CHAPTER I
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
Part 1
Elected and Appointed Officials
Subpart A. Board of Supervisors
Section 101. Compensation of Members of Board of Supervisors
Subpart B. Tax Collector
Section 111. Tax Certifications
Section 112. Tax Duplicates
Subpart C. Manager
Section 121. Office of Township Manager Created
Section 122. Appointment, Tenure and Removal of Manager
Section 123. Qualifications of Manager
Section 124. Manager's Salary
Section 125. Manager's Bond
Section 126. Powers and Duties of Manager
Section 127. Relationship between Board of Supervisors and Manager
Section 128. Illness or Absence of Manager
Section 129. Grammatical Gender and Number
Part 2
Authorities
Subpart A. The Municipal Authority of the Township of Spring
Deleted
Subpart B. The Western Berks Refuse Authority
Section 211. Intention and Desire to Organize Joint Refuse Authority
Section 212. Articles of Incorporation
Section 213. Notice of Articles of Incorporation
Section 214. Filing of Articles of Incorporation
I -1
Subpart C. Southwestern Berks County Joint Water Authority
Deleted
Part 3
Boards, Commissions and Committees
Subpart A. Planning Commission
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Title
Powers and Duties of the Planning Commission
Membership of the Planning Commission
Conduct of Business
Engineering Advisors to the Planning Commission
Administrative and Technical Assistance to the Planning
Commission
Invalidity of Portions of Subpart
Subpart B. Park and Recreation Board
Section 311.
Section 312.
Section 313.
Section 314.
Section 315.
Section 316.
Section 317.
Title
Powers and Duties of the Park and Recreation Board
Composition and Organization of the Park and Recreation Board
Joint Ownership and Maintenance of Certain Parks and Public
Recreation Areas and Facilities
Bond Issue
Maintenance and Tax Levy
Invalidity of Portions of Subpart
Subpart C. Infrastructure Committee
Section 321.
Section 322.
Section 323.
Section 324.
Section 325.
Section 326.
Section 327.
Section 328.
Section 329.
Section 330.
Title
Membership
Appointment
Term
Responsibility
Costs
Meetings
Support
Capital Plan
Severability
Part 4
Pensions
Subpart A. Police Pension Plan
Section 401. Establishment
Section 402. Savings Provisions
Subpart B. Non-Uniformed Pension Plan
Section 411. Establishment
Section 412. Savings Provisions
Subpart C. Firefighters Pension Plan
Section 421. Establishment
Section 422. Savings Provisions
Part 5
Social Security
Section 501. Participation in System; Plan and Agreement Authorized
Section 502. Payments into Contribution Fund; Payroll Deduction System
Authorized; Date Participation Commences
Part 6
Enforcement of Ordinances
Section 601. Civil Procedure
Section 602. Criminal Procedure
AM7 7 73
Section 701.
Section 702.
Section 703.
Section 704.
Section 705.
Section 706.
Section 707.
Section 801.
Section 802.
Section 803.
Section 804.
Section 805.
Section 806.
Section 807.
Section 808.
Section 809.
Section 810.
Section 901.
Section 902.
Section 903.
Section 904.
Section 905
Part 7
School Crossing Guards
Hiring of Crossing Guards
Training
Authorization
Crossing Guards Not Civil Service
Compensation
Notification
Severability
Part 8
Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights
Definitions
Notice and Distribution of Disclosure Statement
Requirements for Requests
Minimum Time Periods for Taxpayer Response to Requests From
Local Taxing Authority
Administrative Appeals
Petitions
Decisions
Appeals
Enforcement
Severability
Part 9
Collection of Attorney Fees
Statement of Policies
Schedule of Fees
Collection Procedures
Related Action
Severability
Part 10
Westside Regional Emergency Management Agency
Section 1001.
Section 1002.
Section 1003.
Section 1004.
Section 1005.
Section 1006.
Section 1007.
Section 1008.
Section 1009.
Section 1010.
Section 1011.
Section 1012.
Section 1013.
Section 1101.
Section 1102.
Section 1103.
Section 1104.
Section 1105.
Section 1106.
Section 1107.
Section 1108.
Section 1109.
Section 1110.
Section 1111.
Section 1112.
Purpose
Grant of Power
Definitions
Participation in Agency
Authority to Enter Agreement
Organization
Finances
Term
Municipality Participation
Agency Powers and Duties
Property
Agency Employees
Severability
Part 11
Berks County Emergency Response Team
Purpose
Grant of Power
Definitions
Participation in Agency
Authority to Enter Agreement
Organization
Finances
Term
Municipality Participation
Agency Powers and Duties
Property
Agency Employees
Part 12
Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement For The Purpose of Delegating Collection of
Certain Taxes By Wilson School District
Section 1201.
Section 1202.
Section 1203.
Section 1204.
Section 1205.
Section 1206.
Section 1207.
Section 1208.
Purpose
Grant of Power
Agreement
Term
Finances
Organization
Property
Employees
Part 13
Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement For The Purpose of Creating and Joining
the Wyomissing Creek Watershed Coalition
Section 1301.
Section 1302.
Section 1303.
Section 1304.
Section 1305.
Section 1306.
Section 1307.
Section 1308.
Grant of Power
Conditions
Duration of Agreement
Purpose and Objectives
Financing
Organizational Structure
Real and/or Personal Property
Employees
Part 1
Elected and Appointed Officials
Subpart A. Board of Supervisors
Section 101. Compensation of Members of Board of Supervisors. Each member
of the Board of Supervisors of the Township shall receive an annual salary of two
thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) for preparation for and /or attendance at
meetings or hearings of the Township Board of Supervisors or other meetings
authorized by the Township Board of Supervisors. Such salary shall become effective at
the beginning of the term of office of each member of the Township Board of
Supervisors following enactment of this Section. (Ordinance 256, January 27, 1997,
Section 1)
AM2223
Subpart B. Tax Collector.
Section 111. Tax Certifications. The Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania (the "Township"), hereby appoints the duly elected and/or appointed tax
collector of the Township as the municipal officer authorized to provide tax
certifications upon request by the public, and the Township hereby authorizes such tax
collector to assess, collect and retain, as compensation for providing such additional
service, a fee of not more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each tax certification that such
tax collector provides. (Ordinance No. 318, March 28, 2005, Section 1)
Section 112. Tax Duplicates. The Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania (the "Township"), hereby appoints the duly elected and/or appointed
Tax Collector of the Township as the municipal officer authorized to provide tax
duplicate tax bills upon request by the public and hereby authorizes said Tax Collector
to assess, collect and retain, as compensation for providing such additional service, a fee
of not more than Five and 00/100 Dollars ($5.00) per duplicate tax bill issued. Such fee
shall be in addition to any other compensation which the Tax Collector may be or is
entitled to receive. (Ordinance No. 333, February 12, 2007, Section 1)
Subpart C. Manager.
Section 121. Office of Township Manager Created. The office of Township
Manager is hereby created by the Township of Spring. (Ordinance No. 367, January 26,
2009, Section 1)
Section 122. Appointment, Tenure and Removal of Manager. The Township
Manager, hereinafter referred to as Manager, shall be appointed for an indefinite term
by a majority of all the members of the Board of Supervisors, hereinafter referred to as
the Board. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Board and may be removed at
any time by a majority of the Board. (Ordinance No. 367, January 26, 2009, Section 1)
Section 123. Qualifications of Manager. The Manager shall be chosen solely on
the basis of his executive and administrative abilities. The Manager shall qualify for the
position by having obtained not less than five (5) years experience in the field of
government administration. (Ordinance No. 367, January 26, 2009, Section 1)
Section 124. Manager's Salary. The salary of the Manager shall be fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. (Ordinance No. 367, January 26,
2009, Section 1)
Section 125. Manager's Bond. Before entering upon Manager's duties, the
Manager shall give a bond to the Township with corporate surety and in the sum of one
hundred thousand and 00/100 dollars ($100,000.00), and said bond shall be conditioned
upon the faithful performance of his duties. The premium shall be paid by the
Township. (Ordinance No. 367, January 26, 2009, Section 1)
Section 126. Powers and Duties of Manager. The Manager shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Township and shall be responsible to the Board as a whole
for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. The
Manager's powers and duties shall be nonlegislative, and shall relate to the general
management of all Township affairs not expressly by statute or ordinance conferred
upon other Township officers or employees. Subject to recall by ordinance of the Board,
the powers and duties of the Township Manager shall include the following:
(A) The Manager shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of
all Township departments other than that of the Police Department. The
Manager shall work with the senior or ranking police officer in the
administrative work of the Police Department, but shall not exercise operational
control or supervision.
(B) The Manager shall prepare and submit to the Board before the close
of its fiscal year, or on such alternate dates as the Board may determine, a budget
for the next fiscal year and an explanatory message. In preparation of the
I - 9
budget, the Manager or an employee designated by the Manager shall obtain
from the head of each department, including the Police Department, estimates of
revenue and expenditures and other supporting data as the Manager requests.
The Manager shall review such estimates and may revise them before submitting
the budget to the Board.
(C) The Manager shall be notified of and shall attend meetings of the
Board and of its committees with the right to take part in the discussion.
(D) The Manager shall prepare the agenda and supply facts and
pertinent data for each meeting of the Board or such of its committees as may be
directed by the Board.
(E) The Manager shall keep the Board informed as to the conduct of
the Township affairs, submit periodic reports on the condition of Township
finances and such other reports as may be requested by the Board, and such
reports or recommendations that the Manager deems necessary.
(F) Except where the responsibility is expressly imposed by statute or
ordinance upon or is specifically directed by the Board to be performed by
another officer or person, the Manager shall enforce the laws of the
Commonwealth and the ordinances and resolutions of the Township.
(G) All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township
shall be referred to the Office of the Manager. The Manager, or an employee
designated by the Manager, shall report thereon to the Board.
(H) The Manager shall hire, and, when the Manager shall deem it
necessary for the good of the Township, shall suspend or discharge all
employees under the Manager's supervision and report any such action taken at
the next Board of Supervisors meeting.
(I) The Manager shall fix wages and salaries of all personnel under the
Manager's supervision within a range previously determined by the Board of
Supervisors.
(J) The Manager shall establish annual written goals of all employees
under his direct supervision. The Manager shall write annual employment
evaluations of all Directors, Township Secretary, Fire Marshall, and any other
employees as determined by the Board of Supervisors.
(K) The Manager shall prepare and propose short and long-term goals
and objectives for consideration by the Township Board of Supervisors and
develop plans and programs to implement approved objectives.
I - 10
(L) The Manager shall represent the Township in contacts with
Federal, State, County and local governments.
(M) The Manager shall develop and implement administrative and
operating procedures to meet Township needs and carry out approved policies.
(N) The Manager shall maintain good relations with the news media
and community organizations in order to keep the public informed and promote
cooperation with Township activities and plans.
(0) The Manager shall authorize routine expenditures in amounts less
than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) without prior Board of Supervisors
approval, to such extent as otherwise permitted by law.
(P) The Manager shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases,
permits and privileges granted by the Township are observed.
(Ordinance No. 367, January 26, 2009, Section 1)
Section 127. Relationship Between Board of Supervisors and Manager. Except
for the approval by the Board of employees hired by the Manager and the amount of
compensation to be paid to such employees, neither the Board nor any of its members
shall dictate or attempt to dictate the hiring of any particular person, or the suspension
or discharge of an employee, by the Manager. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the
Board and its members shall deal with the administrative matters solely through the
Manager. (Ordinance No. 367, January 26, 2009, Section 1)
Section 128. Illness or Absence of Manager. If the Manager becomes ill or needs
to be absent from the Township, the duties of the Manager shall be performed during
the Manager's absence or disability by such person as may be recommended by the
Manager and approved by the Board. (Ordinance No. 367, January 26, 2009, Section 1)
Section 129. Grammatical Gender and Number. Whenever used in this Part,
entitled "Elected and Appointed Officers", the singular shall include the plural, the
plural the singular, and the use of any gender shall be applicable to all genders.
(Ordinance No. 367, January 26, 2009, Section 1)
AM2223
Part 2
Authorities
Subpart A. The Municipal Authority of the Township of Spring
(THE MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING WAS
CREATED BY ORDINANCE NO. 38, MAY 19, 1958, AMENDED BY
ORDINANCE NO. 202, JUNE 26, 1989, AND WAS DISSOLVED BY
RESOLUTION NO. 2004-61, DECEMBER 13, 2004 AND ORDINANCE
NO. 315, DECEMBER 27, 2004)
Subpart B. The Western Berks Refuse Authority.
Section 211. Intention and Desire to Organize Joint Refuse Authority. The Board
of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, constituting the
municipal authorities of the Township, hereby signifies its intention and desire to join
with the Borough of Mohnton, Borough of Shillington, Borough of Sinking Spring,
Borough of West Lawn, Borough of West Reading, Borough of Wyomissing, Borough of
Wyomissing Hills, and the Township of Cumru, all of Berks County, Pennsylvania, in
organizing a Municipal Authority under the provisions of the Municipal Authorities
Act of 1945, the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended. (Ordinance No. 41A, July 11,
1960, Section 1)
Section 212. Articles of Incorporation. The Board of Supervisors are hereby
authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Township of Spring Articles of
Incorporation for said Joint Authority in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," the Borough of Mohnton,
Borough of Shillington, Borough of Sinking Spring, Borough of West Lawn,
Borough of West Reading, Borough of Wyomissing, Borough of Wyomissing
Hills, and the Township of Cumru and Township of Spring, all situated in Berks
County Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate a Joint Authority thereunder do
hereby certify:
1. The name of the Joint Authority is "The Western Berks
Refuse Authority."
2. Said Authority is formed by the Borough of Mohnton,
Borough of Shillington, Borough of Sinking Spring, Borough of West
Lawn, Borough of West Reading, Borough of Wyomissing, Borough of
Wyomissing Hills, the Township of Cumru and Township of Spring, all
situated in Berks County, Pennsylvania, under the provisions of the Act of
May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended, known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945" for the following purposes:
(a) To establish facilities and equipment for the
collection, removal or disposal of ashes, garbage, rubbish and other
refuse materials by incineration, landfill, or other methods.
I - 13
3. No other Authority organized under this Act, or under the
Act approved June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, is in existence in or for the
incorporating municipalities except as follows:
(a) The Borough of Mohnton is a member of "Mohnton
Borough Authority" composed solely of said Borough of Mohnton.
(b) The Borough of Shillington is a member of
"Shillington Municipal Authority" composed solely of said Borough
of Shillington.
(c) The Borough of Sinking Spring is a member of
"Southwestern Berks County Joint Water Authority" composed of
said Borough of Sinking Spring, Borough of West Lawn, Borough
of Wyomissing Hills, and the Township of Spring, all of Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
(d) The Borough of West Lawn is a member of "West
Lawn Borough Authority" composed solely of said Borough of
West Lawn and of the "Southwestern Berks County Joint Water
Authority" composed of said Borough of West Lawn, Borough of
Wyomissing Hills, Borough of Sinking Spring, and the Township of
Spring, all of Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(e) The Borough of West Reading is a member of the
"West Reading Sewer Authority" composed solely of said Borough
of West Reading and of the "Joint Municipal Authority of
Wyomissing Valley, Berks County" composed of the Borough of
West Reading and the Borough of Wyomissing, both of Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
(f) The Borough of Wyomissing is a member of the "Joint
Municipal Authority of Wyomissing Valley, Berks County"
composed of the Borough of Wyomissing and the Borough of West
Reading, both of Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(g) The Borough of Wyomissing Hills is a member of the
"Wyomissing Hills, Berks County Authority" composed solely of
said Borough of Wyomissing Hills and of the "Southwestern Berks
County Joint Water Authority" composed of said Borough of
Wyomissing Hills, Borough of West Lawn, Borough of Sinking
Spring, and the Township of Spring, all of Berks County,
Pennsylvania.
I - 14
(h) The Township of Cumru is a member of the "Cumru
Township Authority" composed solely of said Township of Cumru.
(i) The Township of Spring is a member of the
"Municipal Authority of Spring Township" composed solely of said
Township of Spring and of the "Southwestern Berks County Water
Authority" composed of said Township of Spring, Borough of West
Lawn, Borough of Wyomissing Hills, and the Borough of Sinking
Spring, all of Berks County, Pennsylvania.
4. The names of the incorporating municipalities are: Borough of
Mohnton, Borough of Shillington, Borough of Sinking Spring, Borough of
West Lawn, Borough of West Reading, Borough of Wyomissing, Borough
of Wyomissing Hills, and the Township of Cumru and Township of
Spring, all situated in Berks County, Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of all the municipal authorities of said
incorporating municipalities are:
(the names and addresses have been omitted intentionally
due to their length)
6. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of said Joint Authority to be formed hereby each of whom is a
resident and citizen of the appointing municipality, are as follows:
(the names and addresses have been omitted intentionally
due to their length)
7. The members of the Board of said Authority shall be nine (9) in
number, and said members shall be apportioned as follows:
Borough of Mohnton 1
Borough of Shillington 1
Borough of Sinking Spring 1
Borough of West Lawn 1
Borough of West Reading 1
Borough of Wyomissing 1
Borough of Wyomissing Hills 1
Township of Cumru 1
Township of Spring 1
Each member of the Board of the said Authority shall be appointed by the
Borough Council of each incorporating Borough and the Board of Supervisors of
each incorporating Township which he is to represent on said Board. The terms
of office of any members of the Board appointed to succeed any of the first
members of the Board shall be for a period of five (5) years.
The Council of each Borough and the Board of Supervisors of each
Township at a meeting held not later than one month prior to January 1 in each
year in which a vacancy will occur in the Board by reason of the expiration of the
term of the member appointed by that Borough or Township, shall appoint, as a
member of the Board, a citizen of that Borough or Township, as the case may be,
for a term of five (5) years to succeed the member whose term expires on
January 1, next succeeding.
Any other vacancy in the Board shall be filled by the Council of the
Borough or Board of Supervisors of the Township which appointed the member
whose vacancy is to be filled and the person so appointed to fill said vacancy
shall hold office for the remainder of the unexpired term of the member whose
vacancy in office he has been appointed to fill.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Borough of Mohnton, Borough of
Shillington, Borough of Sinking Spring, Borough of West Lawn, Borough of West
Reading, Borough of Wyomissing, Borough of Wyomissing Hills, and the
Township of Cumru and Township of Spring, all situated in Berks County,
Pennsylvania, each have caused these Articles of Incorporation to be executed by
the Burgess, President of its Borough Council, or the Chairman of its Board of
Supervisors, attested by the Secretary of its respective Council or Board of
Supervisors, and the seal of the said Borough or Township to be affixed this
day of ,1960.
(the names and signatures lines have been omitted intentionally
due to their length)
(Ordinance No. 41A, July 11, 1960, Section 2)
Section 213. Notice of Articles of Incorporation. The Chairman and Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors of this Township, acting jointly with the appropriate officers of
the various other incorporating bodies, all situated in Berks County, Pennsylvania,
further are directed to cause a notice of the substance of this Ordinance, including the
substance of the above Articles of Incorporation, and of the proposed filing of the
Articles of Incorporation, to be published once in a newspaper published and of general
circulation in the County of Berks, Pennsylvania, and once in the Berks County Law
Journal, all as required by the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.
(Ordinance No. 41A, July 11, 1960, Section 3)
I - 16
Section 214. Filing of Articles of Incorporation. The Chairman and Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors of this Township, acting jointly with the appropriate officers of
the municipal bodies of the Borough of Mohnton, Borough of Shillington, Borough of
Sinking Spring, Borough of West Lawn, Borough of West Reading, Borough of
Wyomissing, Borough of Wyomissing Hills, and the Township of Cumru, all situated in
Berks County, Pennsylvania, are directed to file said Articles of Incorporation, together
with the necessary proofs of publication, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and
to do all other things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of "The
Western Berks Refuse Authority", including the payment of any filing fees in
connection therewith. (Ordinance No. 41A, July 11, 1960, Section 4)
(Section 5 of Ordinance No. 41A, July 11, 1960, was intentionally omitted as it only
served to appoint a member to The Western Berks Refuse Authority)
Subpart C. Southwestern Berks County Joint Water Authority.
(THE SOUTHWESTERN BERKS COUNTY JOINT WATER AUTHORITY
WAS CREATED BY TOWNSHIP OF SPRING ORDINANCE NO. 41,
MARCH 20, 1959, AND BOROUGH OF WEST LAWN ORDINANCE NO.
164, MARCH 20, 1959, AND WAS DISSOLVED BY TOWNSHIP OF
SPRING RESOLUTION NO. 2009-15)
Part 3
Boards, Commissions and Committees
Subpart A. Planning Commission.
Section 301. Title. This Subpart shall be known and may be cited as the
"Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, Planning Commission Ordinance of
1974". (Ordinance No. 102, April 8, 1974, Section 1)
Section 302. Powers and Duties of the Planning Commission.
(A) The Planning Commission, herein created and enlarged, shall at the
request of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, have the power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare the comprehensive plan for the development of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, as set forth in the Act of
Assembly of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, as amended, commonly known and
cited as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code," and present it
for the consideration of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records
and files of the Planning Commission herein created and enlarged, shall
be in the possession of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(B) The Planning Commission, herein created and enlarged, at the
request of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, may:
(1) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, concerning the
adoption or amendment of an official map;
(2) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, a zoning ordinance, and
make recommendations to said Board of Supervisors on proposed
amendments to it as set forth in the Act of Assembly of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, as amended, commonly known and cited as the "Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code";
AM2223
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development, planned residential development regulations as set forth in
the foregoing Act of Assembly;
(4) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, a building code and a
housing code and make recommendations concerning proposed
amendments thereto;
(5) Do such other act or make such studies as may be necessary
to fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by the foregoing Act of
Assembly;
(6) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, an environmental
study;
(7) Submit to the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, a recommended capital
improvements program;
(8) Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the
comprehensive plan and planning;
(9) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of such
agencies and individuals;
(10) Hold public hearings and meetings;
(11) Require from other departments and agencies of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, such available
information as related to the work of the Planning Commission herein
created and enlarged; and
(12) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to
make examination and surveys with the consent of the owner.
(C) In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or
recommendation of the Planning Commission, herein created and enlarged,
which involves engineering consideration, shall be subject to review and
comments of the Engineer of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, or an engineer appointed by said Board of Supervisors, which
I - 20
shall be incorporated and separately set forth in any report, written act or
recommendation of the Planning Commission herein created and enlarged.
(Ordinance No. 102, April 8, 1974, Section 2)
Section 303. Membership of the Planning Commission.
(A) All members of the Planning Commission of said Township shall
be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
(B) The Planning Commission of the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, shall have seven (7) members, all of whom shall be
residents of said Township.
(C) All members of the Planning Commission of said Township shall
be citizen members of whom no more than two (2) shall be officers or employees
of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(D) The term of each of the members of the Planning Commission of
said Township shall be for four (4) years, or until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified; provided, however, that the members of the existing
Planning Commission of said Township, established under former laws, shall
continue in office until the end of the term for which they were appointed.
(E) All members of the Planning Commission of said Township shall
serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary and
reasonable expenses.
(F) Any member of the Planning Commission of said Township once
qualified and appointed may be removed from office for malfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Spring Berks County, Pennsylvania, taken after
the member has received fifteen (15) days' advance notice of the intent to take
such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member
shall request it in writing. Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal
shall be only for the unexpired term.
(Ordinance No. 102, April 8, 1974, Section 3 as amended by Ordinance No. 128,
January 26, 1976, Section 1)
Section 304. Conduct of Business. The Planning Commission of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman
and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual
I - 21
terms and may succeed themselves. The Planning Commission of the Township may
make and alter by-laws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures consistent
with the ordinances of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Planning Commission of said
Township shall keep a full record of its business and shall annually make a written
report by March 1 of each year of its activities to the Board of Supervisors of said
Township. Interim reports may be made as may be necessary, or as requested by the
Board of Supervisors of said Township. (Ordinance No. 102, April 8, 1974, Section 4)
Section 305. Engineering Advisors to the Planning Commission. The Engineer
for the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, or an engineer appointed by
the Board of Supervisors of said Township shall serve the Planning Commission of said
Township as engineering advisor. (Ordinance No. 102, April 8, 1974, Section 5)
Section 306. Administrative and Technical Assistance to the Planning
Commission. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, may employ administrative and technical services to aid in carrying out
the provisions of this Subpart and the Act of Assembly of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805,
commonly known and cited as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code" as
consultants on particular matters or as regular employees of the municipality.
(Ordinance No. 102, April 8, 1974, Section 6)
Section 307. Invalidity of Portions of Subpart. In the event that any provision,
section, sentence, clause or part of this Subpart shall be held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence clause or
part of this Subpart, it being the intent of this Township that such remainder of this
Subpart shall be and shall remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance No. 102, April 8,
1974, Section 8)
Subpart B. Park and Recreation Board.
Section 311. Title. This Subpart shall be known and may be cited as the
"Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, Park and Recreation Board
Ordinance." (Ordinance No. 103, April 8, 1974, Section 1)
Section 312. Powers and Duties of the Park and Recreation Board.
(A) The power and authority to equip, operate and maintain parks,
recreation areas and facilities shall be placed in a Park and Recreation Board and
such Board shall possess all of the powers and be subject to all the
responsibilities under Article XIX of the Act of Assembly of May 1, 1933, P.L. 103,
as amended, and as hereinafter attended, including but not limited to the right to
select, employ and discharge all recreation personnel used to carry out the
provisions of Article XIX of the foregoing Act of Assembly.
(B) Subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, the Park and Recreation Board, herein
created, shall exercise its powers and duties in establishing standards,
qualifications and salary classifications of recreation personnel; provided,
however, that whenever boroughs, cities, counties, townships, school districts, or
any of them shall develop a cooperative plan of recreation service with the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, the Park and Recreation
Board, herein created, shall have the further power to adjust its established
personnel standards, qualifications and salary scheduled to be approved by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, to
meet the terms of a joint operation agreed upon.
(C) The Park and Recreation Board of the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for
the conduct of all business within its jurisdiction.
(D) The jurisdiction of the Park and Recreation Board of the Township
of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall include the right to select, employ
and discharge all recreation personnel used to carry out the provisions of Article
XIX, P.L. 103, as amended, and as hereinafter amended.
(E) It shall be the duty of the Park and Recreation Board of the
Township of Spring, Barks County, Pennsylvania, to submit an annual report to
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
on or before the first day of October of each year, including an analysis of the
Township recreation areas, facilities and leadership with particular reference to
the extent and adequacy of the program and its effectiveness in view of the
public expenditure involved and the public needs to be met, together with a
I - 23
proposed budget of moneys to be appropriated and expended during the
following fiscal year for park and recreation purposes within the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 103, April 8, 1974, Section 2)
Section 313. Composition and Organization of the Park and Recreation Board.
(A) The Park and Recreation Board, herein created, shall consist of
seven (7) members, two (2) of which members shall be members or appointees of
the Board of School Directors of the Wilson School District, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, of which School District the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, is a part. All members of the Park and Recreation Board herein
created, shall be adult residents of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, and shall serve for a term of five (5) years or until their successors
are appointed, except that the members of such Board first appointed shall be
appointed for such terms that the term of not more than two (2) members shall
expire annually thereafter.
(B) The members of the Park and Recreation Board of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall serve without pay.
(C) All persons appointed to the Park and Recreation Board of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall serve their full terms
unless voluntarily resigned or removed by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, for dereliction, or neglect of
duty.
(D) Vacancies in the Park and Recreation Board of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be for the unexpired term, and shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments.
(E) The members of the Park and Recreation Board of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall elect their own chairman and secretary
and select all other officers to serve for a period of one year.
(Ordinance No. 103, April 8, 1974, Section 3)
Section 314. Joint Ownership and Maintenance of Certain Parks and Public
Recreation Areas and Facilities. The Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
may jointly with any one or more townships, boroughs and cities, acquire property for
and to operate and maintain any parks and public recreation area and facilities. Any
school district may join with the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, in
I - 24
equipping, operating and maintaining parks, public recreation areas and facilities, and
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, may
appropriate money therefor. (Ordinance No. 103, April 8, 1974, Section 4)
Section 315. Bond Issue. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, may issue bonds for the purpose of acquiring lands for
buildings or parks, public recreation areas and facilities and for the equipment thereof.
(Ordinance No. 103, April 8, 1974, Section 5)
Section 316. Maintenance and Tax Levy. All expenses incurred in the operation
of such parks, recreation areas and facilities established as provided in Article XIX of
the Act of Assembly of May 1, 1933, P.L. 103, as amended, and as hereinafter amended,
shall be payable from the general Township fund of the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, or from the treasury of such township, borough, city, county or
school district, as may be provided for by the agreement of the corporate authorities.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, may
annually appropriate an amount necessary for carrying out the provisions of Article
XIX of the foregoing Act of Assembly, and may cause to be raised by special taxation
such tax, for the purpose of maintaining, equipping and operating the parks, recreation
areas and facilities of the programs thereof. (Ordinance No. 103, April 8, 1974,
Section 6)
Section 317. Invalidity of Portions of Subpart. In the event that any provisions,
section, sentence, clause or part of this Subpart shall be held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provisions, section, sentence, clause
or part of this Subpart, it being the intent of this Township that such remainder of this
Subpart shall be and shall remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance No. 103, April 5,
1974, Section 8)
Subpart C. Infrastructure Committee.
Section 321. Title. There is hereby created a committee which shall be known as
the "Infrastructure Committee of the Township of Spring." (Ordinance No. 308, July 26,
2004, Section 1)
Section 322. Membership. The Committee shall have five voting members, one
of whom shall be the Township Road Master, up to two of whom, including the Road
Master, if he or she be a Supervisor, may be members of the Township of Spring Board
of Supervisors, up to two of whom may be members of the Township of Spring
Planning Commission, and those others who are taxpayers or residents of the Township
of Spring. (Ordinance No. 308, July 26, 2004, Section 1; as amended by Ordinance
No. 339 May 29, 2007, Section 1)
Section 323. Appointment. The Committee's members shall be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring. (Ordinance No. 308, July 26, 2004,
Section 1)
Section 324. Term. All members of the Committee shall serve for one year. The
initial members shall be appointed effective August 1, 2004 through December 31, 2004.
All subsequent members' term shall commence on January 1st and end on December 31
of each year. The Township of Spring Board of Supervisors may have the discretion
and power to remove and replace any voting member during their term.
(Ordinance No. 308, July 26, 2004, Section 1)
Section 325. Responsibility. The Committee shall be responsible to the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Spring and shall review and recommend action to be
taken regarding curb, sidewalk, storm sewer, drainage, sanitary sewer, water, street,
lighting, communications fixtures, or any other infrastructure matter. (Ordinance
No. 308, July 26, 2004, Section 1)
Section 326. Costs. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring shall
appropriate, annually, such monies as the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring determines to be necessary for the Committee to fulfill its mandate ordained
herein. Initial term (August 1 - December 31, 2004) costs and monies will be drawn
from existing appropriate Township budgets as needed with approval of the Township
Supervisors. (Ordinance No. 308, July 26, 2004, Section 1)
Section 327. Meetings. Upon initial organization, the Infrastructure Committee
will elect one chairperson and vice chairperson. The Infrastructure Committee will
meet at such time and place as to be determined by the Committee.
(Ordinance No. 308, July 26, 2004, Section 1)
Section 328. Support. The Infrastructure Committee will be directly supported
by the Township of Spring Road Master, Director of Engineering Services, Director of
Parks and Recreation, Director of Public Safety and any other Township employee as
deemed appropriate by the Township of Spring Board of Supervisors. Minutes will be
taken by an internal Township of Spring employee as determined by the Board of
Supervisors. Solicitor services (on an as needed basis) will be supported by the current
Township of Spring Solicitor's firm for the Board of Supervisors meetings.
(Ordinance No. 308, July 26, 2004, Section 1)
Section 329. Capital Plan. The Infrastructure Committee will establish and
maintain a five-year Capital Plan with an annual Capital Budget commencing with the
Fiscal Year January 1, 2005 - December 1, 2005. (Ordinance No. 308, July 26, 2004,
Section 1)
Section 330. Severability. If any sentence, clause, or section of this Subpart is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses or sections of this Subpart. It is hereby declared as the intent of the
Board of Supervisors that this Subpart would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, or section thereof not been included
herein. (Ordinance No. 308, July 26, 2004, Section 1)
AM2223
Part 4
Pensions
Subpart A. Police Pension Plan
Section 401. Establishment. This Subpart establishes a retirement plan for the
police officers of the Township through the adoption of the Township of Spring Police
Retirement Plan, originally effective March 1, 1974, as amended and restated effective
January 1, 2008, and as further amended from time to time. (Ordinance No. 368,
January 26, 2009, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance 382, October 11, 2011, Section 1;
Amended by Ordinance No. 387, February 27, 2012, Section 1; Amended by
Ordinance No. 398, November 26, 2012, Section 1)
Section 402. Savings Provisions. In the event that any provision, section,
sentence, clause or part of this Retirement Plan shall be held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or
part of the Retirement Plan, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder
shall be and remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance No. 368, January 26, 2009,
Section 1)
(THE POLICE PENSION PLAN OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING HAS BEEN
OMITTED DUE TO LENGTH AND MAY BE VIEWED IN ITS ENTIRETY AT THE
TOWNSHIP OFFICE)
Subpart B. Non-Uniformed Pension Plan
Section 411. Establishment. This Subpart establishes a retirement plan for the
non-uniformed employees of the Township through the adoption of the Township of
Spring Non Uniformed Employees Retirement Income Plan, originally effective
September 1, 1970, as amended and rested effective January 1, 2008, as amended from
time to time. (Ordinance No. 368, January 26, 2009, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance
No. 384, October 24, 2011, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 399, November 26,
2012, Section 1)
Section 412. Savings Provisions. In the event that any provision, section,
sentence, clause or part of this Retirement Plan shall be held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or
part of the Retirement Plan, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder
shall be and remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance No. 368, January 26, 2009,
Section 1)
(THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING NON-UNIFORMED PENSION PLAN HAS BEEN
OMITTED DUE TO LENGTH AND MAY BE VIEWED IN ITS ENTIRETY AT THE
TOWNSHIP OFFICE)
Subpart C. Firefighters Pension Plan
Section 421. Establishment. This Subpart establishes a retirement plan for the
firefighters of the Township through the adoption of the Township of Spring
Firefighters Retirement Income Plan, effective January 1, 2008, as amended from time to
time. (Ordinance No. 368, January 26, 2009, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 383,
October 11, 2011, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 400, November 26, 2012,
Section 1)
Section 422. Savings Provisions. In the event that any provision, section,
sentence, clause or part of this Retirement Plan shall be held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or
part of the Retirement Plan, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder
shall be and remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance No. 368, January 26, 2009,
Section 1)
(THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT INCOME PLAN HAS
BEEN OMIT DUE TO LENGTH AND MAY BE VIEWED IN ITS ENTIRETY AT
THE TOWNSHIP OFFICE)
Part 5
Social Security
Section 501. Participation in System; Plan and Agreement Authorized. The 1951
Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in regular
session, enacted a statute known as Act No. 491, which is the enabling Act provided for
in Section 218 of Public Law 734, 91st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor
and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the "State Agency" to
implement the coverage of employees and officers under the said Old Age and
Survivors Insurance System. The Board of Supervisors of Spring Township is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver to the State Agency, a plan or plans and agreement,
required under Section 6 of said enabling Act and the Social Security Act, to extend
coverage to employees and officers of Spring Township and do all other necessary
things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the Old Age and
Survivors Insurance System. (Ordinance No. 7, December 8, 1952, Paragraph 1)
Section 502. Payments into Contribution Fund; Payroll Deduction System
Authorized; Date Participation Commences. The Secretary is hereby authorized to
establish a system of payroll deduction to be matched by payment by Spring Township,
to be made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the office of
the State Agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund, or funds, from which
wage or salary payments are issued to employees of Spring Township. Such payments
are to be made in accordance with provisions of the law and regulations promulgated
by the State Agency and the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments which are
delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1 per cent per month until such time
as payments are made. Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund, or funds
of Spring Township in the necessary amount to pay into the Contribution Fund as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act and in accordance with the plan, or plans, and
agreement. Authority is given to the Chairman and the Secretary of Spring Township
to enter into an agreement with the State Agency, which agreement shall be in
accordance with Act No. 491 and with paragraph 218 of the Social Security Act. Such
plan and agreement shall provide that the participation of the Township of Spring shall
commence as of January 1, 1951. (Ordinance No. 7, December 8, 1952, Paragraph 2)
AM2223
Part 6
Enforcement of Ordinances
Section 601. Civil Procedure. Except as provided in the following Section 602
hereof, when the penalty imposed for the violation of an ordinance of the Township of
Spring is not voluntarily paid to the said Township, the said Township shall initiate a
civil enforcement proceeding before a district justice. The civil enforcement proceeding
shall be initiated by complaint or by such other means as may be provided by the
Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. All ordinances which are to be enforced
through a civil enforcement proceeding shall prescribe civil penalties not to exceed six
hundred dollars ($600.00) per violation. In addition to or in lieu of civil actions before a
district justice, the Township of Spring may enforce ordinances in equity. In any case
where a penalty for a violation of an ordinance of the Township of Spring has not been
timely paid and the person upon whom the penalty was imposed is found to have been
liable therefor in civil proceedings, the violator shall be liable for the penalty imposed,
including additional daily penalties for continuing violations, plus court costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the said Township of Spring in the enforcement
proceedings. The Township of Spring shall be exempt from the payment of costs in any
civil case brought to enforce an ordinance in accordance with this Section. (Ordinance
No. 257, June 9, 1997, Section 1)
Section 602. Criminal Procedure. All ordinances of the Township of Spring
regulating building, housing, property maintenance, health, fire, public safety, parking,
solicitation, curfew, water, air or noise pollution shall be enforce by action brought
before a district justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor
may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney as
required by Pa.R.Crim.P. No. 83(c) (relating to trial in summary cases). The Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Spring shall prescribe criminal fines not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the violation of such ordinances and shall prescribe
imprisonment to the extent allowed by law for the punishment of summary offenses.
(Ordinance No. 257, June 9, 1997, Section 1)
Part 7
School Crossing Guards
Section 701. Hiring of Crossing Guards. The Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring does hereby approve and allow the Board of School Directors of the
Wilson School District to assume the hiring and oversight of school crossing guards in
accordance with Section 1915(c) of the Second Class Township Code, as amended, and
the Resolution adopted by the Board of School Directors of the Wilson School District
on October 16, 2006. (Ordinance No. 340, July 9, 2007, Section 1)
Section 702. Training. The Township of Spring Police Department shall provide
any and all necessary training and assistance of the school crossing guards while on
duty in accordance with their operating and procedure standards. (Ordinance No. 340,
July 9, 2007, Section 1)
Section 703. Authorization. The school crossing guards will be authorized only
in the management of traffic and pedestrians in and around areas identified by the
Township of Spring Police Department and the Wilson School District Superintendent
or his or her designees. (Ordinance No. 340, July 9, 2007, Section 1)
Section 704. Crossing Guards not Civil Service. The school crossing guards shall
not come within the civil service provision of the Second Class Township Code, as
amended, nor shall they fall under the bargaining unit of the Wilson School District, nor
be considered an employee as defined under Section 1101-A of the Act of March 10,
1949 (P.L. 30, No. 14), known as the "Public School Code of 1949", or a "School
employee" as defined under 24 Pa. C.S. Section 8102 (relating to definitions), or under
any plans hereafter effective. (Ordinance No. 340, July 9, 2007, Section 1)
Section 705. Compensation. The Wilson School District shall fix the
compensation for all school crossing guards. The Township of Spring and the Wilson
School District shall each assume one-half (1/2) of the cost associated with
compensation of the school crossing guards. (Ordinance No. 340, July 9, 2007, Section 1)
Section 706. Notification. The Board of School Directors of the Wilson School
District shall notify the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring of those hired to
serve as school crossing guards and request the necessary training or assistance to be
provided. (Ordinance No. 340, July 9, 2007, Section 1)
Section 707. Severability. The provisions of this Part are severable, and if any
section, sentence, clause, part or provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall
not affect the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, parts or provisions of this Part. It
is hereby declared to be the intent of the Township of Spring that such Part would have
I - 33
AM2223
been enacted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or
provision had not been included herein. (Ordinance No. 340, July 9, 2007, Section 1)
Part 8
Taxpayer Bill of Rights
Section 801. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this
Part shall have the meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
Act 50. Act 50 of 1998, known as the "Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights".
Appeals Board. A board of local tax appeals established under Section 509
of the Act (relating to administrative appeals).
Assessment. The determination by a local taxing authority of the amount
of underpayment by a taxpayer.
Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors of the Township.
Eligible Tax. Any of the following, including interest and penalty
provided by law, when levied by a political subdivision:
(1) Any tax authorized or permitted under the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), known as "The Local Tax Enabling
Act."
(2) Any per capita tax levied under any act.
(3) Any occupation, occupation assessment or occupation
privilege tax levied under any act.
(4) Any tax on income levied under any act.
(5) Any tax measured by gross receipts levied under any act.
(6) Any tax on a privilege levied under any act.
(7) Any tax on amusements or admissions levied under any act.
(8) Any tax on earned income and net profits.
Except as provided in Section 805 of this Chapter, the provisions of this Part shall
not apply to any tax on real property.
Local Taxing Authority. A political subdivision levying an eligible tax.
The term shall include any officer, agent, agency, clerk, income tax officer,
collector, employee or other person to whom the Board of Supervisors has
assigned responsibility for the audit, assessment, determination or
administration of an eligible tax. The term shall not include a tax collector or
collection agency who has no authority to audit a taxpayer or determine the
amount of an eligible tax or whose only responsibility is to collect an eligible tax
on behalf of the Board of Supervisors.
Taxpayer. An individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, estate, trust, trustee, fiduciary or any other entity subject to or
claiming exception from any eligible tax or under a duty to perform an act for
itself or for another under or pursuant to the authority of an act providing for an
eligible tax.
Township. The Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 369, February 23, 2009, Section 1)
Section 802. Notice and Distribution of Disclosure Statement. The Township, as
a local taxing authority, shall notify any taxpayer contacted regarding the assessment,
audit, determination, review or collection of an eligible tax of the availability of a
disclosure statement. The local taxing authority shall make copies of the disclosure
statement available to taxpayers upon request at no charge to the taxpayer, including
mailing costs. A copy of the notification shall read as follows:
"You are entitled to receive a written explanation of your rights with regard to
the assessment, audit, appeal, enforcement, refund and collection of local taxes.
The written explanation is entitled "Township of Spring Taxpayers Bill of Rights
Disclosure Statement". Upon receiving a request from you, the Township will
provide you with a copy of the Disclosure Statement at no charge. You may
request a copy in person, or by mailing a written request to the following
address:
Township of Spring
Township Secretary
2850 Windmill Road
Sinking Spring, PA 19608
A copy will also be mailed to you if you call the Township Secretary at telephone
number 610-678-5393 weekdays during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m."
(Ordinance No. 369, February 23, 2009, Section 1)
I - 36
Section 803. Requirements for Requests. The Disclosure Statement shall set forth
the following information as required by Act 50 and shall be made available for
distribution as set forth in Section 802 of this Chapter:
(A) The rights of a taxpayer and the obligation of a local taxing
authority during an audit or administrative review of a taxpayer's books and
records.
(B) The administrative and judicial appeals process.
(C) The procedure for filing and processing refund claims and taxpayer
complaints.
(D) The enforcement procedures.
(Ordinance No. 369, February 23, 2009, Section 1)
Section 804. Minimum Time Periods for Taxpayer Response to Requests From
Local Taxing Authority.
(A) The taxpayer shall have at least thirty (30) calendar days from the
mailing date to respond to requests for information by a local taxing authority.
The local taxing authority shall grant additional reasonable extensions upon
application for good cause. Such applications for extension shall be submitted in
writing to the Board of Supervisors prior to the expiration of said thirty (30) day
period and shall specify the reasons for the requested extension and the facts
supporting those reasons.
(B) The local taxing authority shall review and respond to an
application for extension within fifteen (15) days of receipt of written request of
the application for extension. If the request is granted, the Township shall
inform the taxpayer of the number of days of the extension. If the request is
denied, the taxpayer shall immediately provide the Township with the requested
information. Failure to respond to the written request for extension within said
fifteen (15) day period shall be deemed the grant of a thirty (30) day extension,
which shall be subject to additional applications for extension.
(C) A local taxing authority shall take no lawful action against a
taxpayer for the tax year in question until the expiration of the applicable
response period, including extensions.
(Ordinance No. 369, February 23, 2009, Section 1)
AM?773
Section 805. Administrative Appeals. The administrative process for appeals
shall consist of review and decision or hearing and decision by a local tax appeals board
appointed by the Board of Supervisors from time to time. The appeals board shall
consist of three (3) members. The members of the local tax appeals board shall be
residents of the Township and shall receive no compensation for their service on the
local tax appeals board. (Ordinance No. 369, February 23, 2009, Section 1)
Section 806. Petitions.
(A) Filign . A petition is timely filed if the letter transmitting the
petition, addressed to the Township Secretary at the Township offices located at
2800 Shillington Road, Reading, PA 19608, is postmarked by the United States
Postal Service on or before the final day on which the petition is required to be
filed. Deadlines for filing petitions to the Board of Supervisors are as follows:
(1) Refund petitions shall be filed within three (3) years after the
due date for filing the report, as extended, or one (1) year after actual
payment of an eligible tax, whichever is later. If no report is required, the
petition shall be filed within three (3) years after the due date for payment
of an eligible tax or within one (1) year after actual payment, whichever is
later.
(2) Petitions for reassessment of an eligible tax shall be filed
within ninety (90) days of the date of the assessment notice.
(B) Contents. The petition shall contain all information required by the
form which is attached to the Disclosure Statement.
(Ordinance No. 369, February 23, 2009, Section 1)
Section 807. Decisions. Decisions on petitions submitted under Section 806 of
this Chapter shall be issued within sixty (60) days of the date a complete and accurate
petition is received by the Board of Supervisors. Failure to act within sixty (60) days
shall result in the petition being deemed approved. (Ordinance No. 369, February 23,
2009, Section 1)
Section 808. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision under this Part who
has a direct interest in the decision shall have the right to appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas of Berks County, Pennsylvania within thirty (30) days of the adverse
decision denying the petition. Failure to file an appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Berks County, Pennsylvania within said thirty (30) day time period shall be deemed
waiver of all rights of said taxpayer to further appeal. (Ordinance No. 369, February 23,
2009, Section 1)
I - 38
AM7723
Section 809. Enforcement.
(A) Collection of Tax. The Township may pursue any and all legal
remedies prescribed by applicable federal, state and local laws, statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including but not limited to the filing of a civil
lawsuit for collection of the delinquent tax and/or the filing of a municipal lien,
in order to collect the delinquent tax and all accrued interest and penalties
thereon.
(B) Interest and Penalties. In the event a taxpayer fails to make
payment of any eligible tax, interest shall accrue at the highest legal rate
permitted by law. In addition, the taxpayer may be subject to penalties for
failure to pay eligible taxes when due as prescribed by applicable federal, state
and local laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations.
(Ordinance No. 369, February 23, 2009, Section 1)
Section 810. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Part is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring that this Part would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not
been included herein. (Ordinance No. 369, February 23, 2009, Section 1)
Part 9
Collection of Attorney Fees
Section 901. Statement of Policies. The Township of Spring hereby approves the
Statement of Collection Policies and Procedures for the collection of delinquent unpaid
taxes, user charges, utility charges and other charges (the "account(s)") covered by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Claims and Tax Lien Law, Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No.
153), amended December 19, 1990 (53 P.S. §7101, et seq.) (the Municipal Claims Law), as
further amended by Pennsylvania Act No. 1 of 1996, (P.L. 1, No. 1) (53 P.S. §7106) (the
"Act"), or such other policies and administrative statements as may be approved by the
Board of Supervisors for the Township by resolution or other formal enactment from
time to time. (Ordinance No. 281, March 25, 2002, Section 1)
Section 902. Schedule of Fees.
(A) The Township hereby approves the following schedule of
attorneys' fees for services in connection with the collection of accounts, which is
hereby determined to be fair and reasonable compensation for the services set
forth in §3(a.1) of the Municipal Claims Law as added by the Act:
Fee for Services (Designated
in Time for Service to be
Legal Services Billed at Approved Rates)
Initial review and sending first demand letter 0.50 hours
Prepare and transmit second demand letter 0.50 hours
Prepare and file lien 1.00 hours
Prepare and file Writ of Scire Facias 0.50 hours
Obtain reissued writ 0.50 hours
Prepare and mail under Pa.R.C.P. §237.1 0.25 hours
Prepare Motion for Alternate Service 0.50 hours
Prepare and file Motion for Summary Judgment 1.00 hours
and related judgment
Prepare and file Writ of Execution 0.50 hours
I - 40
Attendance at sale; review of schedule of 1.50 hours
distribution and resolve distribution issues
Services not covered above Hourly amount equal to
Solicitor's regular charges
to Township
(B) There shall be added to the above amounts the reasonable out-ofpocket
expenses of counsel in connection with each of these services, as itemized
in the applicable counsel bills, which shall be deemed to be part of the fees.
(C) The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to
the Township's claim in each account.
(Ordinance No. 281, March 25, 2002, Section 2)
Section 903. Collection Procedures. The following collection procedures are
hereby established in accordance with the Act:
(A) At least thirty (30) days prior to assessing or imposing attorneys'
fees in connection with the collection of an account, the Township shall mail or
cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of such
intention to the taxpayer or other entity liable for the account (the "account
debtor").
(B) If within thirty (30) days after mailing the notice in accordance with
subsection (A), the certified mail to any account debtor is refused or unclaimed
or the return receipt is not received, then at least ten (10) days prior to the
assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the Township shall mail or cause to be
mailed, by first class mail, a second notice to such account debtor.
(C) All notices required by this Part shall be mailed to the account
debtor's last known post office address as recorded in the records or other
information of the Township, or such other address as it may be able to obtain
from the Berks County Tax Assessment Office.
(D) Each notice as described above shall include the following:
(1) The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and
the amount owed, including penalties and interest.
(2) A statement of the Township's intent to impose or assess
attorneys' fees within thirty (30) days after the mailing of the first notice,
or within ten (10) days after the mailing of the second notice.
I - 41
(3) The manner in which the assessment or imposition of
attorneys' fees may be avoided by payment of the account.
(4) The place of payment for accounts and the name and/or title
of the Township official designated to be responsible for collection
matters.
(5) For the purpose of this Part and the implementation of
attorneys' fees to be charged to such collection activities, the solicitor's
hourly rate shall be the same as that would be otherwise chargeable to the
Township for other services rendered by the Solicitor and as approved by
the Board of Supervisors at their annual reorganization meeting.
(Ordinance No. 281, March 25, 2002, Section 3)
Section 904. Related Action. The proper officials of the Township are hereby
authorized and empowered to take such additional action as they may deem necessary
or appropriate to implement this Part. (Ordinance No. 281, March 25, 2002, Section 4)
Section 905. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Part is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the
Township Board of Supervisors that this Part would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been
included herein. (Ordinance No. 281, March 25, 2002, Section 5)
AM7773
Part 10
Westside Regional Emergency Management Agency
Section 1001. Purpose. A local emergency management agency comprised of
various Berks County municipalities is established to provide the residents and citizens
of the respective municipalities and communities with more efficient, responsive, cost
effective and competent emergency management services consistent with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services Code and with the
objectives of protecting the health, safety and welfare of municipal residents and
landowners. The regional emergency management agency shall assume the
responsibilities and functions assigned by law to each participating municipality.
(Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 1; as amended and restated in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1002. Grant of Power. This Part is adopted pursuant to authority
granted in:
(A) The Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services Code, Act 323
of November 26, 1978 (35 Pa. C.S. §7101, et seq.) as amended, or as it may be
amended from time to time;
(B) The Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act 180 of
1972 (53 P.S. 481, et seq.) as amended, or as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 2; as amended and restated in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 2)
Section 1003. Definitions. The following words or phrases, when used in this
Part, shall have the meanings indicated:
Code - the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services Code, Act 323
of 1978 (35 Pa. C.S. §7101, et seq.) as amended, or as it may be amended from
time to time.
Agency - the West Side Regional Emergency Management Agency
created by various Berks County municipalities under and pursuant to this and
similar ordinances under authority of the Code.
Municipality - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania
(Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 3; as amended and restated in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 3)
I - 43
Section 1004. Participation in Agency. Pursuant to and in accord with the
above-referenced authority, the Municipality is hereby authorized to become a member
of and to participate in the Agency, and hereby delegates its responsibilities under the
Code to the Agency in accordance with the authority granted in the above-referenced
laws and this Part. (Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 4; as amended and
restated in its entirety by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 4)
Section 1005. Authority to Enter Agreement. Pursuant to and in accord with the
above-referenced authority, the Municipality is hereby authorized and directed to enter
into the First Amended and Restated Westside Regional Emergency Management
Agency Agreement which governs the Agency and its affairs, a copy of which is
attached to this Part and incorporated herein by reference (the "Agreement"). (A copy
of the Agreement has been omitted due to length but may be viewed at the Township
Office) (Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 5; as amended and restated in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 5)
Section 1006. Organization. The Agency created and existing under and by
virtue of the authority of the Code and this Part shall be comprised of representatives of
the municipalities creating and participating in the Agency. The participation of the
Municipality in the Agency shall be governed and controlled by the terms and
conditions of the Agreement, as duly amended, the provisions of applicable
Pennsylvania laws and regulations, and such other policies as may be duly adopted by
the Agency in accordance with the Agreement. (Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005,
Section 6; as amended and restated in its entirety by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007,
Section 6)
Section 1007. Finances. The Agency and its activities shall be operated with
funds provided by the participating municipalities in accordance with the provisions of
the Agreement referred to above, and such other grants or funding as may be available.
(Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 7; as amended and restated in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 7)
Section 1008. Term. The Agency, and the Agreement governing it, shall be for
an indefinite term and dependent upon the continued participation of the various
member municipalities. Participating municipalities can withdraw from the Agency
upon reasonable notice as provided for in the Agreement. (Ordinance No. 321, August
22, 2005, Section 8; as amended and restated in its entirety by Ordinance No. 334,
March 12, 2007, Section 8)
Section 1009. Municipality Participation.
(A) The governing body of the Municipality shall appoint one (1)
member of its elected officials to serve on the Agency Council. The governing
I - 44
AM7273
body of the Municipality shall also designate one (1) alternate member of its
elected officials who shall only assume the duties and responsibilities of the
appointed member when the appointed member is absent or otherwise directs
the alternate member to so act in his or her place
(B) The governing body of the Municipality shall authorize, budget,
appropriate and pay in a timely manner such initial and annual fees and other
necessary charges as provided for under the Agreement to provide the Agency
with fiscal resources for its operational requirements.
(C) Municipal officials and employees shall cooperate fully with the
Agency to accomplish the goals and objectives of the Agency.
(Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 9; as amended and restated in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 9)
Section 1010. Agency Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the Agency,
its officials, employees and representatives, shall be as set forth in this Part, the
Agreement and the other laws, regulations and instruments governing its organization
and operation and shall include the following:
(A) The Agency Council in consultation with the Technical Committee
shall (i) designate an individual to serve as the Emergency Management
Coordinator, who shall be an employee of and paid by the Township of Spring,
and (ii) name a member of the Technical Committee from each Agency Member
(as defined in the Amended and Restated Agreement) to serve as Deputy
Emergency Management Coordinators of the Agency. Deputy Coordinators
shall perform their duties as employees of the respective Agency Members with
all costs associated with Deputy Coordinators to be paid by the respective
Agency Member employing a Deputy Coordinator. The Township of Spring
shall be reimbursed by the Agency for all costs associated with the employment
of the Emergency Management Coordinator, including but not limited to salary
and any applicable fringe benefits. The Agency shall provide the necessary and
appropriate training for the Coordinator and Deputy Coordinators.
(B) Subject to review and approval of each participating municipality,
the Agency shall prepare and maintain a joint Emergency Operations Plan that
can be implemented for response to emergencies affecting the participating
municipalities.
(C) Subject to review and approval of each participating municipality,
the Agency shall be responsible for planning and resource development for
emergency operations within the territorial limits of the participating
municipalities.
I - 45
AM2223
(D) Subject to review and approval of each participating municipality,
the Agency shall carry out all other powers and duties of the participating
municipalities as set forth in the Code, at 35 Pa. C.S.A. §7503.
(Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 10; as amended and restated in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 10)
Section 1011. Property. All property shall be acquired, managed, or disposed of
pursuant to the Agreement in accordance with the terms of the Agreement. No
acquisition of real property or real estate is authorized. (Ordinance No. 321, August 22,
2005, Section 11; as amended and restated in its entirety by Ordinance No. 334, March
12, 2007, Section 11)
Section 1012. Agency Employees. Although there is no current authority for
Agency employees, in the event the Agency is subsequently granted authority under
the Agreement to hire employees, then the Agency shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including Social
Security for its employees. (Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 12; as
amended and restated in its entirety by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 12)
Section 1013. Severability. If any article, section, subsection, provision,
regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this Part, is, for
any reason declared to be illegal, unconstitutional or invalid, by any Court of competent
jurisdiction, this decision shall not affect or impair the validity of the Part as a whole, or
any other article, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation, restriction,
sentence, clause, phrase, word, or remaining portion of the within Part. The Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Pennsylvania, hereby declares that it would
have adopted the within Part and each article, section, subsection, provision, regulation,
limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase and word thereof, irrespective of the
limitations, restrictions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or word that may be declared
illegal, unconstitutional or invalid. (Ordinance No. 321, August 22, 2005, Section 14; as
amended and restated in its entirety by Ordinance No. 334, March 12, 2007, Section 14)
Part 11
Berks County Emergency Response Team
Section 1101. Purpose. A local emergency response team comprised of various
Berks County municipalities is established to provide the residents and citizens of the
respective municipalities and communities with more efficient, responsive, cost
effective and competent emergency response services consistent with the requirements
of applicable laws and with the objectives of protecting the health, safety and welfare of
municipal residents and landowners. (Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 1102. Grant of Power. This Part is adopted pursuant to authority
granted in:
(A) The Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act, 42 Pa. C.S.A. Section 8951 et
seq., as amended, or as it may be amended from time to time (the "Jurisdiction
Act");
(B) The Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act 177 of
1996 (53 Pa. C.S.A. Section 2301, et seq.) as amended, or as it may be amended
from time to time (the "Cooperation Act").
(Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 1103. Definitions. The following words or phrases, when used in this
Part, shall have the meanings indicated:
Agency - the Berks County Emergency Response Team created by
various Berks County municipalities and other entities under and pursuant to
this and similar ordinances or resolutions, as appropriate, under authority of the
Jurisdiction Act.
Township - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 1104. Participation in Agency. Pursuant to and in accord with the
above-referenced authority, the Township is hereby authorized to become a member of
and to participate in the Agency. (Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 1105. Authority to Enter Agreement. Pursuant to and in accord with the
above-referenced authority, the Township is hereby authorized and directed to enter
into the intergovernmental cooperation agreement which governs the Agency and its
affairs, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference
I - 47
AM2223
(the "Agreement"). (A copy of said Agreement has been omitted due to length but may
be viewed at the Township Office) (Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 1106. Organization. The Agency created and existing under and by
virtue of the authority of the Jurisdiction Act, the Cooperation Act and this Part shall be
comprised of representatives of the municipalities creating and participating in the
Agency. The participation of the Township in the Agency shall be governed and
controlled by the terms and conditions of the Agreement, as duly amended, the
provisions of applicable Pennsylvania laws and regulations, and such other policies as
may be duly adopted by the Agency in accordance with the Agreement. (Ordinance
No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 1107. Finances. The Agency and its activities shall be operated with
funds provided by the participating municipalities in accordance with the provisions of
the Agreement referred to above, and such other grants or funding as may be available.
(Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 1108. Term. The Agency, and the Agreement governing it, shall be for
an indefinite term and dependent upon the continued participation of the various
member municipalities, but in any event, not less than three (3) years. Thereafter,
participating municipalities can withdraw from the Agency upon reasonable notice as
provided for in the Agreement. (Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 1109. Municipality Participation.
(A) The Chief of Police of the Township or his designee within his
department, as determined by the Township, shall serve on the Board of Chiefs
of the Agency.
(B) The Board of Supervisors of the Township shall authorize, budget,
appropriate and pay in a timely manner such initial and annual fees and other
necessary charges as provided for under the Agreement to provide the Agency
with fiscal resources for its operational requirements, to the extent that such
goals and objectives are consistent with and in the best interest of the Township.
(C) Township officials and employees shall cooperate fully with the
Agency to accomplish the goals and objectives of the Agency.
(Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 1110. Agency Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the Agency,
its officials, employees and representatives, shall be as set forth in this Part, the
Agreement and the other laws, regulations and instruments governing its organization
and operation. (Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
I - 48
Section 1111. Property. All property shall be acquired, managed, or disposed of
pursuant to the Agreement in accordance with the terms of the Agreement. No
acquisition of real property or real estate is authorized. (Ordinance No. 356, March 24,
2008, Section 1)
Section 1112. Agency Employees. Although there is no current authority for
Agency employees, in the event the Agency is subsequently granted authority by the
participating municipalities to hire employees, then the Agency shall be empowered to
enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits for its
employees. (Ordinance No. 356, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
PART 12
Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement for the Purpose of Delegating Collection of
Certain Taxes by Wilson School District
Section 1201. Purpose. The Township of Spring (the "Township") and Wilson
School District (the "School District") have negotiated an Agreement whereby and
whereunder the Township will delegate to the School District the power and
responsibility to exclusively collect Act 511 Business Privilege Tax and Mercantile Taxes
levied by the Township, for the portion of the Township located within the geographic
boundaries of the School District, so as to efficiently collect said certain taxes, which is
in the best interests of the Township and the citizens of the Township. (Ordinance No.
389, April 9, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1202. Grant of Power. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to authority
granted in:
A. The Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act 177 of 1996 (53
Pa. C.S.A. Section 2301 et seq.) as amended, or as it may be amended from time to time
(the "Cooperation Act"); and
B. The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of 1965 (53 P.S. Section 6924.101 et
seq.) as amended or as it may be amended from time to time ("Act 511").
(Ordinance No. 389, April 9, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1203. Agreement. The terms and conditions of the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Agreement between the Township and the School District (the
"Agreement") are attached hereto as Exhibit A and made a part hereof in their entirety.
(A copy of said Agreement has been omitted due to length but may be viewed at the
Township Office) (Ordinance No. 389, April 9, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1204. Term. The initial term of the Agreement shall be five (5) years and
shall continue for one-year periods thereafter unless and until terminated by either
party in writing with ninety (90) days' notice prior to the expiration of the then-current
term. (Ordinance 389, April 9, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1205. Finances. The Township shall compensate the School District in
an amount equal to three and one-quarter percent (3.25%) of the gross Mercantile Taxes
and Business Privilege Taxes collected by the School District in accordance with the
provisions of the Agreement referred to above. (Ordinance No. 389, April 9, 2012,
Section 1)
Section 1206. Organization. The organizational terms are set forth in Sections I,
II, IV and V of the Agreement. (Ordinance No. 389, April 9, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1207. Property. All property shall be acquired, managed, or disposed of
pursuant to the Agreement in accordance with the terms of the Agreement. No
acquisition of real property or real estate is authorized. (Ordinance No. 389, April 9,
2012, Section 1)
Section 1208. Employees. No new entity has been created by the Agreement that
would require employees, however in the event a new entity is subsequently created
and granted authority by the Township and the School District to hire employees, then
the new entity shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits for its employees. Independently the Township and
the School District are responsible for their respective employees' policies for group
insurance and employee benefits. (Ordinance No. 389, April 9, 2012, Section 1)
(THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT FOR THE PURPOSE
OF DELEGATING COLLECTION OF CERTAIN TAXES BY WILSON SCHOOL
DISTRICT HAS BEEN OMITTED DUE TO LENGTH AND MAY BE VIEWED IN ITS
ENTIRETY AT THE TOWNSHIP OFFICE)
PART 13
Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement for the Purpose of Creating and Joining the
Wyomissing Creek Watershed Coalition
Section 1301. Grant of Power. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to authority
granted in the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act 177 of 1996 (53
PA. C.S.A. §2301 et seq.) as amended, or as may be amended from time to time.
(Ordinance No. 394, June 25, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1302. Conditions. The terms and conditions of the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Agreement between the Township and the Participating Municipalities
(the "Agreement") is attached hereto as Exhibit A and made a part hereof in its entirety.
(A copy of said Agreement has been omitted due to length but may be viewed at the
Township Office) (Ordinance No. 394, June 25, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1303. Duration of Agreement. The Agreement shall continue in full force
and effect, except as modified by mutual agreement of the parties or if terminated
pursuant to paragraph 36 of the Agreement, which provides, if at any time a
Participating Member wishes to end its participation in the Coalition and to terminate
its rights and obligations under the Agreement, it shall give the Chairperson of the
Steering Committee thirty (30) days written notice that it no longer wishes to
participate. (Ordinance No. 394, June 25, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1304. Purpose and Objectives. The Township and the Township of
Cumru, the Borough of Mohnton, the City of Reading, the Borough of Shillington, the
Borough of Wyomissing, and the Borough of West Reading (the "Participating
Municipalities"), have negotiated an Agreement whereby and whereunder as
Participating Municipalities in the Wyomissing Creek Watershed to create a Coalition to
coordinate and cost share the implementation of the Total Maximum Daily Load (the
"TMDL") for the Wyomissing Watershed per the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (the "MS4") permitting regulations of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection on behalf of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency for the Wyomissing Creek Watershed. (Ordinance No. 394, June 25, 2012,
Section 1)
Section 1305. Financing. The Township shall initially contribute Five Thousand
Dollars ($5000), and thereafter, an equal share based upon assessment by the Coalition
in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement referred to above. (Ordinance
No. 394, June 25, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1306. Organizational Structure. Each Participating Municipality shall
appoint one (1) member to serve on a Steering Committee which shall direct the
I - 52
Coalition. Additional terms on the organizational structure are set forth in Paragraphs
11 through 16 of the Agreement. (Ordinance No. 394, June 25, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1307. Real and/or Personal Property. All property shall be acquired,
managed, or disposed of pursuant to the Agreement in accordance with the terms of the
Agreement. No acquisition of real property or real estate is authorized. (Ordinance
No. 394, June 25, 2012, Section 1)
Section 1308. Employees. No new entity has been created by the Agreement that
would require employees. The utilization of municipal consultants to be compensated
is anticipated in the Agreement. The Coalition is therefore empowered to enter into
contracts for such consultants. (Ordinance No. 394, June 25, 2012, Section 1)
(THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT FOR THE PURPOSE
OF CREATING AND JOINING THE WYOMISSING CREEK WATERSHED
COALITION HAS BEEN OMITTED DUE TO LENGTH AND MAY BE VIEWED IN ITS
ENTIRETY AT THE TOWNSHIP OFFICE)
CHAPTER II
ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS
Section 101. Short Title
Section 102. Purpose
Section 103. Scope
Section 104. Definitions
Section 105. Registration
Section 106. Operational Standards
Section 107. Intentional False Alarm
Section 108. False Alarm Administrative Fees
Section 109. Liability of Township
Section 110. Penalty
Section 111. Severance Clause
AK2541
AK2541
Section 101. Short Title. This Chapter shall be commonly known and may be cited
as the "Township of Spring Alarm Ordinance." (Ordinance No. 210, September 11, 1989,
Section 1)
Section 102. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards and
regulations for various types of burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices which
require response by the Township police and/ or local fire companies. (Ordinance No. 210,
September 11, 1989, Section 2)
Section 103. Scope. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any person who
operates, maintains, owns or rents any alarm device designed to summon the Township
police and/ or local fire companies to any location within the Township in response to any
type of alarm signal. (Ordinance No. 210, September 11, 1989, Section 3)
Section 104. Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms are
defined as follows:
Alarm - a communication indicating or warning that a crime, fire or other
emergency situation warranting immediate action by the Township police or local
fire companies has occurred or is occurring.
Alarm Device - a privately owned or rented and operated electronic,
electrical, mechanical or similar device designed to transmit an alarm by wire,
telephone, radio, audible signal (bell, horn, siren, etc.) or other means to the
Township police, local fire companies or to any person or firm who or which is
instructed to notify the Township police or local fire companies, or to any person
who is within the sound transmission distance limits of such audible signal. This
term shall not include "smoke detectors," normally installed in private residences,
when such audible signal does not transmit to the outside of such private residence.
False Alarm - any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence, or
unintentional act of any person, and shall include alarms caused by malfunctioning
of the alarm device or other relevant system. This term shall not include an alarm
device set off due to electrical storms, or like circumstances, over which the person
having an alarm device under this Chapter has no control.
False Alarm Administrative Fee - the fee payable to the Township resulting
from false alarms which require response by the Township police and/ or local fire
companies.
Intentional False Alarm - a false alarm resulting from the intentional
11-3
AK2541
activation of an alarm device by a person under circumstances where the person has
no reasonable basis to believe that a crime, fire or other emergency warranting
immediate action by the Township police or local fire companies has occurred or is
occurring.
Person - any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, agency or any legal entity, whatsoever, which is recognized
by law as the subject of rights and duties. The singular shall include the plural, and
the masculine, the feminine and the neuter.
Registrant - a person causing registration of an alarm device or a person
having an alarm device registered under this Chapter with the Township police.
Registration - any person having a presently existing alarm device, or
installing an alarm device in any premises in the Township, shall submit the
information, hereinafter specified, to the Township police, which will document
such alarm device with the Township police.
Township - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 210, September 11, 1989, Section 4)
Section 105. Registration.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, maintaining
property, or a person otherwise occupying a premises in the Township, to put an
alarm device into operation on his or its premises, or to allow an alarm device to be
put into operation on his or its premises, without first causing registration of such
alarm device with the Township Police.
(B) In order to cause registration of such alarm device, a person shall
submit the following information to the Township police:
(1) His, her or its name.
(2) His, her or its home address and/ or principal business address
and the telephone number of each.
(3) The location at which the alarm device is or will be installed or
operated; and type of alarm.
II-4
AK2541
(4) The names and addresses and telephone numbers of at least
two (2) individuals, who have keys to the premises at which the alarm device
is located, and who are authorized to enter the premises at any time, but who
do not reside at the location of the alarm device; or in lieu thereof, the name
and address and phone number of the company which provides alarm
service at the premises and which has on file with it, the names and
telephone numbers of such authorized key holders.
(C) Any person having caused registration of an alarm device with the
Township police shall keep all information required with the original registration
up to date. In case of any change in the original registration, notice of such change
shall be made to the Township police within five (5) days from such change.
Notification shall be made in person or by mail.
(D) Notwithstanding the language contained in Section 105(A) of this
Chapter, it shall not be unlawful for a person to continue to operate an alarm device
on his premises without registering such alarm device with the Township police,
after the effective date of this Chapter, provided that said alarm device was in
operation before the effective date of this Chapter, until such time as the Township
police or local fire companies respond to an alarm resulting from the activation of
such alarm device, whereafter such person shall have five (5) days within which to
cause registration of such alarm device, as required by this Chapter. Failure of such
person to cause registration within the required five (5) days, shall subject such
person to the penalties as hereinafter provided for.
(Ordinance No. 210, September 11, 1989, Section 5)
Section 106. Operational Standards.
(A) Any alarm device installed in any premises within the Township, or
operating in any premises within the Township must be maintained in good
working order to assure reliability of such alarm device.
(B) If an alarm device is designed to cause an exterior bell, horn, siren or
other sounding device to be activated on or near the premises on which the alarm
device is installed at the time it gives an alarm, said alarm device shall be designed
to deactivate the bell, horn, siren or other sounding device after twenty (20) minutes
of operation. All alarm devices shall meet the applicable standards of the
Underwriters Laboratories and/or National Fire Protection Association, and/or
other recognized industry standards.
H-5
AK2541
(C) The Township police may require that repairs be made whenever it
has been determined that such repairs are necessary to assure proper operation of
an alarm device. Any person failing to make such required repairs within a period
of seven (7) days, following notification to make such repairs, shall be liable to the
penalties hereinafter provided for.
(Ordinance No. 210, September 11, 1989, Section 6)
Section 107. Intentional False Alarm. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause an
intentional false alarm. Any person violating this Section shall be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided for. (Ordinance 210, September 11, 1989, Section 7)
Section 108. False Alarm Administrative Fees.
(A) For the first (1st) through third (3rd) false alarms, emanating from an
alarm device in any calendar year, no action will be taken against the registrant.
Upon the third (3rd) false alarm received in any calendar year, the Chief of Police of
the Township, or his/her designee shall notify the registrant by regular mail or
personal notice, within five (5) days after the third (3rd) false alarm was received,
that any further false alarm emanating from his alarm device within that calendar
year, shall subject the registrant to the administrative fee, or upon failure to pay the
administrative fee, a penalty as herein provided for.
(B) For the fourth (4th) through sixth (6th) false alarms emanating from an
alarm device within the same calendar year, an administrative fee of Fifty Dollars
($50.00) shall be imposed on the registrant for each offense.
(C) For the seventh (7th) and subsequent false alarms emanating from an
alarm device, an administrative fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be
imposed for each offense.
(D) When a fourth (4th) or subsequent false alarm has occurred, the Chief
of Police of Township or his/her designee, shall notify the registrant of the alarm
device from which the false alarm emanated, within ten (10) days, after such false
alarm has occurred, that an administrative fee is due and the amount thereof. Such
notice shall also include that such administrative fee is payable to the Township,
and shall be paid at the business office of the Township within fifteen (15) days,
after receipt of the notice, and that failure to pay the administrative fee shall subject
such person to the penalties as hereinafter provided for. Such notice shall be made
by certified mail, or by personal service on the registrant, or an adult member of the
registrant's family or an adult employee located at the address of the registrant.
II-6
AK2541
(Ordinance No. 210, September 11, 1989, Section 8; amended by Ordinance No. 293,
January 27, 2003, Section 1 and Section 2, )
Section 109. Liability of Township. The registration of an alarm device within the
Township shall not constitute acceptance by the Township of any liability to maintain such
alarm device, or to answer alarms or for any other responsibility in connection therewith.
(Ordinance No. 210, September 11, 1989, Section 9)
Section 110. Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, or
refuses to pay an imposed false alarm administrative fee, shall upon conviction thereof
before the proper District Justice of the Peace, or in the event of an appeal before the Court
of Common Pleas of Berks County, Pennsylvania, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than six hundred ($600.00) dollars and court costs as provided by law, or suffer
imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both. (Ordinance No. 210,
September 11, 1989, Section 10)
Section 111. Severance Clause. In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause
of any part of this Chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby, and
shall remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance No. 210, September 11, 1989, Section 11)
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
CHAPTER III
ANIMALS
Curbing of Dogs and Removal of Dog Feces
Penalty for Violation of Provisions of this Chapter
Invalidity of Portions of this Chapter
Authority to Enact this Chapter
AK2407
AK2407
Section 101. Curbing of Dogs and Removal of Dog Feces. No person owning,
harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog, shall cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil,
defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk,
passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate or walk, or
upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of said private property. The restriction of this Section shall not
apply to that property lying between the curb and the improved sidewalk area, which area
shall be used to curb such dog under the following conditions:
(A) The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog in a sanitary method from the designated areas as heretofore
defined.
(B) The feces removed from the said designated area shall be deposited by
the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog curbed in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, in a sanitary method.
(Ordinance No. 109, February 24,1975, Section 1)
Section 102. Penalty for Violation of Provisions of This Chapter. Any person failing
to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) and cost of
prosecution, and, in default of the payment of any such fine, be committed to the Township
Lockup for not more than five (5) days or be committed to the County Jail, or Workhouse,
for not more than thirty (30) days. (Ordinance No. 109, February 24,1975, Section 2)
Section 103. Invalidity of Portions of This Chapter. In the event any provision,
section, sentence, clause or part of this Chapter shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
Chapter, it being the intent of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, that
such remainder shall be and shall remain in force and effect. (Ordinance No. 109,
February 24,1975, Section 4)
Section 104. Authority to Enact This Chapter. It is hereby declared that the
enactment of this Chapter is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania. (Ordinance No. 109, February 24, 1975, Section 5)
CHAPTER IV
BICYCLES
(Reserved for Future Use)
CHAPTER V
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
(Reserved for Future Use)
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 108.
CHAPTER VI
CODE ENFORCEMENT
Part 1
Uniform Construction Code
Election to Administer and Enforce
Adoption of Uniform Construction Code
Revisions to the Uniform Construction Code
Administration and Enforcement of Code
Board of Appeals
Previously Adopted Codes
Fees
Severability
Part 2
Property Maintenance Code
Section 201. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
Section 202. Severability
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Part 3
Uniform Construction Code Board of Appeals
Title and Background
Agreement
Participation
Ratification of Previous Actions
Authorization
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act
Severability
AK2730
Part 1
Uniform Construction Code
Section 101. Election to Administer and Enforce. The Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania (the "Township") hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §7210.101-
7210.1103, as amended from time to time (the "Act"), and its regulations. (Ordinance No.
346, August 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 102. Adoption of Uniform Construction Code. The Uniform Construction
Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Township. (Ordinance No. 346, August 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 3. Revisions to the Uniform Construction Code. The following additions,
insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the Uniform Construction Code:
(A) The International Building Code, 2006 edition, is hereby revised as
follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(2) Section 1612.3 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(3) Section 1612.3 Insert - "December 5, 1997 "
(4) Section 3410.2 Insert - "October 14, 1940"
(B) The International Code Council Electrical Code - Administrative
Provisions, 2006 edition, is hereby revised as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(2) Section 404.2 Insert - "Fees assessable by the Township for the
administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this particular code
shall be established by the Board of Supervisors of the Township by
resolution from time to time."
(C) The International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, is hereby
revised as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
VI -2
(D) The International Existing Building Code, 2006 edition, is hereby
revised as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(2) Section 1301.2 Insert - "October 14, 1940"
(D) The International Fire Code, 2006 edition, is hereby revised as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(2) Section 109.3 Insert - "Summary Offense", "One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00)" and "thirty (30)"
(3) Section 111.4 Insert - "$1,000.00" and "$1,000.00"
(4) Section 3204.3.1.1 Insert - "These items are prohibited in all
zoning districts except industrial and agricultural zoning uses"
(5) Section 3404.2.9.5.1 Insert - "These items are prohibited in all
zoning districts except industrial and agricultural zoning uses"
(6) Section 3406.2.4.4 Insert - "These items are prohibited in all
zoning districts except industrial and agricultural zoning uses"
(7) Section 3804.2 Insert - "These items are prohibited in all zoning
districts except industrial and agricultural zoning uses"
(F) The International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, is hereby revised as
follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(2) Section 106.5.2 Insert - "Fees assessable by the Township for the
administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this particular code
shall be established by the Board of Supervisors of the Township by
resolution from time to time."
(3) Section 106.5.3 Insert - "80%" and "80%"
(4) Section 108.4 Insert - "Summary Offense", "One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00)" and "thirty (30)"
(5) Section 108.5 Insert - "$1,000.00" and "$1,000.00"
(G) The International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, is hereby revised as
follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(2) Section 106.5.2 Insert - "Fees assessable by the Township for the
administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this particular code
shall be established by the Board of Supervisors of the township by
resolution from time to time."
VI- 3
AK2730
(3) Section 106.5.3 Insert - "80%" and "80%"
(4) Section 108.4 Insert - "Summary Offense", One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00)" and "thirty (30)"
(5) Section 108.5 Insert - "$1,000.00" and "$1,000.00"
(H) The International Code Council Performance Code for Buildings and
Facilities, 2006 edition, is not modified at this time.
(I) The International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition, is hereby revised as
follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(2) Section 106.6.2 Insert - "Fees assessable by the Township for the
administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this particular code
shall be established by the Board of Supervisors of the Township by
resolution from time to time."
(3)
(4) Section 108.4 Insert - "Summary Offense", "One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00)", and thirty (30)
(5) Section 108.5 Insert - "$1,000.00" and "$1,000.00"
(6) Section 305.6.1 Insert - "36 inches" and "36 inches"
(7) Section 904.1 Insert - "24 inches" and "24 inches"
Section 106.6.3 Insert - "80%" and "80%"
(J) The International Residential Code, 2006 edition, is hereby revised as
follows:
(1) Section R101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(2) Table R301.2(1) Insert the following Design Criteria:
a) Ground Snow Load - 2,516/ ft2
b) Wind Speed - 90 mph
c) Seismic Design Category - C
d) Weathering - Severe
e) Frost line depth - 36"
f) Termite - moderate to heavy
g) Decay - Slight to moderate
h) Winter Design Temp -130
i) Flood Hazards - See Code of Ordinances
(3) Section P2603.6.1 Insert - "36 inches" and "36 inches"
(4) Section P3103.1 Insert - "24 inches" and "24 inches"
(K) The International Urban-Wildland Interface Code, 2006 edition is
hereby revised as follows:
VI- 4
A1(2730
(1) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(Ordinance No. 346, August 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 104. Administration and Enforcement of Code. Administration and
enforcement of the Code within the Township shall be undertaken in any of the following
ways as determined by the Board of Supervisors of the Township from time to time by
resolution:
(A) By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the
Township Building Code Official to act on behalf of the Township.
(B) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or
third-party agencies to act on behalf of the Township.
(C) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Act through an inter-municipal agreement.
(D) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Act on behalf of the Township.
(E) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of structures other
than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility and miscellaneous use
structures.
(Ordinance No. 346, August 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 105. Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the Township in conformity with the
requirements of the relevant provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time, and for
the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken
jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by
joint action of the participating municipalities. (Ordinance No. 346, August 13, 2007,
Section 1)
Section 106. Previously Adopted Codes.
(A) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Township before August 13, 2007 are hereby repealed.
VI- 5
AK2730
(B) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this Part and whose requirements are less than the
minimum requirements of the Code are hereby amended to conform with the
comparable provisions of the Code.
(C) All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Township not
governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ordinance No. 346, August 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 107. Fees. Fees assessable by the Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this Part and the Code shall be established by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township by resolution from time to time. (Ordinance No. 346,
August 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 108. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Part is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences,
clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township that this Part would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been
included herein. (Ordinance No. 346, August 13, 2007, Section 1)
A1(2730
Part 2
Property Maintenance Code
Section 201. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. That a certain document,
three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Secretary of the Township of Spring,
being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006
edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the Township of Spring, in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are
safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and for the demolition of such existing
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said Property Maintenance Code on file in the Office of the Township of Spring are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed as follows:
(A) Section 101.1 Insert - "Township of Spring"
(B) Section 103.5 Insert - "Fees assessable by the Township for the
administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this particular code shall
be established by the Board of Supervisors of the Township by resolution from time
to time."
(C) Section 106.3 is amended and restated in its entirety as follows:
"106.3 Prosecution of Violation. Any person failing to comply with a
notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be
deemed guilty of a summary offense or civil infraction as determined by the
local municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense.
If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute
the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the
order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority
having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate."
(D) Section 302.4 Insert - "ten (10) inches"
VI- 7
A1(2730
(E) Section 302.8 - Replace with the following:
"302.8. Motor Vehicles: Except as provided for in other regulations,
not more than one currently unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle shall
be parked, kept or stored or any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be
in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped
or dismantled.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside
a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such
purposes."
(F) Section 304.14 Insert - "April 1 to November 1"
(G) Section 602.3 Insert - "October 1 to June 1"
(F1) Section 602.4 Insert - "October 1 to May 1"
(Ordinance No. 346, August 13, 2007, Section 2)
Section 202. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Part is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences,
clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township that this Part would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been
included herein. (Ordinance No. 346, August 13, 2007, Section 2)
AK2730
Part 3
Uniform Construction Code Board of Appeals
Section 301. Title and Background. The title and background of this Part are as
follows:
(A) This Part authorizes the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, to join with other participating municipalities to enter into an
intergovernmental agreement to establish the Berks County Uniform Construction
Code Board of Appeals in cooperation with the County of Berks.
(B) Certain townships and boroughs in Berks County, Pennsylvania have
enacted ordinances adopting the Uniform Construction Code ("UCC"), Act 45 of
1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101, et seq. (the "Act").
(C) Section 301 of the Act directed the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry to promulgate regulations with respect to the administration and
enforcement of the Act, which regulations were codified at Title 34 Pa.Code,
Chapters 401, 403 and 405 ("Regulations").
(D) Section 403.121(d) of the Regulations, 34 Pa.Code § 403.121(d), as
authorized by Section 501(c) of the Act, 35 P.S. § 7210.501(c), provides that two or
more municipalities may establish a joint board of appeals through an
intergovernmental agreement adopted under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S. § 2301, et seq.
(E) Under the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, a
municipality may enter into an intergovernmental cooperation agreement upon the
passage of an ordinance by its governing body.
(F) The Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania (the
"Township") desires to enter into an intergovernmental agreement ("Agreement")
with other participating municipalities in cooperation with the County to establish
the Berks County Uniform Construction Code Board of Appeals ("UCC Board of
Appeals"), to hear and rule on appeals, requests for variances and requests for
extension of time as may be filed under the Township's UCC ordinance (Part 1,
Chapter VI).
(Ordinance No. 329, April 10, 2006, Section 1)
VI -9
AK2730
Section 302. Agreement. The Board of Supervisors hereby approves entering into
the Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference
(and which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this Part was enacted),
with the intent and effect that the Township shall be bound by the Agreement. (A copy of
the Agreement may be obtained at the Township office.) (Ordinance No. 329, April 10,
2006, Section 2)
Section 303. Participation. The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors is hereby
authorized and directed on behalf of the Township: (i) to execute and deliver the
Agreement; and (ii) to execute and deliver such additional instruments, and to take such
further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to carry forth the Agreement and the
transactions to be effected under the Agreement, including payment of the participation fee
to Berks County on behalf of the UCC Board of Appeals, as may be due from the Township
under the Agreement. (Ordinance No. 329, April 10, 2006, Section 3)
Section 304. Ratification of Previous Actions. All actions of any officer, agent or
other representative of the Township heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of
the UCC Board of Appeals and/ or the Township's participation therein are hereby ratified
and approved in all respects. (Ordinance No. 329, April 10, 2006, Section 4)
Section 305. Authorization. The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to take
such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this Part
and of the Agreement. (Ordinance No. 329, April 10, 2006, Section 5)
Section 306. Intergovernmental Cooperation Act. As required by the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
(A) The conditions of the Agreement are set forth in the Agreement.
(B) The Township shall utilize the UCC Board of Appeals for all appeals
filed from application of the Township's UCC ordinance for the term as set forth in
the Agreement.
(C) The purpose and objectives of the Agreement are as set forth in this
Part and in the Agreement.
(D) The manner and extent of financing the Agreement are that: (i) no
borrowing will be required by the Township; (ii) funds to implement the
Township's obligations under the Agreement shall come from normal and usual
budgeted amounts for such matters; and (iii) other provisions governing the manner
VI -10
AK2730
and extent of the financing of the UCC Board of Appeals shall be as set forth in the
Agreement;
(E) The UCC Board of Appeals shall be administered by the Board of
Commissioners of Berks County, or its designee.
(F) All property, real or personal, of the UCC Board of Appeals shall be
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the UCC Board of Appeals in
accordance with the terms of the Agreement and the rules and procedures as may
be adopted by the UCC Board of Appeals.
(G) The UCC Board of Appeals will not be entering into any contracts.
(Ordinance No. 329, Apri110, 2006, Section 6)
Section 307. Severability. The provisions of this Part are severable and if any
section, sentence, clause, or part or provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction such decision of the court shall not
affect the remaining sections, clauses, parts or provisions of this Part. It is hereby declared
to be the intent of the Township that such Part would have been enacted if such illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been
included herein. (Ordinance No. 329, Apri110, 2006, Section 7)
oRDTNANCE No. q06.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING, BERKS
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIAV ADOPTING TI_IE 2012 EDMON
OF THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
CODE REGLILATING AND GOVERNING THE
CONDITIONS AND MAINTENANCE OF ALL PROPERTY,
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; BY PROVIDING THE
STANDARDS FOR SUPPLIED UTILITIES AND FACILITIES
AND OTHER PHYSICAL THINGS AND CONDITIONS
ESSENTIAL TO ENSURE THAT STRUCTURES ARE SAFE,
SANITARY AND FIT FOR OCCUPATION AND USE; AND
THE CONDEMNATION OF BUILDINGS ANDSTRUCTURES
UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY AND USE, AND THE
DEMOLITION OF SUCH EXISTING STRUCTURES IN THE
TOWNSHIP OF SPRING; PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE
OF PERMITS AND COLLECTION OF FEES THEREFOR;
REPEALING ORDINANCE NO.346 OF THETOWNSHIPOF
SPRING AND ALL OTHER ORDINANCES OR PARTS OF
LAWS IN CONFLICT THEREWITH.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ENACTED AND ORDAINEDbythe
authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Part2, entitled "Property Maintenance Code", of Chapter VI, entitled
"Code Enforcement" , of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Spring is hereby
amended and restated in its entirety as follow:
"Part2
Property Maintenance Code
Section 201. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. That a certain
document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Secretary of the
Township of Spring, being marked and designated as the International Property
Maintenance Code,201.2 editton, as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Township of
Spring, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the
conditions dnd maintenance of all property, buildings and structures by providing
the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
10A935702-20t2Property Maintemce Code
1
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary andfitforoccupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and strucfures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and for the demolition of such existing strucfures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Property Maintenance Code on file in the Office of the Secretary of the Townshipof
Spring are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this Section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,prescribed
as follows:
Section 101.1 Title is amended and restated in its entirety as follows:
"Section 101.L Title. These regulations shall be known as the
International Property Maintenance Code of the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, hereinafter referred to as the " code" .
Section 103.5 Fees is amended and restated in its entirety as follows:
"Section L03.5 Fees. Fees assessable by the Township for the
administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this
particular code shall be established by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township by resolution from time to time."
Section 106.3 Prosecution of Violation is amended and restated in its
entirety as follows:
" Section 1 06.3 Prosecution of Violation. Any person failing to
comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with
Section '1.07 of the code shall be deemed guilty of a summary offense
or civil infraction as determined by the local municipality, and the
violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of
violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, conectorabate
such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the strucfure in violation of the provisions of
the code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any
action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises
shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate."
Section 11,2.4 Failure to Comply is amended and restatedinitsentirety
as follbws:
104935702-2072Ptoperty Maintemce Code
)
"Section 172.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall
continue any work after havingbeen servedwith a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) ol more than One Thousand Dollars
($1,000)."
Section 302.4 Weeds is herebv deleted in its entiretv.
Section 304.1.4InsectScreens is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section 304.17 Guards for Basements Windows is herebydeletedinib
entirety.
Section 304.19 Gates is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section 602.2 Residential Occupancies is amended and restated in its
entirety as follows:
"Section 602.2 Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be
provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room
temperature of 68"F (20"C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the
locality indicated in Appendix D of the International PlumbingCode.
Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall portable unvented
space heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating.
Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperatureis
above 30"F (-1"C), a minimum temperature of 65oF (18"C) shall be
maintained."
Section 602.3 Heat Supply is amended and restated in its entirety as
follows:
"Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Every owner and operatorof any
building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or
sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to fumishheatto
the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from
October 1 to June 1 to maintain a minimum temperature of 68"F
(20"C) in all habitable rooms/ bathrooms and toilet rooms.
J
10 49357 02-2072 Pr oper tv Maintemce Code
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum
room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating
system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in
Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above
30'F C1'C) a minimum temperature of 65'F (18'C) shall be
maintained."
Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces is amended and restated in its
entireW as follows:
"Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable
work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from
October 1 to ]une 1" to maintain a minimum temperature of 65'F
(18'C) during the period the spaces are occupied."
Section 202. Severabil8. If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clauseor
phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstifutional, illegal or
invalid, such unconstitutionallty, illegality or invalidity shall not affectorimpairthe
validity of any of the remaining provisions, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses,
or phrases of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township that this Ordinance would have been adopted had
such unconstifutional, illegal or invalid part, section, subsection, sentence,clauseor
phrase thereof not been included herein."
SECTION 2. All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting withtheprovisions of
this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with this Ordinance.
SECTION 3. This Ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements,
orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect andbeinfullforceand
effect on the earliest date permitted by law following the date of enactment
SECTION 4. Nothing in this Ordinance or in the Property Maintenance Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or
existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or
remedy of any chay'acter be lost, impaired or affected by this Ordinance.
70{935702-2012Property Maintenance Code
4
SECTION 5. The Code of Ordinances of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, as amended, shall be and remain unchanged and in full force and effect
except as amended, supplemented and modified by this Ordinance. This Ordinance shall
become a part of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, as amended, upon adoption.
DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED this 12tn day of August, 2013.
TOI\AISHIP OF SPRING
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Attest:
lsEALl
rich, Chairman
tti ]iSmith, Vice Chairman
Kvle M. Hummel
70 49357 02-2072 Woperty Maintenance Code_
MUNICIPAL CERTIFICATION
1, 5l' erJ I Ra,^p,.r .(A€,s.is+ant)Secretaryof theTownshipofSpring
Berks County, Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that the foregoingOrdinanceNo. ?Obwas
advertised in the Reading Eagle, a daily newspaper of general circulation in the Township of
Spring, on August2,2013, and was duly enacted and approved as set forth at a Regular
Meeting of the Board of Supervisors held on August122013.
lsEALl N*l fn; (A,ssistart) #cretaryv
6
l0 4935702-m72 ProDertv Maintenance Code






Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
CHAPTER VII
CONDUCT
Unlawful to Tamper with Public Property or Property on Streets,
Alleys or Public Ground
Unlawful to Tamper with Stakes, Posts, and Monuments
Unlawful to Tamper with Warning Lamps, Signs, or Barricades
Unlawful to Take Material from Streets, Alleys, or Public
Grounds
Exceptions to Provisions Relating to Tampering with, Injuring, or
Removing Certain Property
Penalty for Tampering with, Injuring, or Removing Certain Property
Severability
AK2908
VII-2
AK2908
Section 101. Unlawful to Tamper with Public Property or Property on Streets, Alleys
or Public Ground. No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, or
tamper with or deface any public property of the Township of Spring, within or without
the Township, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, street light or water
stop box on or in any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds in the Township.
(Ordinance No. 123, August 25, 1975, Section 1)
Section 102. Unlawful to Tamper with Stakes, Posts, and Monuments. No person or
persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with or pull, drive, change, alter, or
destroy any stake, post, monument or other evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location,
corner or angle in the Township of Spring, made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed
or set, or caused to be done by the authorities of the Township in any survey of or in any
street, alley or public ground in the Township, to evidence the location, elevation, line,
grade, corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, drain or other
public work, matter or thing. (Ordinance No. 123, August 25, 1975, Section 2)
Section 103. Unlawful to Tamper with Warning Lamps, Signs or Barricades. No
person or persons shall willfully or maliciously destroy or remove or deface or obliterate or
cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade erected by the authorities of the Township or
by any person, firm or corporation doing work by permission of the authorities of the
Township on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or bridges or on any public grounds of
the Township, within or without the Township, as a warning of danger. (Ordinance
No. 123, August 25, 1975, Section 3)
Section 104. Unlawful to Take Material from Streets, Alleys or Public Grounds. No
person or persons shall take any earth, stone or other material from any of the streets,
alleys or public grounds in the Township. (Ordinance No. 123, August 25, 1975, Section 4)
Section 105. Exceptions to Provisions Relating to Tampering with, Injuring or
Removing Certain Property. This Chapter shall not apply to normal activities in
connection with the construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon, or to incidental results of
work done thereon or therein upon permit from or by authority of the Township.
(Ordinance No. 123, August 25, 1975, Section 5)
Section 106. Penalty for Tampering with, Injuring or Removing or Removing Certain
Property. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for
not more than thirty (30) days. Provided: the fact that a violator has been penalized, after
hearing, as herein provided, shall not preclude the Township or other injured party from
VII-3
AK2908
taking proper legal action to recover damages resulting from such violation. Provided
further: each violation of any provision of this Chapter, and each day the same is
continued, shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ordinance No. 123, August 25, 1975,
Section 6)
Section 107. Severability. The provisions of this Chapter shall be severable, and if
any section, part of section or provision thereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal
or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining
sections, parts of sections, or provisions of this Chapter. It is hereby declared as a
legislative intent that this Chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional,
illegal or otherwise invalid provision not been a part thereof. (Ordinance No. 123, August
25, 1975, Section 7)
VII-4
CHAPTER VIII
CURFEW
(Reserved for Future Use)
DE8124
CHAPTER IX
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
Part 1
Outdoor Fires
Section 101. Outdoor Fires Restricted
Section 102. Outdoor Fires on Private Property Outside Fire Limits Regulated
Section 103. Burning of Designated Recyclables and Yard Waste is Prohibited
Section 104. Penalty for Violation
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204.
Section 205.
Section 206.
Section 207.
Section 208.
Section 209.
Section 210.
Part 2
Fire Lanes
Establishment of Fire Lanes
Posting of Signs
Private Property
Blockage of Fire Lane Prohibited
Definitions
Notice of Violation
Penalty for Violation of Section 203
Penalty for Violation of Section 204
Severability
Declaration
Part 3
Recognition of the Township of Spring Fire Rescue Service
Section 301. Purpose
Section 302. Creation of Township of Spring Fire Rescue Service
Section 303. Recognition
Section 304. Governance
Section 305. Authorized Activities of Fire Rescue Service
Section 306. Rules and Regulations
Section 307. Funds and Finances
Section 308. Severability
DE8124
Section 401.
Section 402.
Section 403.
Section 404.
Section 405.
Section 406.
Section 407.
Section 408.
Section 409.
Section 410.
Section 411.
Section 412.
Section 501.
Section 502.
Section 503.
Section 504.
Section 505.
Section 506.
Section 507.
Section 601.
Section 602.
Section 603.
Section 604.
Section 605.
Section 606.
Section 607.
Section 608.
Part 4
Insurance - Fire Loss Escrow
Municipal Certificate Required Prior to Payment of Fire Loss
Claims
Request to Township Treasurer
Receipt of Certificate
Receipt of Certificate and Bill
Loss in Excess of 60 Percent
Administration of Funds
Proof of Payment
Liability
Subrogation and Assignment
Construction
Penalty
Severability
Part 5
Key Safe
Key Safe Required
Key Safe Contents
Application
Exclusions
Time for Compliance
Penalty for Violation
Severability
Part 6
Fire Protection Cisterns
Title
Purpose
Specifications and General Requirements
Maintenance
Exceptions
Changes in Fire Protection Cistern Standard Specifications
Conflicts
Severability
DE8124
Section 701.
Section 702.
Section 703.
Section 704.
Part 7
Fire Prevention Code
Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
Fire Prevention Code of the Township of Spring
Fees
Severability
DE8124
DE8124
Part 1
Outdoor Fires
Section 101. Outdoor Fires Restricted. No person shall set or maintain any fire
upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public grounds in the Township of Spring,
or burn or cause to be burned thereon any boxes, rubbish, leaves or other material or
substance of any kind. Nor shall any person set or maintain any fire, or burn or cause
to be burned any substance or material of any kind, out of doors, other than for the
purpose of cooking edible foods, anywhere within the fire limits of the said Township,
as now or hereafter may be constituted, such fire limits now being comprised of the
following villages within the said Township: Colony Park, Cornwall Terrace, Midvale
Manor, Lincoln Park, Springmont, West Wyomissing, Wilshire and Whitfield.
Provided: "Person" shall include any natural person, firm, corporation, association or
partnership; the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular,
and the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter. (Ordinance 48, September 10,
1962, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 115, August 25, 1975, Section 1)
Section 102. Outdoor Fires on Private Property Outside Fire Limits Regulated.
Out-of-door fires shall be permitted upon private property in those parts of the said
Township outside the fire limits as now or hereafter, as the case may be, constituted,
provided that the following regulations and restrictions are adhered to:
(A) Every such out-of-door fire shall be personally attended by a
competent individual unless said fire is built in and confined to a
noncombustible container, covered with a screen of one-half-inch (1/2") or smaller
mesh or with other suitable noncombustible container;
(B) No such fire shall be closer than fifteen feet (15') from any building
or from any property line; and
(C) no such fire shall be allowed to burn upon any day, except between
the hours of nine o'clock A.M. and seven o'clock P.M.
(Ordinance No. 48, September 10, 1962, Section 2)
Section 103. Burning of Designated Recyclables and Yard Waste is Prohibited.
The burning of designated recyclables and yard waste, as determined from time to time
by the Board of Supervisors as directed by the Garbage and Recycling Ordinances of the
Township, is hereby prohibited at all times within the Township of Spring. Ordinance
No. 361, September 8, 2008, Section 1)
Section 104. Penalty for Violation. Any person violating any provision of this
Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than fifty
IX -5
DE8124
dollars ($50.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days. Provided: each violation of this
Part, and each day the same is continued, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ordinance No. 48, September 10, 1962, Section 3; Amended by Ordinance No. 115,
August 25, 1975, Section 2)
DE8124
Part 2
Fire Lanes
Section 201. Establishment of Fire Lanes. The Fire Marshall of the Township of
Spring, within his/her respective fire district, as established by the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Spring shall have the authority to designate and mark such fire
lanes as may be reasonable and necessary on private property devoted to public use.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring shall adopt a resolution approving
these areas so designated by the Enforcement Officer as "fire lanes" within the said
Township. Such fire lanes shall be those areas immediately adjacent to a building or
buildings for a distance of twenty-four (24) feet from said building or buildings on such
property such as shopping centers, apartment complexes, bowling alleys, theaters,
hospitals, schools, churches and similar locations as may be deemed necessary by the
Enforcement Officer to insure proper ingress and egress of fire department and
emergency vehicles for the protection of persons and property herein described in
accordance with Section F 311.0 of "The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1987," as
from time to time hereafter amended. Parking in such fire lanes shall be prohibited and
such fire lanes shall be posted "No Parking Fire Lane." (Ordinance No. 214, May 14,
1990, Section 1)
Section 202. Posting of Signs. Whenever any Fire Marshall of the Township of
Spring, within his/her respective fire district, as established by the Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, shall determine that parking of motor vehicles upon any public or
private street, lane, alley or private parking lot is liable to interfere with the operations
of the fire or police departments, or hamper egress of occupants from buildings in case
of fire or emergency, parking in such areas shall be prohibited and said areas shall be
posted "No Parking Fire Lane." (Ordinance No. 214, May 14, 1990, Section 2)
Section 203. Private Property. On private property which is devoted to public
use, there shall be maintained one (1) or more unobstructed lanes to provide for the
ingress and egress of fire department vehicles, equipment and personnel, said lanes to
be a minimum of twelve feet (12') in width each and laid out for convenient access from
the public thoroughfares and water supplied to the building or buildings. The marking
of said lanes shall be performed and maintained by and at the expense of the property
owner or occupier. (Ordinance No. 214, May 14, 1990, Section 3)
Section 204. Blockage of Fire Lane Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to barricade, stop a vehicle, park or otherwise block, any of
the passage, entrance or exit ways to, in, about or out of any public building or any
place occupied for public use or accommodations whether upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with or obstruct the free and unimpeded passage of persons
and fire equipment around the said building, nor shall any person park a motor vehicle
IX - 7
DE8124
or trailer in disregard of any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 214, May 14, 1990, Section 4)
Section 205. Definitions. For the purpose of this Part the term "building" shall
mean the exterior surface of the vertical wall of the structure, excluding any marquee,
portico, mansard roof or similar appendages. (Ordinance No. 214, May 14, 1990,
Section 5)
Section 206. Notice of Violation. Notice of violation of Section 204 of this Part
shall be effectuated by the placing of a parking ticket upon the vehicle parked or
stopped in the fire lane in question by the Township of Spring Police Department.
(Ordinance No. 214, May 14, 1990, Section 6)
Section 207. Penalty for Violation of Section 203. Any person, firm, corporation,
etc., or its agent, servant, employees, etc., violating Section 203 of this Part, upon
conviction thereof, before a District Justice, shall be fined not more than one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars for each offense, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment thereof, shall be committed to the Berks County Prison for a period of not
more than thirty (30) days. Each day or portion thereof during which such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable as such. (Ordinance
No. 214, Mar 14, 1990, Section 7)
Section 208. Penalty for Violation of Section 204. Any person, firm, corporation,
etc., or its agents, servants, employees, etc., violating Section 204 of this Part, upon
conviction thereof, before a District Justice, shall be fined fifteen ($15.00) dollars for each
offense, together with costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof, shall be
committed to the Berks County Prison for a period of not more than two (2) days. Each
day or portion thereof during which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense and punishable as such. (Ordinance No. 214, May 14, 1990, Section 8)
Section 209. Severability. If any section, clause, phrase or portion of this Part is
for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such portion shall be deemed a separate and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ordinance No. 214,
May 14, 1990, Section 9)
Section 210. Declaration. It is declared that enactment of this Part is necessary
for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Township of Spring and the general public. (Ordinance No. 214,
May 14, 1990, Section 11)
DE8124
Part 3
Recognition of the Township of Spring Fire Rescue Service
Section 301. Purpose. The purpose of this Part is to establish and recognize the
Township of Spring Fire Rescue Service (the "Fire Rescue Service"), comprised of the
Township of Spring Firefighters, Inc. and the Volunteer Firefighters Relief Association
of the Township of Spring Volunteer Fire Department as the official fire rescue service
of the Township, created by the merger of the Lincoln Park Fire Company, Community
Fire Co. of Vinemont, West Wyomissing Fire Department Firefighters, Inc. and West
Lawn Fire Company No. 1; to provide for the governance and command structure of
the Fire Rescue Service, to set forth authorized activities of the Fire Rescue Service and
its members and employees and to provide for appropriations to the Fire Rescue
Service. (Ordinance No. 279, February 25, 2002, Section 10; Amended by Ordinance
No. 393, June 11, 2012, Section 1)
Section 302. Creation of Township of Spring Fire Rescue Service. The Township
hereby creates the Township of Spring Fire Rescue Service, having an address at
2301 Monroe Avenue, West Lawn, Pennsylvania 19609. Attention: Fire Commissioner,
and establishes the same as the officially recognized provider of firefighting, rescue,
Emergency Medical Services quick response and fire protection services in the
Township following a Chain of Command as specified in the Fire Rescue Standard
Operating Procedures. No other organization(s) dedicated to the fighting of fires,
rescue services and/or the provisions of fire protection services are authorized to
operate in the Township, except for those operating under a mutual aid agreement or
other similar agreements for the provision of said services or otherwise authorized by
state or federal law. (Ordinance No. 279, February 25, 2002, Section 10; Amended by
Ordinance No. 393, June 11, 2012, Section 1)
Section 303. Recognition. The following former fire companies are recognized as
the Legacy and Charter members of the Fire Rescue Service:
Lincoln Park Fire Company
Community Fire Co. of Vinemont
West Wyomissing Fire Department Firefighters, Inc.
West Lawn Fire Company No. 1
Each one of the above companies has served as an integral part of the consolidated
firefighting entity to be now known as the "Township of Spring Fire Rescue Service".
(Ordinance No. 279, February 25, 2002, Section 10; Amended by Ordinance No. 393,
June 11, 2012, Section 1)
IX - 9
DE8124
Section 304. Governance. The Fire Rescue Service shall be governed by a
command structure as set forth in the "Township of Spring Fire Rescue Service
Standard Operating Procedures", as hereafter amended from time to time:
(A) Fire Rescue Service shall be managed, directed and
supervised by the Fire Commissioner, who shall be appointed by
the Township Board of Supervisors. Except for non-operational,
administrative matters for which the Fire Commissioner shall
report to the Township Manager, the Fire Commissioner shall
report directly to the Board of Supervisors.
(B) The Fire Chief / Deputy Fire Commissioner shall be
appointed by the Township Board of Supervisors, and shall
perform the duties as assigned by the Fire Commissioner.
(C) Deputy Fire Chiefs shall be appointed by the Fire
Commissioner for a period of one (1) calendar year. Such Deputy
Fire Chiefs shall work under the command of the Fire Chief and the
Fire Commissioner. The Fire Commissioner may appoint other
officers as needed to assist with management of fire rescue
operations.
(Ordinance No. 279, February 25, 2002, Section 10; Amended by Ordinance
No. 393, June 11, 2012, Section 1)
Section 305. Authorized Activities of Fire Rescue Service. The Fire Rescue
Service is hereby authorized to provide:
(A) Such services to the Township as may be necessary
for the protection of property and persons situate therein, which
include, but are not limited to, extinguishment and prevention of
personal injury and death from fire, protection of property from
damage and/ or destruction by fire, response to motor vehicle
accidents, medical emergencies, hazardous materials incidents and
other dangerous situations.
(B) Nonemergency and public service functions,
including, but not limited to, water removal from properties after
storms, and assistance in the removal, abatement and /or
prevention of damage or injury to persons or property, whether
due to natural causes or manmade situations.
(C) To conduct and participate in such training activities
or drills, either within the Township or outside of the Township, as
may be deemed necessary by the Fire Commissioner and his staff to
maintain proficiency in providing service.
DC - 10
DE8124
(D) The Fire Rescue Service may respond to calls and
provide services to municipalities outside of the Township as set
forth in applicable mutual aid agreements and /or
intergovernmental cooperation agreements, contracts for providing
services and/ or in response to requests for emergency services.
(Ordinance No. 279, February 25, 2002, Section 10; Amended by Ordinance
No. 393, June 11, 2012, Section 1)
Section 306. Rules and Regulations. The rules and regulations of the Fire Rescue
Service shall be those contained in the "Township of Spring Fire Rescue Service
Standard Operating Procedures", as hereafter amended from time to time, the contents
of which are incorporated herein by reference as though the same were set forth at
length. (Ordinance No. 279, February 25, 2002, Section 10; Amended by Ordinance
No. 393, June 11, 2012, Section 1)
Section 307. Funds and Finances. All resources necessary for the maintenance
and operation of the Fire Rescue Service in the Township shall be determined and
allocated by the Township Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Manager
and Fire Commissioner. The foregoing provisions relating to allocation of resources for
the benefit of the Fire Rescue Service shall not include monies paid by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to the Township and which are exclusively reserved
and dedicated for the use and benefit of the Volunteer Firefighters Relief Association of
the Township of Spring Volunteer Fire Department. (Ordinance No. 279, February 25,
2002, Section 10; Amended by Ordinance No. 393, June 11, 2012, Section 1)
Section 308. Severability. If any sentence, clause, or section of this Part is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses or sections of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board
of Supervisors that this Part would have been adopted had such unconstitutional,
illegal or invalid sentence, clause, or section thereof not been included herein.
(Ordinance No. 279, February 25, 2002, Section 10; Amended by Ordinance No. 393,
June 11, 2012, Section 1)
DE8124
Part 4
Insurance - Fire Loss Escrow
Section 401. Municipal Certificate Required Prior to Payment of Fire Loss
Claims. No insurance company, association or exchange doing business in this
Commonwealth shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure
located within the Township where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00)
unless the insurance company, association or exchange is furnished with a certificate
pursuant to Section 402 of this Part, and unless there is compliance with the procedures
set forth in Sections 402 and 403. (Ordinance No. 244, March 27, 1995, Section 1-200)
Section 402. Request to Township Treasurer. The Treasurer of the Township
shall, upon written request of the named insured specifying the tax description of the
property, name and address of the insurance company, association or exchange and the
date agreed upon by the insurance company, association or exchange and the named
insured as the date of the receipt of a loss report of the claim, furnish the insurance
company, association or exchange either of the following within fourteen (14) working
days of the request:
(A) A certificate or, at the discretion of the Township, a verbal
notification, which shall be confirmed in writing by the insurer to the effect that,
as of the date specified in the request, there are no delinquent taxes, assessments,
penalties or user charges against the property and that, as of the date of the
Treasurer's certificate or verbal notification, the Township has not certified any
amount as total costs incurred by the Township for the removal, repair or
securing of a building or other structure on the property.
(B) A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and user charges against the property as of the date
specified in the request that have not been paid as of the date of the certificate
and also showing, as of the date of the Treasurer's certificate, the amount of the
total costs, if any, certified to the Treasurer that have been incurred by Township
for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property. For the purposes of this subsection, the Township shall certify to the
Treasurer the total amount, if any, of such costs. A tax assessment, penalty or
user charge becomes delinquent at the time and on the date a lien could
otherwise have been filed against the property by the Township under applicable
law.
(Ordinance No. 244, March 27, 1995, Section 1-200)
DE8124
Section 403. Receipt of Certificate. Upon the receipt of a certificate pursuant to
Section 402(A), the insurance company, association or exchange shall pay the claim of
the named insured in accordance with the policy terms, unless the loss agreed to
between the named insured and the company, association or exchange equals or
exceeds sixty (60) percent of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering
the building or other structure. In the case of such a loss, the insurance company,
association or exchange, the insured property owner and the Township shall follow the
procedures set forth in Sections 405 and 406 of this Part. (Ordinance No. 244, March 27,
1995, Section 1-200)
Section 404. Receipt of Certificate and Bill. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill
pursuant to Section 402(B), the insurance company, association or exchange shall return
the bill to the Treasurer and transfer to the Treasurer an amount from the insurance
proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessments, penalties, charges and costs as shown
on the bill. Township shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment of the
items shown on the bill. (Ordinance No. 244, March 27, 1995, Section 1-200)
Section 405. Loss in Excess of 60 Percent. When the loss agreed to between the
named insured and the company, association or exchange equals or exceeds sixty (60)
percent of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or
other structure, the insurance company, association or exchange shall transfer from the
insurance proceeds to the designated officer of the Township in the aggregate of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) and each
fraction of that amount of a claim or, if at the time of a loss report the named insured
has submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the amount calculated
under the foregoing transfer formula, the insurance company, association or exchange
shall transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate. The
transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies, associations or
exchanges insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the
transfer to the Township shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms. The
named insured may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure after the transfer and the
designated officer shall return the amount of the funds in excess of the estimate to the
named insured if the Township has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure. The duly appointed Treasurer of the Township is
authorized to carry out the duties of this Part. (Ordinance No. 244, March 27, 1995,
Section 1-200)
Section 406. Administration of Funds. Upon receipt of proceeds by the
Township as authorized by this Part, the designated officer shall place the proceeds in a
separate fund to be used solely as security against the total cost of removing, repairing
or securing incurred by the Township. When transferring the funds as required in
Section 405 of this Part, an insurance company, association or exchange shall provide
IX - 13
DE8124
the Township with the name and address of the named insured, whereupon the
Township shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received
by the municipality and notify the named insured that the procedures under this
subsection shall be followed. The fund shall be returned to the named insured when
repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure have been completed and
required proof received by the designated officer if the Township has not incurred any
costs for repairs, removing or securing. If the Township has incurred costs for repairs,
removal or securing of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund and, if excess funds remain, the Township shall transfer the remaining funds to
the named insured. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Township to recover any deficiency. Further, nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to prohibit Township and the named insured from entering into an
agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if some other
reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
(Ordinance No. 244, March 27, 1995, Section 1-200)
Section 407. Proof of Payment. Proof of payment by the insurance company,
association or exchange of proceeds under a policy in accordance with Section 405 of
this Part is conclusive evidence of the discharge of its obligation to the insured under
the policy to the extent of the payment and of compliance by the company, association
or exchange with Section 405 of this Part. (Ordinance No. 244, March 27, 1995,
Section 1-200)
Section 408. Liability. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to make an
insurance company, association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds
payable under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this Part
or to make the Township or a public official of the Township an insured under a policy
of insurance or to create an obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid
removal liens or expenses other than as provided in this Part. (Ordinance No. 244,
March 27, 1995, Section 1-200)
Section 409. Subrogation and Assignment. An insurance company, association
or exchange making payments of policy proceeds under this Part for delinquent taxes
or structure removal liens or removal expenses incurred by the Township shall have a
full benefit of such payment, including all rights of subrogation and of assignment.
(Ordinance No. 244, March 27, 1995, Section 1-200)
Section 410. Construction. This Part shall be liberally construed to accomplish
its purpose to deter the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage
abandonment of property and to prevent blight and deterioration within the confines of
the Township. (Ordinance No. 244, March 27, 1995, Section 1-200)
Section 411. Penalty. The Board of Supervisors of Township herewith prescribes
fines and penalties not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.00) for each violation of this
DC - 14
DE8124
Part, which fines and penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceedings
brought in the name of the Township before the appropriate district justice.
Proceedings for the violation of this Part may be commenced by warrant or by
summons at the discretion of the district justice before whom the proceeding is begun.
Upon judgment against any person, named insured or other insuring entity by
summary conviction or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the
fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed
to the lockup of the Township for a period not exceeding five (5) days or to Berks
County Prison for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. (Ordinance No. 244,
March 27, 1995, Section 1-201)
Section 412. Severability. The provisions of this Part shall be severable, and if
any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid,
such decision shall not effect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Part.
It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this Part would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid provision not been included.
(Ordinance No. 244, March 27,1995, Section 1-202)
DE8124
Part 5
Key Safe
Section 501. Key Safe Required. When rapid access to or within a structure or an
area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is
necessary for life saving or firefighting purposes, the Fire Marshall, or a designate of the
Township of Spring, may require a key safe or safes to be installed by the structure's
owner or occupant at the owner's or occupant's sole cost and expense in an accessible
location on the structure. The key safe or safes shall be of a type approved by the
Township of Spring and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the
fire department. Location of the key safe shall be approved by the Fire Marshall.
(Ordinance No. 255, January 27, 1997, Section 1)
Section 502. Key Safe Contents. The key safe shall contain, but not be limited to,
the following items:
(A) Keys to locked points of ingress or egress whether on the interior or
exterior of the structure.
(B) Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.
(C) Keys to locked electrical rooms.
(D) Keys to elevator controls.
(E) Keys to fire alarm panels, devices and systems.
(F) Keys to other areas as so directed by the Fire Marshall, or a
designated alternate.
(Ordinance No. 255, January 27, 1997, Section 2)
Section 503. Application. This Part shall apply to:
(A) A structure regardless of use or occupancy containing six (6) or
more occupancies within the same structure which use a common external exit
access.
(B) All occupancies having or required to have a fire alarm or fire
sprinkler suppression system.
(Ordinance No. 255, January 27, 1995, Section 3)
IX - 16
DE8124
Section 504. Exclusions. This Part shall not apply to any single or duplex
residential units; however, it does not prohibit installation of a key safe, if the owner or
occupant so desires to provide a key safe for the respective residence. (Ordinance
No. 255, January 27, 1997, Section 4)
Section 505. Time for Compliance. All existing structures covered by this Part
shall comply within twelve (12) months of this Part's effective date. All newly
constructed structures covered by this Part not yet occupied or structures currently
under construction shall comply immediately. (Ordinance No. 255, January 27, 1997,
Section 5)
Section 506. Penalty for Violation. Any person or firm violating any provision of
this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1000.00) and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed as a separate
offense. (Ordinance No. 255, January 27, 1997, Section 6)
Section 507. Severability. If any of the provisions, section, sentences, clauses, or
parts of this Part or the application of any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of
this Part shall be held invalid, this invalidity shall not effect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sections, sentences, clauses, or parts of this Part, it being the
intention of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring that these remaining
provisions, sections, sentences, clauses, or parts shall be and continue in full force and
effect. (Ordinance No. 255, January 27, 1997, Section 7)
DE8124
Part 6
Fire Protection Cisterns
Section 601. Title. This Part shall be known as "The Fire Protection Cistern
Ordinance of the Township of Spring." (Ordinance No. 267, July 13, 1998, Section 1-35)
Section 602. Purpose. The following regulations are promulgated for the
purpose of assuring the proper construction of new fire protection cisterns within the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania ("Township"), and to improve the
development of water resources for fire protection throughout the Township, thereby
creating conditions favorable to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of
the Township. (Ordinance No. 267, July 13, 1998, Section 1-36)
Section 603. Specifications and General Requirements.
(A) The owners and/or developers of all subdivisions containing four
(4) or more lots and/or land developments containing in its entirety structures
totaling ten thousand four hundred (10,400) square feet or more, in area,
hereafter approved or constructed within the Township, in which subdivision or
land developments there is no public water supply available or the public water
supply fails to meet the requirements of the Township for adequate fire
protection, shall construct within such subdivisions or land developments fire
protection cisterns in conformity with the provisions of this Part and with
Township Drawing No. 8-3-003, or approved equal. Any further subdivision
resulting in a total of four (4) or more lots, which include any lots of the original
subdivision, or any further land developments resulting in structures with a total
of ten thousand four hundred (10,400) square feet or more in area, shall
constitute cause for the installation of fire cisterns. Said owners and/or
developers shall include all such fire protection cisterns required hereunder as
municipal improvements in the applicable municipal improvement agreement.
All fire protection cisterns required hereunder shall be constructed and installed
prior to the issuing of any building permit for other structures by the Township.
(B) Township Drawing No. 8-3-003 is attached hereto and made a part
of this Part. (Drawing is on file at the Township office.)
(C) Fire protection cisterns shall be located no more than eight hundred
(800) feet from the nearest lot line of the furthermost lot. In addition, such
cisterns shall be located at approximately one thousand six hundred (1,600) foot
intervals along streets or roadways. Each such cistern shall be sited and located
on the final subdivision or final land development plan approval by the
Township.
IX - 18
DE8124
(D) The design of each fire protection cistern shall be submitted to the
Township for approval prior to construction or installation. A minimum of two
(2) sets of design plans, sealed and signed by a professional registered engineer,
shall be submitted to the Township.
(E) All construction work done pursuant to the provisions of this Part
shall be inspected and approved by the Township.
(F) Contour lines and grades shall be indicated on recorded plans of
subdivisions and /or land developments or other such plans as may be approved
by the Township. The cost of establishing such contour lines and grades shall be
borne by the subdivider or land developer.
(G) Should the Township Engineer determine that the ground
condition and/or rock condition beneath a fire protection cistern area provides
sufficient stability, the subbase requirements may be waived, modified or
changed.
(H) All trees, roots, stumps, brush, downed timber, rotten wood,
rubbish and any other objectionable material shall be removed from the site,
including the removal of any obstruction interfering with the proposed cistern
construction, for the full right-of-way area, or as approved by the Township.
(I) Subgrade shall be prepared to accommodate the placement of the
fire protection cistern in conformity to the contour lines, grades and widths
shown on the drawings and cross-sections.
(J) Subgrade shall be graded to the elevation and cross-section
required with sufficient material compacted to required density.
(K) In cases where the required density or stability cannot be obtained,
the material in the area shall be excavated to a depth that when replaced or
recompacted at a moisture content not exceeding optimum, the subgrade shall
have required stability.
(L) The subgrade shall be properly prepared to receive the subbase.
(M) The subdivider or land developer shall provide signs bearing the
words "No Parking" within twenty (20) feet clear distance of structures
contemplated hereunder.
(N) During construction of the subdivision or land development, and
until the lots therein referred to are conveyed by the subdivider or land
developer, such subdivider or land developer shall maintain the fire protection
IX - 19
DE8124
cistern located on its land. Whenever a conveyance of a lot or lots referred to in
the said subdivision or land development plan containing a fire protection
cistern, the land owner(s) therein referred to shall assume the maintenance and
operation of the said fire protection cistern(s). The Township shall assume no
ownership interest in such fire protection cisterns.
(Ordinance No. 267, July 13, 1998, Section 1-37)
Section 604. Maintenance.
(A) All fire protection cisterns shall be cleaned and all sediment
removed annually, or as deemed necessary by the Township Fire Marshall or his
representative. Property owners who fail to meet maintenance requirements
may be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation to cover
costs and equipment for proper maintenance. The enforcement of this Part shall
be by an action brought before a district justice in the same manner provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure.
(B) Any Township fire company or fire department, together with any
fire company or fire department authorized by the Township to combat fires
within the Township may, as necessary, connect to and use the fire protection
cisterns for training, system maintenance or emergency use.
(C) Refill of the fire protection cisterns following maintenance or
emergency use shall be the responsibility of the party that removed the water
from such cistern.
(Ordinance No. 267, July 13, 1998, Section 1-38)
Section 605. Exceptions. Exceptions may be granted under the following
conditions:
(A) In appropriate locations, the Township may approve a pond with a
dry hydrant system in lieu of an underground fire protection cistern.
(B) In circumstances where the adjoining existing subdivision or land
development contains a fire protection cistern meeting the distance requirements
contained in §603(C) of this Part for the subdivision and /or land development,
the Township may waive the cistern requirement.
(C) In circumstances where automatic sprinkler systems are required
or chosen, the Township may waive the cistern requirement.
IX - 20
DE8124
(Ordinance No. 267, July 13, 1998, Section 1-39)
Section 606. Changes in Fire Protection Cistern Standard Specifications. Since
fire protection cistern standard specifications of the Township may, from time to time,
change, the Board of Supervisors of the Township reserve the right to amend and
modify, by resolution of said Board, new and/or revised standard cistern specifications.
Public notice of such resolution shall be given and a written copy therefor shall be
attached to and become a part of this Part. (Ordinance No. 267, July 13, 1998, Section 1-
40)
Section 607. Conflicts. Notwithstanding anything herein set forth, whenever the
provisions of this Part shall be inconsistent with the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of the Township and the provisions of said ordinance are more
restrictive or contain more stringent requirements than are set forth in this Part, the
provisions of said Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall prevail and be
applicable. (Ordinance No. 267, July 13,1998, Section 1-41)
Section 608. Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this Part shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not
affect remaining portions. (Ordinance No. 267, July 13,1998, Section 3)
DE8124
Part 7
Fire Prevention Code
Section 701. Adoption of The Fire Prevention Code. That a certain document,
copies of which are on file and available for public use, inspection and examination in
the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring
("Township"), being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2006
edition, in its entirety with Appendices except for revisions as noted in Section 702 of
this Ordinance written by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted and
reaffirmed as the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of Spring, in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulating and governing the protection of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of
hazardous substances, materials and device; and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and incorporating each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties conditions and terms of said Fire Prevention Code
on file in the office of the Township of Spring as if fully set forth herein, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 702 of this
Ordinance.
(Ordinance No. 388, March 26, 2012, Section 1)
Section 702. Fire Prevention Code of The Township of Spring. The 2006
International Fire Code is hereby adopted and affirmed by reference, subject to the
following additions, insertions, deletions and changes:
Section 101.1 Title shall be amended and restated in its entirety as follows:
"101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire
Code of the Township of Spring, hereinafter referred to as
the "Code".
Section 103.2 Appointment shall be amended and restated in its entirety as
follows:
"103.2 Appointment. The fire code official shall be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring."
Section 105.1.2 Types of Permits shall be amended and restated in its entirety as
follows:
DE8124
"105.1.2 Operational Permit. An operational permit allows
the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for
which a permit is required by Section 105.6 for a period of
one (1) year based upon a calendar year running from
January 1 to December 31, without proration or until it is
renewed or revoked."
Section 105.1.2.2 Construction Permits shall be DELETED in its ENTIRETY.
Section 105.4 Construction Documents shall be DELETED in its ENTIRETY.
Section 105.6 Required Operational Permits, shall be amended and restated in its
entirety as follows:
"105.6. Required operational permits. The fire code official is
authorized to issue annual operation permits for the
operations set forth in Section 105.6.1 through 105.6.46."
Section 108 Board of Appeals shall be DELETED in its ENTIRETY.
Section 109.3 Violation Penalties, shall be amended and restated in its entirety as
follows:
"109.3. Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair
or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be
guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense."
Section 110.1.2 Structural Hazards, shall be DELETED in its ENTIRETY.
Section 111, Stop Work Orders, shall be DELETED in its ENTIRETY.
Section 806.1.1 Restricted Occupancies shall be DELETED in its ENTIRETY.
Appendix A Board of Appeals, shall be DELETED in its ENTIRETY.
(Ordinance No. 388, March 26, 2012, Section 1)
IX - 23
DE8124
Section 703. Fees.
(A) Annual Operational Permit Fees
1. The owner, lessee, tenant or operator of all structures in the Township
used for Assembly, Business, Educational, Mercantile, Factory Industrial, Institutional,
High Hazard, Residential R-1, R-2, Storage, Utility and miscellaneous purposes and
defined in the International Building Codes shall pay an annual Operational Permit Fee
for permits issued pursuant to and under Section 105 of the 2006 International Fire
Code, with such fees being due within thirty (30) days of billing.
2. Annual Operational Permit Fees are established as follows. Future
amendments or alterations to the inspection fee schedule shall be made by resolution of
the Township of Spring Board of Supervisors.
Relevant Section of the Annual Fee
International Fire Code 2006 Edition
105.6.1 Aerosol Products in excess of 500 pounds $50.00 per year
105.6.2 Amusement Buildings $50.00 per year
106.6.3 Aviation Facilities $100.00 per year
105.6.4 Carnivals and Fairs $50.00 per year
105.6.5 Cellulose Nitrate Film $50.00 per year
105.6.6 Combustible Dust-Producing Operation $100.00 per year
105.6.7 Combustible Fibers in excess of 100 Cubic Feet $50.00 per year
105.6.8 Compressed Gases $50.00 per year
105.6.9 Covered Mall Buildings $100.00 per year
105.6.10 Cryogenic Fluids $50.00 per year
105.6.11 Cutting and Welding $50.00 per year
105.6.12 Dry Cleaning Plants $50.00 per year
105.6.13 Exhibits and Trade Shows $50.00 per year
105.6.14 Explosives $150.00 per year
105.6.15 Fire Hydrants or Valves $50.00 per year
105.6.16 Flammable and Combustible Liquids $50.00 per year
Underground Tanks - Install/Remove
Residential
IX - 24
DE8124
Less than 275 Gallons
In excess of 275 Gallons
Non-Residential
Greater than 275 Gallons and less than 500 Gallons
Greater than 501 Gallons and less than 10,000 Gallons
In Excess of 10,000+ Gallons
105.6.17 Floor Finishing
105.6.18 Fruit and Crop Ripening
105.6.19 Fumigation and Thermal Insecticidal Fogging
105.6.20 Hazardous Materials
Combustible Liquids
Corrosive Materials
Explosive Materials
Flammable Materials
Highly Toxic Materials
Oxidizing Materials
Organic Peroxides
Pyrophoric Materials
Toxic Materials
Unstable (Reactive) Materials
Water Reactive Materials
105.6.21 HPM Facilities
105.6.22 High Piled Storage in Excess of 500 Square Feet
105.6.23 Hot Work Operations
105.6.24 Industrial Ovens
105.6.25 Lumber Yards and Wood Working Plants
105.6.26 Liquid Gas Fueled Vehicles / Equipment
105.6.27 LP Gas
Above Ground Tanks -Installed / Remove
Less Than 2000 Gallons
In Excess of 2000 Gallons
IX - 25
$50.00 per year
$75.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$150.00 per year
$200.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per pear
$100.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$35.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
DE8124
105.6.28 Magnesium Greater Than 10 Pounds $50.00 per year
105.6.29 Combustible Storage in Excess of 2,500 Cubic Feet $50.00 per year
105.6.30 Open Burning $50.00 per year
105.6.31 Open Flame and Torches $50.00 per year
105.6.32 Candles / Open Fames (Assembly Occupancy) $50.00 per year
105.6.33 Organic Coatings Greater Than One (1) Gallon $50.00 per year
105.6.34 Place of Assembly $50.00 per year
105.6.35 Private Fire Hydrants Each Hydrant $50.00 per year
105.6.36 Pyrotechnic Special Effects Material $75.00 per year
105.6.37 Pyroxylin Plastics $50.00 per year
105.6.38 Refrigeration Equipment $50.00 per year
105.6.39 Repair Garages / Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities $50.00 per year
105.6.40 Roof Top Heliports $100.00 per year
105.6.41 Spraying / Dipping $50.00 per year
105.6.42 Storage of Scrap Tires $50.00 per year
105.6.43 Temporary Membrane Structures (Tents and $50.00 per year
Canopies)
105.6.44 Tire Rebuilding Plants $50.00 per year
105.6.45 Waste Handling $50.00 per year
105.6.46 Wood Products in Excess of 200 Cubic Feet $50.00 per year
105.7.5 Fire Pump or Pumps $100.00 per year
105.7.6 Flammable / Combustible Liquid Tanks
(See also 105.6.16) $50.00 per year
105.7.7 Hazardous Materials (See also 105.6.20) $200.00 per year
105.7.8 Industrial Ovens (See also 105.6.24) $50.00 per year
105.7.9 L.P. Gas Tanks (See also 105.6.27) $50.00 per year
105.7.13 Temporary Tents and Canopies (See also 105.6.43) $50.00 per year
(B) Failure to Obtain a Permit. Should any owner or operator of a
business or premises that is required to have an Annual Fire Safety Inspection
performed or required to obtain an Annual Operational Permit fail to pay the
within fee associated with said required inspection or permit or should any
owner or operator of a business or premises fail to obtain said permit or
inspection, that owner or operator shall be deemed to be in violation of this
IX - 26
DE8124
Ordinance and subject to the violation provisions set forth in Section 109.3, and
any such fees together with interest and costs of collection, including attorney's
fees, shall constitute a municipal claim and may be entered as a lien against the
subject property.
(Ordinance No. 388, March 26, 2012, Section 1)
Section 704. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this
Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of the Township that this Ordinance
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause,
section or part thereof not been included herein. (Ordinance No. 388, March 26, 2012,
Section 1)
TO\\AISHIP OF SPRING
ORDINANCE NO. If O 5
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOI^/NSHIP OF SPRING, BERKS
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING AND RESTATING IN ITS
ENTIRETY PART 7, ENTITLED 'FIRE PREVENTION CODE" OF
CHAPTER TX, ENTITLED 'F[RE PREVENTION AND FIRE
PROTECTION' OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING CODE OF
ORDINANCES ADOPTING THE PROVISIONS OF THE
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE, 2OO9 EDITION, WITH APPENDICES,
EXCEPT FOR CERTAIN REVISIONS AS SET FORTH IN SECTION
702 OF THE ORDINANCE INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
TITLE, PROCEDURE FOR APPOINTMENT OF FIRE CODE
OFFICIAL, TYPE AND DURATION OF CERTAIN PERMITS,
ELIMINATING PROVISIONS FOR BOARDS OF APPROVAL,
PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES. ELIMINATING PROVISIONS FOR
STRUCTURAL HAZARDS AND RESTRICTED OCCUPANCIES, AND
SETTING FEES FOR CERTAIN INSPECTIONS AND PERMITS.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED, by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ENACTED AND
ORDAINED by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Part 7 entitled "Fire Prevention Code", of Chapter IX entitled "Fire
Prevention and Fire Protection" of the Township of Spring Code of Ordinances is
hereby amended and restated in its entirety as follows:
"PART 7 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Section 70L. Adoption of the Fire Prevention Code. That a certain
documenf copies of which are on file and available for public use,
inspection and examination in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Spring ( "Township"), being marked and
designated as the Intemational Fire Code, 2009 edition, in its entirety with
Appendices except for revisions as noted in Section 702 of this Ordinance
written by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted and
reaffirmed as the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of Spring, in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulating and goveming the protection
of life and irroperty from fire and explosion hazards arising from the
storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and device;
and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of
buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and incorporating each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties conditions and terms of said Fire
Prevention Code on file in the office of the Township of Spring as if fully
set forth herein, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in Section 702 of this Ordinance.
section 702. Fire Prevention code of the Township of spdng. The
2009 International Fire Code is hereby adopted and affirmed by reference,
subject to the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes:
Section 1.01.,.'J,, Title, shall be amended and restated in its entirety as
follows:
"1.01,.L Title. These regulations shall be knor'rm as the
Fire Prevention Code of the Township of Spring, hereinafter
referred to as the " code" .
Section 'L03.2, Appointment, shall be amended and restated in its
entirety as follows:
"103.2 Appointment. The fire code official/fite
marshal shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of SPring."
Section 1,05.1".2, Types of Permits, shall be amended and restated in
its entirety as follows:
"L05.L.2 Operational Permit. An operational permit
allows the applicant to conduct an operation or a business
for which a permit is required by Section 105.6 for a period
of one (1) year based upon a calendar year running from
january L to December 31", without proration or until it is
renewed or revoked."
section 1,05.1,.2.2, Construction Permits, shall be DELETED in its
ENTIRETY.
sectign 105.4, Construction Documents, shall be DELETED in its
ENTIRETY.
Section -1,05.6, Required Operational Permits, shall be amended and
restated in its entirety as follows:
''1,05.6. Required operational permits. The fire code
official is authorized to issue annual operation permits for
the operations set forth in Section 105.6.1 through'1.05.6.46.'
Section 108, Board of Appeals, shall be DELETED in its ENTIRETY.
Section'1.09.3, Violation Penalties, shall be amended and restated in
its entirety as follows:
''1.09.3. Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter,
repair or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be
guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense."
Section 11.0.1.2, Structural Hazards, shall be DELETED in its
ENTIRETY.
Section 806|J"Jl., Restricted Occupancies, shall be DELETED in its
ENTIRETY.
Appendix A, Board of Appeals, shall be DELETED in its
ENTIRETY.
SECTION 703. FEES.
A. Annual Operational Permit Fees
1,. The owner, lessee, tenant or operator of all structures
in the Township used for Assembly, Business, Educational, Mercantile,
Factory Industrial, Institutional, High Hazard, Residential R-1, R-2,
Storage, Utility and miscellaneous purposes as defined in the International
Building Cofe shall pay an annutrl Operational Permit Fee for permits
issued pursuant to and under Section 105 of the 2009 International Fire
Code, with such fees being due within thirty (30) days of billing.
2. Annual Operational Permit Fees are established as set
forth herein. Future amendrnents or alterations to the inspection fee
schedule shall be made by resolution of the Township of Spring Board of
Supervisors.
Relevant Section of the Annual Fee
International Fire Code, 2009 Edition
105.6.1 Aerosol Products in excess of 500 pounds
105.6.2 Amusement Buildings
105.6.3 Aviation Facilities
1.05.6.4 Carnivals and Fairs
105.6.5 Cellulose Nitrate Film
105.6.6 Combustible Dust-Producing Operations
1.05.6.7 Combustible Fibers in excess of 100 Cubic Feet
105.6.8 Compressed Gases
1.05.6.9 Covered Mall Buildings
105.6.10 Cryogenic Fluids
105.6.11 Cutting and Welding
1,05.6.12 Dry Cleaning Planb
105.6.13 Exhibits and Trade Shows
1.05.6.1.4 Fireworks Sales / Explosives
105.6.15 Fire Hydrants or Valves
105.6.1"6 Flammable and Combustible Liquids
Underground Tanks - Install/Remove
Residential
Less than 275 Gallons
In excess of 275 Gallons
Non-Residential
Greatef than275 Gallons and less than 500 Gallons
Greater than 501 Gallons and less than 10,000 Gallons
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$150.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$75.00 per yea-r
$100.00 per year
$150.00 per year
Relevant Section of the
International Fire Code. 2009 Edifion
In Excess of 10,000+ Gallons
1,05.6.17 Floor Finishing
105.6.18 Fruit and Crop Ripening
1,05.6.1,9 Fumigation and Thermal Insecticidal Fogging
1,05.6.20 Hazardous Materials
Combustible Liquids
Corrosive Materials
Explosive Materials
Flammable Materials
Highly Toxic Materials
Oxidizing Materials
Organic Peroxides
Pyrophoric Materials
Toxic Materials
Unstable (Reactive) Materials
Water Reactive Materials
1,05.6.21, HPM Facilities
1,05.6.22 High Piled Storage in Excess of 500 Square Feet
1,05.6.23 Hot Work Operations
1,05.6.24 Industrial Ovens
1,05.6.25 Lumber Yards and Wood Working Planb
1.05.6.26 Liquid or Gas Fueled Vehicles / Equipment
1,05.6.27 LP Gas
Above Ground-Install / Remove
Less Than 2000 Gallons
In Excess of 2000 Gallons
105.6.28 Magnesium Greater Than 10 Pounds
1,05.6.29 Combusfible Storage in Excess of 2500 Cubic Feet
105.6.30 Open Burning
105.6.31Open Flames and Torches
Annual Fee
$200.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per pear
$100.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$35.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
Relevant Section of the
International Fire Code. 2009 Edition
Annual Fee
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$100.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$200.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
$50.00 per year
1,05.6.32Open Flames and Candles (Assembly Occupancy) $50.00 Per year
105.6.33 Organic Coatings Greater Than One (1)Gallon $50.00 per year
1,05.6.34P1ace of Assembly $50.00 per year
105.6.35 Private Fire Hydrants - Each Hydrant $50.00 per year
L05.6.36 Pyrotechnic Special Effects Material $75.00 per year
105.6.37 Pyroxylin Plastics $50.00 Per year
105.6.38 Refrigeration Equipment $50.00 per year
1,05.6.39 Repair Garages / Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities $50.00 Per year
105.6.40 Rooftop Heliports $100.00 Per year
1.05.6.41Spraying / Dipptng $50.00 per year
105.6.42Storage of Scrap Tires and Tire Byproducts $50.00 Per year
1.05.6.43 Temporary Membrane Structures (Tents and $50.00 Per year
Canopies)
1,05.6.44 Tire Rebuilding Plants
105.6.45 Waste Handling
1.05.6.46 Wood Products in Excess of 200 Cubic Feet
105.7.5 Fire Pump or Pumps
1,05.7.7 Flammable / Combustible Liquid Tanks
(See also 1,09.6.1,6)
105.7.8 Hazardous Materials (See also 105.6.20)
1,05.7.9Industrial Ovens (See also 105.6.24)
105.7.10 LP Gas Systems (See also 105.6.27)
1.05.7.1.4 Temporary Tents and Canopies (See also 105.6.43)
B. Failure to Obtain a Permit. Should any owner or operator of
a business or premises that is required to have an Annual Fire Safety
Inspection performed or required to obtain an Annual Operational Permit
fail to pay the within fee associated with said required inspection or
permit or should any owner or operator of a business or premises fail to
obtain said permit or inspection, that owner oI oPelator shall be deemed
to be in violation of this Ordinance and subiect to the violation provisions
set forth in Section 109, and any such fees together with interest and cosb
of collection, including attorney's fees, shall constifute a municipal claim
and may be entered as a lien against the subject property.
SECTION 704. REPEALER. Any and all ordinances or parts of
ordinances conflicting with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby
repealed insofar as they impose lesser standards than this Ordinance.
SECTION 705. SEVERABILITY. If any sentence, clause, section or
part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional,
illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses,
sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of
the Board of Supervisors of the Tor,rmship that this Ordinance would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included herein."
SECTION 2. A11 ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with
and impose lesser standards than what is imposed by this Ordinance.
SECTION 3. That nothing in this Ordinance or the Fire Prevention Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or cause of action acquired or
existing, under any act or ordinancc hcrcby rcpcalcd; nor shall any just or legal right or
remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. It is declared that enactment of this Ordinance is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the Township.
SECTION 5. This Ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements,
orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force
and effect on the earliest date permitted by law following the date of enactment.
DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED this 12tn day of August, 2013.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
TOWNSHIP OF SPRING
Berks County, Pennsylvania
Attest:
(;
lsEALl
ith, Vice Chairman
Kvle M. Hummel
Alan S. Kreider
MUNICIPAL CERTIFICATION
1, S-h"rul Ro-.n . (Asslsant) Secrdtary of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance No.
1U was advertised in the Reading Eagle, a daily newspaper of general circulation in
the Township of Spring, on August2,2013, and was duly enacted and approved as set
forth at a Regular Meeting of the Board of Supervisors held on August12,2013-
ISEALI









AL6134
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204.
Section 205.
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Section 308.
Section 309.
Section 310.
Section 401.
Section 402.
Section 403.
Section 404.
Section 405
CHAFFER X
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Part 1
Statuary Authorization
Part 2
General Provisions
Intent
Applicability
Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Severability
Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
Part 3
Administration
Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
Permits Required
Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Application Procedures and Requirements
Review of Application by Others
Changes
Placards
Start of Construction
Enforcement
Appeals
Part 4
Identification of Floodplain Areas
Identification
Description and Special Requirements of Identified Floodplain
Areas
Changes in Identification of Area
Boundary Disputes
Jurisdictional Boundary Changes
X - 1
AL6134
Part 5
Technical Provisions
Section 501. General
Section 502. Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements
Section 503. Design and Construction Standards
Section 504. Development Which May Endanger Human Life
Section 505. Special Requirements for Subdivisions
Section 506. Special Requirements for Mobile/ Manufactured Homes
Section 507. Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles
Part 6
Prohibited Activities In Identified Floodplain Areas
Section 601. General
Part 7
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
Section 701. Existing Structures
Section 702. Improvements
Part 8
Variances
Section 801. General
Section 802. Variance Procedures and Conditions
Part 9
Definitions
Section 901. General
Section 902. Specific Definitions
AL6134
Part 1
Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations to promote public
health, safety, and the general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Spring does hereby order as follows. (Ordinance No.
391, June 11, 2012)
AL6134
Part 2
General Provisions
Section 201. Intent.
The intent of this Ordinance is to:
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in
areas subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 202. Applicability.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within any identified floodplain area within the
Township of Spring unless a Permit has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
B. Unless otherwise required by Township regulations, a Permit shall
not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures located
within any identified floodplain area.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 203. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This ordinance supersedes
any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain areas.
However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the
extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of
the provisions of this Ordinance, the more restrictive shall apply. (Ordinance No. 391,
June 11, 2012)
X -4
AL6134
Section 204. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause,
or phrase of this Ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby
declared to be severable. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 205. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection
sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice
jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that
areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Spring or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. (Ordinance
No. 391, June 11, 2012)
AL6134
Part 3
Administration
Section 301. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Building Code
Official of the Township of Spring is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
Ordinance and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. (Ordinance
No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 302. Permits Required. A Permit shall be required before any
construction or development is undertaken within any identified floodplain area within
the Township of Spring. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 303. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a Permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and
ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any Permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the Permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such
as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325,
as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);
and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33, U.S.C. 1344. No Permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is
progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall
make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper
credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
E. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any
X - 6
AL6134
applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the Permit and take such
other action as deemed appropriate pursuant to the provisions of Section 309.
F. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated
with the requirements of this Ordinance including, but not limited to, permitting,
inspection and enforcement.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of
the 34 PA Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 304. Application Procedures and Requirements.
A. Application for such a Permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain
Administrator on forms supplied by the Township. Such application shall contain the
following:
1. Name and address of applicant.
2. Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
3. Name and address of contractor.
4. Site location including address.
5. Listing of other permits required.
6. Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building before the
flood damage occurred where appropriate.
7. A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for Permits shall provide all
the necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain
Administrator to determine that:
1. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes
and ordinances;
2. All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
X - 7
AL6134
3. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
4. Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
and
5. Building materials are flood-resistant;
6. Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
7. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and located to
prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the
above determination:
1. A completed Permit Application Form.
2. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
(1) inch being equal to one hundred feet (100') or less, showing the following:
a. North arrow, scale, and date;
b. Topographic contour lines, if available;
c. The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location of any
existing or proposed subdivision and development;
d. The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
access ways; and
e. The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, identified floodplain areas, and, if available,
information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water
including direction and velocities.
3. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
a. The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
b. The elevation of the base flood;
X -8
AL6134
c. Supplemental information as may be necessary
under 34 PA Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
4. The following data and documentation:
a. If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with a base flood;
b. Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations;
c. Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any
proposed development within an AE Area/ District without
floodway (See Section 402 B) when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the BFE more than
one (1) foot at any point;
d. A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed construction
or development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the
base flood;
Such statement shall include a description of the type
and extent of flood proofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/ or the
development;
e. detailed information needed to determine compliance
with Section 503 F, Storage, and Section 504, Development Which
May Endanger Human Life, including:
i. the amount, location and purpose of any
materials or substances referred to in Sections 503 F and 504 which
are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained
on site.
ii. a description of the safeguards incorporated
into the design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in Section 504
during a base flood.
f. where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of Environmental
X -9
AL6134
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation
control.
D. Applications for Permits shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the
Township of Spring, in an amount as established from time to time by resolution by the
Board of Supervisors.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 305. Review of Application by Others. A copy of all plans and
applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain
area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator
to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g. planning commission,
municipal engineer, etc.) for review and comment. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 306. Changes. After the issuance of a Permit by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any
of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such
change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain
Administrator for consideration. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 307. Placards. In addition to the Permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the Permit, the date
of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator. (Ordinance No. 391,
June 11, 2012)
Section 308. Start of Construction. Work on the proposed construction or
development shall begin within 180 days after the date of issuance and shall be
completed within twelve (12) months after the date of issuance of the Permit or the
Permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piling, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a mobile/manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
X - 10
AL6134
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the
applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain
Administrator to approve such a request.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 309. Enforcement.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provisions of this Ordinance, or of any regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such
alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
1. be in writing;
2. include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
3. allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of thirty (30) days
for the performance of any act it requires;
4. be served upon the property owner or his/her agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to
have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the
laws of this State;
5. contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this Ordinance or who fails or refuses to comply with any
notice, order of direction of the Floodplain Administrator or any other authorized
employee of the municipality shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall pay a fine to the Township of Spring of not less than One Hundred Dollars
($100.00), nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), plus costs of prosecution.
In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved including an
action in equity for the proper enforcement of this Ordinance. The imposition of a fine
or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this Ordinance shall not excuse
the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable
time.
X -11
AL6134
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 310. Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this Ordinance, may
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within thirty
(30) days after the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct a
public hearing upon the appeal in accordance with all applicable provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (the "MPC").
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
concerning the administration of the provisions of this Ordinance may seek relief
therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the MPC.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
AL6134
Part 4
Identification of Floodplain Areas
Section 401. Identification.
The identified floodplain area shall be:
A. Any areas within the Township of Spring classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated July 3, 2012 and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital
data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study; and
The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments are hereby adopted by the Township of Spring and declared to be a part of
this Ordinance.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 402. Description and Special Requirements of Identified Floodplain
Areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The Floodway Area/District shall be those areas identified as Floodway
on the FIRM as well as those floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas where no
floodway has been identified in the FIS. The floodway represents the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than
one (1) foot at any point.
1. Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted
unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. No new construction or development shall be allowed within any
floodway area, unless a Permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
AL6134
B. The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas identified as
an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which BFEs
have been provided in the FIS but no floodway has been delineated.
1. In AE Area/District without floodway, no new development shall
be permitted unless it can be demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past
and projected development will not increase the BFE by more than one (1) foot.
2. No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use,
or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development would
not, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the
BFE by more than one (1) foot at any point.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no one-percent (1%) annual
chance flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway
information from Federal, State, or other acceptable sources shall be used when
available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified
floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly
reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
municipality.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 403. Changes in Identification of Area. The identified floodplain area
may be revised or modified by the Board of Supervisors where studies or information
provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 404. Boundary Disputes. Should a dispute arise concerning the
Floodplain Administrator's determination, any party aggrieved by this determination
may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, which will conduct a hearing and render a
X - 14
AL6134
decision in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance and procedures of the
MPC. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 405. Jurisdictional Boundary Changes. Prior to development occurring
in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are proposed or have
occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to
boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those
in CFR 44 60.3. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
AL6134
Part 5
Technical Provisions
Section 501. General.
A. Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse.
1. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse within an identified floodplain area until all adjacent
municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
2. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse within an identified floodplain area unless it can be
shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
3. In addition, FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development, shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation
of any watercourse within an identified floodplain area.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA,
with copies to the Township, for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) as soon as
practicable but within six (6) months of any new construction, development, or other
activity resulting in changes in the BFE. The situations when a LOMR or a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) are required are:
1. Any development that causes a rise in the BFEs within the
floodway; or
2. Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without
a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the BFE;
or
3. Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any
identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions
contained in this Ordinance and any other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations.
D. Within any Identified Floodplain Area (See Section 402), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured fifty (50) feet
X - 16
AL6134
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office or it is demonstrated to the
Floodplain Administrator that the new construction or development is located outside
of the Floodway.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 502. Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements.
A. Residential Structures
1. In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up
to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
2. In A Zones, where there are no BFEs specified on the FIRM, any
new construction or substantial improvement of a residential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation determined in accordance with Subsection 402 C of this
Ordinance.
3. The design and construction standards and specifications contained
in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International
Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34
PA Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Non-residential Structures
1. In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
non-residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
a. is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and,
b. has structural components with the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
2. In A Zones, where no BFEs are specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement of a non-residential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely floodproofed up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
Subsection 402 C of this Ordinance.
X - 17
AL6134
3. Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with
the WI or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication entitled
"Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a
statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with
the above referenced standards.
4. The design and construction standards and specifications contained
in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International
Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34
PA Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor
1. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or
incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and
constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
2. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
a. a minimum of two (2) openings having a net total
area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed space.
b. the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
(1) foot above grade.
c. openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc.
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic Structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this
Ordinance, must comply with all ordinance requirements which do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific
ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
X - 18
AL6134
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from
ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with
the following requirements:
1. the structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material,
and equipment related to the principal use or activity.
2. floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
3. The structure will have a low damage potential.
4. the structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
5. power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
6. permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
7. sanitary facilities are prohibited.
8. the structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit
of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
a. a minimum of two openings having a net total area of
not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
b. the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
(1) foot above grade.
c. openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc.
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
X - 19
AL6134
Section 503. Design and Construction Standards. The following minimum
standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
A. Fill
1. If fill is used, it shall:
a. extend laterally at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the
building line from all points;
b. consist of soil or small rock materials only - Sanitary
Landfills shall not be permitted;
c. be compacted to provide the necessary permeability
and resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
d. be no steeper than one (1) vertical to two (2)
horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes
are submitted to and approved by the Floodplain Administrator;
and
e. be used to the extent to which it does not adversely
affect adjacent properties.
B. Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey
the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure
proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The
system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems.
1. All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.
2. Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.
3. No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located
so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.
X - 20
AL6134
4. The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages and 25 PA Code,
Chapter 73.
D. Other Utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to
minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no lower than
one (1) foot below the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in times
of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in
Section 504, Development Which May Endanger Human Life, shall be stored at or
above the Regulatory Flood Elevation or flood proofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height
of flood water.
H. Anchoring.
1. All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement.
2. All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely
anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, Walls and Ceilings
1. Wood flooring used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the
building.
2. Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or "water- resistant" variety.
3. Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are "water-resistant" and will
withstand inundation.
AL6134
4. Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other "water-resistant" material.
J. Paints and Adhesives
1. Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
2. Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
3. All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a "marine" or "waterresistant"
paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical Components.
1. Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three (3) feet above the
BFE.
2. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be
located below the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
M. Fuel Supply Systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system
into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these
systems in the event that flood water infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code Coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained in 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended, and not limited
to the following provisions shall apply to the above and other sections and sub-sections
of this Ordinance, to the extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the
requirements of this Ordinance.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof:
Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof:
Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
X - 22
AL6134
Section 504. Development Which May Endanger Human Life.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development
as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which:
1. will be used for the production or storage of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances; or
2. will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply
of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or
3. will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of
radioactive substances;
shall be subject to the provisions of this Section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous to
human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
B. Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above, shall be prohibited.
C. Where permitted within any Identified Floodplain Area, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be:
X - 23
AL6134
1. elevated, or in the case of a non-residential structure elevated or
designed, and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least one and one
half (1 1/2) feet above BFE,
2. designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for
completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing
Regulations (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992),
or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 505. Special Requirements for Subdivisions. All subdivision proposals
and development proposals containing at least 50 (fifty) lots or at least 5 (five) acres,
whichever is the lesser, in Identified Floodplain Areas where BFE data are not available,
shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine
BFEs and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall
be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
506. Special Requirements for Mobile/Manufactured Homes.
A. Within any Floodway Area/District, mobile/manufactured homes shall
be prohibited.
B. Within any Identified Floodplain Areas, mobile/manufactured homes
shall be prohibited within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the top of
bank of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any Identified Floodplain Area, all
mobile/manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
1. placed on a permanent foundation.
2. elevated so that the lowest floor of the mobile/manufactured home
is at least one and one half (1 1/2) feet above BFE.
3. anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
D. Installation of mobile/manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer.
X - 24
AL6134
Where the applicant cannot provide the above information, the requirements of
Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition draft, or latest revisions thereto, shall apply and 34 PA Code
Chapter 401-405.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009
IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 PA Code, as
amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers'
standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the units(s)
proposed installation.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
507. Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
1. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and
2. be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
3. meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in
Section 506.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012; Amended by No. 395, July 9, 2012, Section 1)
AL6134
Part 6
Prohibited Activities in Identified Floodplain Areas
Section 601. General. In accordance with the administrative regulations
promulgated by the Department of Community and Economic Development to
implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall
be prohibited within any Identified Floodplain Area within the Township of Spring:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction
enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the
following activities:
1. hospitals
2. nursing homes
3. jails or prisons
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new
mobile/manufactured home park or mobile/manufactured home subdivision,
substantial improvement to an existing mobile/manufactured home park or
mobile/manufactured home subdivision, or expansion to an existing
mobile/manufactured home park subdivision.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
AL6134
Part 7
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
Section 701. Existing Structures. The provisions of this Ordinance do not require
any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However,
when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of Section 702
shall apply. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 702. Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any Identified Floodplain
Area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with all other existing
and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one (1) foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market
value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 PA Code,
as amended and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than fifty (50) percent of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
AL6134
Part 8
Variances
Section 801. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this
Ordinance would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer
or landowner, the Township of Spring Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of those requirements. (Ordinance No. 391, June 11,
2012)
Section 802. Variance Procedures and Conditions. Requests for variances shall
be considered by the Township of Spring Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
procedures contained in Section 310 and the provisions of the MPC. The following
specific criteria, as well as such other evidence and criteria as may be relevant pursuant
to ARTICLE a of the MPC shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in the BFE.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any A Area/District or within any AE Area/District without floodway
that would result in a new BFE more than one foot (1') greater than the BFE existing at
the effective date of this Ordinance.
C. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements
pertaining specifically to Prohibited Activities in Identified Floodplain Areas (Part 6) or
to Development Which May Endanger Human Life (Section 504).
D. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to
provide relief.
E. In granting any variance, the Township of Spring Zoning Hearing Board
shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of
this Ordinance.
F. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township of Spring Zoning
Hearing Board shall consider the provisions of the MPC pertaining to the granting of
variances.
G. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Township of Spring Zoning Hearing Board. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to FEMA.
AL6134
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and
constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one-percent (1%) annual chance
flood.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
AL6134
Part 9
Definitions
Section 901. General. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used
in this Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give this Ordinance its most reasonable
application.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
Section 902. Specific Definitions
1. Accessory structure - a structure serving a purpose customarily incidental
to the principal building and located on the same lot as the principal building.
2. Accessory use - a use subordinate and customarily incidental to the
principal use on the same lot.
3. Base flood - a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood" or one-percent (1%) annual
chance flood).
4. Base flood discharge - the volume of water resulting from a Base Flood as
it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in cubic feet per second
(cfs).
5. Base flood elevation (BFE) - the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a 1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. In areas where the BFE is not indicated on the FIRM, the
BFE shall be considered the BFE as calculated in Section 402.
6. Basement - any area of the building having its floor below ground level on
all sides.
7. Building - any combination of materials forming any structure which is
erected on the ground and permanently affixed thereto, designed, intended or arranged
for the housing, shelter, enclosure or structural support of persons, animals or property
of any kind.
8. Development - any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of
mobile/manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and
excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
X - 30
AL6134
9. Existing mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision - a
mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the mobile/manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
10. Expansion to an existing mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision
- the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the mobile/manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads).
11. Flood - a temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
12. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - the official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
13. Flood Insurance Study (FIS) - the official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
14. Floodplain Administrator - the Township of Spring Building Code
Official.
15. Floodplain area - a relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/ or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface
waters from any source.
16. Floodproofing - any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures
and their contents.
17. Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
18. Highest Adjacent Grade - The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
19. Historic structures - any structure that is:
X - 31
AL6134
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified either:
i. By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or
ii. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
20. Lowest floor - the lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or incidental storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such
space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this ordinance.
21. Mobile/ manufactured home - a transportable, single-family detached
dwelling designed so that it can be used for permanent occupancy, contained in one (1)
unit or in two (2) units designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and
constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation.
Mobile/manufactured homes shall be constructed in accordance with the Safety and
Construction Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
The term "mobile/manufactured home" shall not be deemed to include "recreation
vehicle" nor a "modular home" placed on a permanent perimeter foundation.
22. Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision -a parcel of land under
single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two (2) or
more mobile homes for nontransient residential use.
23. Minor repair - the replacement of existing materials with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the
X - 32
AL6134
cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any
structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of
egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exit way requirements; nor
shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar
piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other facilities affecting public health or general
safety.
24. Municipality - The Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
25. New construction - structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after July 3, 2012 and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. Any construction started after April 18, 1983 and before July 3, 2012 is
subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of
construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
26. New mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision - a
mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the mobile/manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
27. Person - an individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any
other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.
28. Post-FIRM Structure - is a structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred after December 31, 1974 or on April 18, 1983, whichever is later,
and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
29. Pre-FIRM Structure - is a structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974 or before April 18, 1983,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
30. Recreational vehicle - a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
AL6134
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck,
d. not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
31. Regulatory flood elevation - the BFE or estimated one-percent (1%) annual
chance flood elevation, as determined using methods acceptable to the Floodplain
Administrator, plus a freeboard safety factor of one and one-half (1 1/2) feet.
32. Special flood hazard area (SFHA) - means an area in the floodplain subject
to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM
as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
33. Start of construction - includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the Permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement,
or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit and shall be
completed within twelve (12) months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
mobile/manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first, alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
34. Structure - any manmade object having an ascertainable, stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land or something located
on the land. The term structure shall include buildings, signs, fences, walls, towers,
swimming pools, porches, gas or liquid storage tanks, as well as mobile/manufactured
homes.
35. Subdivision - the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including
changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or
building or lot development: Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land
X - 34
AL6134
for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
36.. Substantial damage - damage from any cause sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
37. Substantial improvement - any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent
of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage"
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
38. Township - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania
39. Uniform Construction Code (UCC) - The statewide building code
adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction
in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings,
The Code adopted The International Residential Code (IRC) and the International
Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with the
State floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are
made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
40. Violation - means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR §60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4),
or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
41. Watercourse -a channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined
bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
(Ordinance No. 391, June 11, 2012)
CHAPTER XI
FRANCHISES
(See Agreements in Appendix B)
(Reserved for Future Use)
AM1223
CHAPTER XII
GARBAGE, REFUSE, SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
Part 1
Refuse
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 108.
Section 109.
Section 110.
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204.
Section 205.
Section 206.
Section 207.
Section 208.
Section 209.
Section 210.
Section 211.
Section 212.
Short Title
Definitions
Preparation of Refuse and Storage Practices
Collection Practices
Licensing of Refuse Collectors
Collection Vehicles
Disposal of Refuse
Refuse Collection and Disposal Fees
Penalties
Conflict of Ordinances, Effect of Partial Validity
Part 2
Recycling
Title
Definitions
Establishment of Program
Storage and Collection of Recyclables
Service Fees, Billings and Charges
Plans to be Filed and Approved by Township
Establishment of Regulations
Reports to Filed with Township
Enforcement and Administration
Violation and Penalty
Repealer
Effective Date
Part 3
Designated Disposal Facility
Section 301. Title
Section 302. Definitions
Section 303. Designation of Disposal Facility
XII - 1
AM1223
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Section 401.
Section 402.
Section 403.
Section 404.
Section 405.
Section 406.
Payment of Disposal Fees
Regulations
Construction
Severability
Part 4
Yard Residuals Collection Facility
Title and Purpose
Definitions
Designation of Collection Facility
Regulations
Penalties
Severability
AM1773
Part 1
Refuse
Section 101. Short Title. This Part shall be known as the "Refuse Ordinance."
(Ordinance No. 364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
Section 102. Definitions.
The term "garbage" shall mean all animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
The term "ashes" shall mean the residue resulting from the burning of
wood, coal, coke or other combustible material.
The term "rubbish" shall include glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood,
or non-putrescible solid wastes.
The term "refuse" shall mean all solid wastes except body wastes and shall
include garbage, ashes, and rubbish.
The term "disposal" shall include the storage, collection, disposal, or
hauling of refuse.
The term "person" shall include any natural person, association,
partnership, firm or corporation.
The term "bulky rubbish" shall include discarded furniture, large
household appliances such as refrigerators, washing machines, bathtubs, sinks,
and commodes.
The term "collector" shall mean a person licensed by the municipality to
collect, transport and dispose of municipal waste.
The term "exterior property" shall mean the open space on the premises
and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
The term "owner" shall mean any person, agent, operator, firm or
corporation having a legal or equitable interest in real estate in the Township of
Spring or otherwise having control of the property including the guardian of an
estate of such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such
person.
XII - 3
AM1223
The term "tenant" shall mean a person corporation, partnership, or group,
whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof
as a unit.
The term "yard" shall mean an open space on the same lot with a
structure.
Other: The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
(Ordinance No. 364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
Section 103. Preparation of Refuse and Storage Practices.
(A) Refuse Preparation.
(1) Garbage shall be drained and stored in durable, rustresisting,
nonabsorbent, watertight, easily washable containers, equipped
with handles and tight-fitting covers.
(2) Ashes shall be stored in fire-resistant containers equipped
with handles and tight-fitting covers. Ashes containing hot embers shall
not be collected until they have been adequately quenched.
(3) Rubbish shall be stored in durable containers with tightfitting
covers. Tree trimmings, hedge clippings, old newspapers and
similar materials, which cannot be conveniently placed in the
aforementioned containers shall be baled, tied or sacked in compact
bundles less than three (3) feet in length and placed in a location easily
accessible to the collector.
(4) Bulky rubbish shall not be allowed to accumulate on any
premises except in containers which are approved by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Spring in accordance with the
specifications contained in this Part.
(5) No person shall place refuse in any street, alley or other
public place, or upon any private property within the limits of the
Township of Spring, unless it is placed in a proper refuse container for
collection. Likewise, no person shall throw or deposit refuse in any
stream or any other body of water.
AM1223
(6) Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any
existing accumulation of refuse within three (3) days after the effective
date of this Part shall be deemed a violation of same.
(7) Certain materials, such as scrap lumber and firewood, may
be stored and kept on the premises, but they shall be stored so that a
minimum clear space of twelve (12) inches above the ground surface is
provided.
(B) Refuse Storage. All refuse shall conform to the following
standards:
(1) General.
(a) All refuse receptacles shall be provided by the owner,
tenant or occupant of the premises, unless otherwise specified.
(b) The storage of all refuse by residents of the Township
of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall be practiced so as to
prevent the attraction, harborage or breeding of insects and/ or
rodents and to eliminate conditions harmful to public health or
which create safety hazards, odors, unsightliness and public
nuisances.
(c) A sufficient number of containers necessary to meet
the intent of paragraph (2) shall be provided to contain all waste
materials generated between regularly scheduled collections.
(2) Individual Containers
(a) Individual containers utilized for the storage of refuse
at household and other premises shall have the following physical
characteristics:
i) Constructed in such manner as to be easily
handled for collection.
a. Not greater than 15-gallons capacity for
garbage storage.
b. Not greater than 32-gallons capacity for
combined refuse storage.
XII - 5
ii) Constructed of rust and corrosion-resistant
materials.
iii) Be equipped with tight-fitting lids.
iv) Constructed in such a manner as to be
watertight, leak-proof, weather-proof, insect-proof and
rodent-proof.
v) Shall not exceed seventy-five (75) pounds in
weight when filled.
(b) Method of Use of Individual Containers
i) Containers shall not be filled to the point
where the lid will not fit properly.
ii) The area around the container(s) shall be kept
clean.
(3) Disposable Containers. Disposable containers such as paper
and polyethylene bags shall be acceptable for storage of refuse provided
the following conditions are met:
(a) Only those bags specially designed for storage and
collection shall be used.
(b) Bags are protected against precipitation, animal
damage and overloading to prevent littering or attracting vectors.
(c) Bags have holding strength capable of withstanding
stresses until they are collected.
(d) Bag opening is securely closed prior to setting out for
collection.
(4) Bulk Containers. Bulk containers for commercial, industrial,
and institutional refuse shall meet the general and individual container
requirements previously set forth except for size limitations. Bulk
containers shall be sized according to the type and quantity of waste
production, equipment handling capabilities, and the frequency of
collection.
)GI - 6
AM1223
(5) Open Storage. Certain wastes of a non-decomposable nature
may be stored temporarily in a manner other than containerization.
(a) In order to minimize littering, magazines,
newspapers, waste paper, free prunings, brush and yard
trimmings, when stored outside of containers, shall be tied securely
in bundles of such size as to be readily handled by the collection
system.
(b) Tires and out-sized wastes such as furniture and
appliances shall be stored so that water accumulation and rodent
harborage are prevented.
(Ordinance No. 364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
Section 104. Collection Practices.
(A) Places of Collection. For collection purpose, except where there is
an agreement with the collector to the contrary, refuse containers shall be placed
at ground level, on the property, not within the cartway of a street or alley and
easily accessible from the side of the street or alley from which collection is
made.
(B) Frequency of Collection. Refuse shall be collected:
(1) Twice weekly
(2) Bi-annually for bulky rubbish during spring and fall cleanup.
(C) Apartments having five or more dwelling units, commercial,
industrial and institutional refuse shall be collected by private contract. The
owner of said property shall file with the Township Secretary at 2850 Windmill
Road, Sinking Spring, Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, by
January first of each year, a certificate stating the method of storage, collection
frequency, collector and Township license number, disposal facility and the
disposal facility permit.
(D) Placement of Refuse for Collection on One's Own Property. No
person shall place or cause to be placed refuse for collection upon any property
other than the property upon which such refuse is generated without first
securing the consent of an owner of the property upon which such refuse is
XII - 7
AM1223
placed for collection.
(E) Every owner, tenant or occupant in the Township of Spring whose
properties are not covered by Township refuse collection and disposal services
shall contract with an individual, entity or firm which is a licensed collector by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to have all the municipal waste generated
on the premises by any occupants of the premises removed and deposited in a
permitted landfill.
(F) Whenever requested by the Township of Spring, the property
owner of any real estate within Spring Township shall present proof adequate in
the judgment of the Township designee that the owner of said real estate has a
current contract with a licensed hauler to dispose of municipal waste generated
on the premises on a biweekly basis or more often. The property owner of the
premises shall have seventy-two (72) hours to provide proof to the Township
designee that he/she has a current contract with a licensed hauler to provide
sufficient service to satisfy the terms and conditions of this article.
(Ordinance No. 364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
Section 105. Licensing of Refuse Collectors.
(A) Only a person licensed by the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, shall collect refuse within the territorial limits of the Township of
Spring.
(B) An authorized collector is one who has entered into a contract with
or has been granted a license by the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, for the specific purpose of collecting and disposal of refuse.
(C) The fee for such license shall be $10.00 per year, or fraction thereof,
and all licenses shall be issued by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania. All vehicles must be re-inspected annually
by the Township Engineer of said Township.
(D) No licensed collector shall dispose of any refuse collected in the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, except by conveyance to a
place of disposal operating under permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources. Contractor shall state in writing the name, location,
and type of facility that he will use for disposal.
(E) Failure of a licensed collector to comply with the provisions of this
Part shall result in the revocation of his license.
XII - 8
AM1223
(F) Any collector picking up municipal waste in the Township of
Spring shall be required to advise the Township in writing within seventy-two
(72) hours after request from the Township as to whether an owner has a current
contract for municipal waste disposal from his/her premises within the
Township. Furthermore, all licensed collectors shall cooperate with the Township
designee in providing information in the event that an action is instituted to
enforce the terms and conditions of this article.
(Ordinance No. 364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
Section 106. Collection Vehicles. Except for the collection of bulky rubbish as
designated in Section 104(B)(2) of this Part, all vehicles used for the collection of refuse
shall have watertight enclosed metal bodies of easily cleanable construction, equipped
with compaction devices. (Ordinance No. 364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
Section 107. Disposal of Refuse.
(A) No person shall hereafter dispose of any refuse collected in the
Township of Spring, Berks County, except by conveyance to a disposal facility
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
(B) It shall be unlawful to dump, burn, destroy or otherwise dispose of
refuse within the jurisdictional limits of the Township of Spring, except at a
disposal facility approved and permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources. Such Permit must be valid at all times and on file
with the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
Section 108. Refuse Collection and Disposal Fees. The Township of Spring, in
order to provide refuse collection and disposal services, will collect a per capita refuse
tax in the manner prescribed under the Second Class Township Code. (Ordinance No.
364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
Section 109. Penalties.
(A) Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars
($300.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine, to be
committed to the Township Lockup for not more than five (5) days, or to the
County Jail, or Workhouse for not more than thirty (30) days.
AM1223
(B) All contracts between the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, and contracts collecting and removing refuse from the Refuse
Collection Districts of the said Township shall contain a provision providing that
the said Township shall be authorized to deduct from payments due or to
become due to the said contractor, the following penalties for each separate
offense, provided, however, that such penalties shall be proved to the satisfaction
of the said Township:
(1) For not collecting garbage, offal, or ashes and rubbish, as
agreed: one dollar ($1.00) per can.
(2) For over-loading trucks or using leaky or filthy trucks: five
dollars ($5.00).
(3) For failure to collect on day specified: twenty dollars
($20.00).
(4) For not replacing lids on garbage or refuse cans when cans
are collected: twenty-five cents ($0.25) per can.
(5) For damage to disposal containers by reason of rough
handling by the contractor's employees: fifty cents ($0.50) per can.
(6) For willfully destroying disposal containers without owner's
consent: three dollars ($3.00) per can plus can replacement.
(7) For unauthorized change in schedule route: ten dollars
($10.00) per day.
(8) For inclusion of refuse from other sources than defined
herein and disposed of at Township expense: five hundred dollars
($500.00).
The above provided penalties are to be so withheld if a violation here stated is
proved to the satisfaction of the Township of Spring
(Ordinance No. 364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
Section 110. Conflict of Ordinances, Effect on Partial Validity.
(A) In any case where a provision of this Part is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, housing, fire, safety, health or other
ordinance, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
XII - 10
AM1223
and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case
where a provision of this Part is found to be in conflict with a provision of any
other ordinance or code of the Township of Spring, existing on the effective date
of this Part which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection
of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this Part or codes are
hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they maybe found in conflict
with this Part.
(B) If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this Part should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this Part, which shall remain in full
force and effect; and, to this end, the provisions of this Part are hereby declared
to be severable.
(Ordinance No. 364, December 22, 2008, Section 1)
AM1223
Part 2
Recycling
Section 201. Title. This Part shall be known as the "Township of Spring
Recycling Ordinance." (Ordinance No. 215, July 9, 1990, Section I)
Section 202. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this Part
shall have, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in
this Section:
Aluminum Cans - clean, non-aerosol and empty all-aluminum beverage
and food containers.
Authorized Collector - any person, firm, or corporation licensed or
contracted by the Township of Spring to handle recyclables in accordance with
the provisions of this Part.
Bimetallic Cans - empty food or beverage containers consisting of steel
and aluminum.
Commercial Establishment(s) - any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business including, but not limited to,
stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers, and theaters.
Corrugated Paper - structural paper material with an inner core shaped in
rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
Dwelling Unit(s) - a room or a group of rooms located within a structure
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating for the exclusive use of the
occupant(s) thereof.
Exclusive Contract - an agreement entered into between the Township of
Spring and a private person or corporation for the collection and/or disposal of
recyclables within the Township Spring to the extent provided by this Part and
such agreement.
Federal - the United States of America together in any one (1) or more of
its departments and agencies.
AM1223
Glass - clear, green or brown glass bottles and jars. Expressly excluded
from this definition of glass are blue glass, lead crystal, porcelain, ceramic
products, tempered or plate glass together with florescent and incandescent
lighting bulbs.
High Grade Office Paper - all white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial establishments, institutional establishments, municipal
establishments, dwelling units, and single family dwelling units of up to four (4)
dwelling units in a structure and multi-family establishments.
Industrial Establishment(s) - any establishment engaged in the
manufacturing and/or processing of goods and /or materials.
Institutional Establishment(s) - any establishment engaged in service to
persons, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, retirement
homes, orphanages, schools, colleges and universities.
Leaf Waste - leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden residue,
clipped shrubbery and tree trimmings. Expressly excluded from this definition
of leaf waste are grass clippings.
Multi-Family Establishment(s) - rental housing apartment buildings or
apartment complexes which have four (4) or more dwelling units, together with
condominium associations and homeowners associations of four (4) or more
dwelling units which are established and organized in such a manner that the
association provides common services for the residents of the housing
development. This definition shall also include apartment buildings and
apartment complexes owned and operated by institutional establishments if such
institutional establishments charge a rental fee for such dwelling unit.
Municipal Waste - any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom, or office
waste and any other material including solid waste, liquid, semi-solid or
contained gaseous materials resulting from the operations of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous
waste in the Solid Waste Management Act of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania from a municipal, commercial, or institutional water supply
treatment plant, waste water treatment plant, or air pollution control facilities.
Newspapers - paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded from this definition of newspapers are magazines.
XII - 13
AM1223
Person - any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, Federal government institution or
agency, State government institution or agency, or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Plastic Containers - empty and clean consumer product containers made
of poly-ethylene terephthaeate (PET), polypropylene (PP), high density
polyethylene (HDPE), and low density polyethylene (LPDE) including, but not
limited to, plastic bottles used as containers for soda, milk, and other consumer
food products and for certain household cleaning products and personal care
products.
Recyclables/ Recyclable Materials - those materials specified by the
Township of Spring for separation from municipal waste for collection,
transportation, processing, and marketing as part of a recyclable program.
Recycling - the program or system of separation from municipal waste
collection, transportation, processing, and marketing of recyclables.
Single Family Dwelling Unit - a dwelling unit occupying all of one (1)
structure.
State - the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania together with any one (1) or
more of its departments and agencies.
Steel Cans - clean, non-aerosol, and empty all-steel (ferrous metal).
Township - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 215, July 9, 1990, Section II)
Section 203. Establishment of Program.
(A) The Township hereby establishes a recycling program for the
mandatory separation of recyclables from municipal waste generated by
occupants of single family dwelling units of up to four (4) dwelling units within
a structure, multi-family establishments, commercial establishments, institutional
establishments, and industrial establishments, located within the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, the same being in accordance with the
provisions of Section 1501(c) of the Municipal Waste Planning Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act.
AM1993
(B) Selected recyclables for the recycling program established pursuant
to this Section shall be designated by the Board of Supervisors of the Township
in regulations to be promulgated pursuant to the terms of Section 207 of this
Part, from the following list of materials:
(1) Corrugated paper
(2) Newspaper
(3) High-grade office paper
(4) Clear glass
(5) Brown glass
(6) Green glass
(7) Aluminum cans
(8) Steel (ferrous) cans
(9) Bimetallic cans
(10) Plastic containers
(11) Leaf waste
(12) Other recyclable materials as designated by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township, effective thirty (30) days after designation of
such recyclable materials.
(Ordinance No. 215, July 9, 1990, Section III)
Section 204. Storage and Collection of Recyclables.
(A) General. It shall be the duty of every owner of property and every
person occupying single family dwelling units of up to four (4) dwelling units
within a structure, multi-family establishments, commercial establishments,
industrial establishments, and institutional establishments located within the
Township wherein recyclables are generated and accumulated, to provide and
keep, at all times, a sufficient number of containers to hold all recyclables, except
as otherwise specified in this Part, between intervals of collection of recyclables,
as specified in the regulations to be promulgated pursuant to the terms of
)GI - 15
AM1223
Section 207 of this Part, by an authorized collector; and to insure, pursuant to the
provisions of this Part, the regulations to be promulgated pursuant to the terms
of Section 207 of this Part, under this Part and applicable State and Federal laws
and regulations, the collection, transportation, processing and marketing of the
same.
(B) Designation of Recyclables to be Collected. All recyclables to be
collected, transported, processed and marketed by collectors shall be designated
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township by regulations to be promulgated
pursuant to the terms of Section 207 of this Part. Separate designations of
recyclables to be collected, transported, processed and marketed by collectors
shall be established as aforesaid for (i) single family dwelling units of up to four
(4) dwelling units within a structure; (ii) multi-family establishments;
(iii) commercial establishments; (iv) institutional establishments and (v)
industrial establishments.
(C) Storage and Collection of Recyclables From Single Family Dwelling
Units of Up to Four (4) Dwelling Units Within a Structure.
(1) Containers. All recyclables generated and accumulated by
the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of single family dwelling units of up to
four (4) dwelling units within a structure, shall be placed in containers for
collection by an authorized collector. Such containers shall be durable,
and shall be made of plastic. The capacity of such container shall not
exceed twenty (20) gallons. Containers for curbside recyclables shall be as
specified by Township or as provided by Township.
(2) Location of Containers. Each container of recyclables shall
be placed for collection so as to be accessible to the authorized collector at
ground level and at a location immediately behind the curbline of the
street from which the collection of recyclables is made or if there is no
curbing at a location agreeable among the resident, the Township and the
authorized collector. Leaf waste and newspapers shall be collected for
recycling at a location to be designated by the Township in the regulations
to be promulgated pursuant to the terms of Section 207 of this Part.
(D) Storage and Collection of Recyclables from Multi-Family
Establishments.
(1) Containers. Recyclables generated and accumulated at
multi-family establishments shall be placed in containers approved by the
owner(s) of such establishments and approved by the Township.
AM1223
(2) Location of Containers. Containers of recyclables generated
and accumulated by multi-family establishments shall be located on the
premises of the owner(s) and/or occupants of such establishments at a
place agreed upon by such person(s) and the authorized collector. Such
locations shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, roads, streets, highways, alleys or entrances and exits of public
or private buildings.
(E) Storage and Collection of Recyclables from Commercial
Establishments, Institutional Establishments and Industrial Establishments.
(1) Containers. Recyclables generated and accumulated at
commercial establishments, institutional establishments and industrial
establishments shall be placed in containers provided by the owner(s) of
such establishments and approved by the Township.
(2) Location of Containers. Containers for recyclables generated
and accumulated by multi-family establishments, commercial
establishments, institutional establishments, and/ or industrial
establishments shall be located on the premises of the owner(s) and/or
occupant(s) of such establishments at a place agreed upon by such
person(s) and the authorized collector. Such locations shall not interfere
with public or private sidewalks, walkways, driveways, roads, streets,
highways, alleys or entrances and exits of public or private buildings.
(F) Responsibility for Recyclables. All recyclables placed out for
collection shall be owned by, and be the responsibility of the occupants of the
same property accumulating and storing such recyclables until the same are
collected. Such recyclables shall become the property and responsibility of the
collector upon the collector's acceptance and collection of such recyclables.
(G) Processing, Recovery and Marketing of Recyclables. The recycling
program herein established by Township shall involve the processing and
marketing of recyclables by the Township itself, or by the Township contracting
with other entities for such work. All processing and marketing of recyclables
shall be performed pursuant to the provisions of the Part, the regulations to be
promulgated pursuant to the terms of Section 207 of this Part and applicable
State and Federal laws and regulations.
(H) Authorized Collectors of Recyclables. It shall be unlawful for any
person other than persons authorized by license issued by the Township, to
collect, transport, process and market recyclables in the Township. In the event
the Township decides to enter into an exclusive contract for the collection,
XII - 17
AM1223
transportation, processing and marketing of recyclables in the Township, the
contractor therein referred to shall be required to collect recyclables in the
Township at large or in recycling districts of the Township exclusive of other
collectors, subject to the exceptions set forth in the exclusive contract.
Authorization to collect, transport, process and market recyclables for persons
other than oneself and one's household may be given only by the Township
through the issuance of a license. All applications for licenses for collection of
recyclables shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Licenses for collection, transportation, processing and
marketing of recyclables shall be issued to only those persons who can
provide satisfactory evidence that the same are capable of providing the
necessary services and can comply with the provisions and intent of this
Part. The Township reserves the right to disapprove any application for
such license.
(2) Applicants for licenses for collection, transportation,
processing and marketing of recyclables shall furnish the following
information to the Township, in writing, upon forms furnished by the
Township:
(a) The number of collection vehicles; the make, model,
license plate number, and size of each vehicle to be used for the
collection and transportation of recyclables.
(b) The location, address, and telephone number of the
business office of the applicant.
(c) A certificate of the applicants worker's compensation
insurance, as required by law.
(d) A certificate of insurance applying to all operations by
the applicant, his/her/its agents and employees as follows:
Forms Minimum Limits
Contractor's Public Liability $500,000/ $1,000,000
Contractor's Property Damage Liability $100,000/ $300,000
Automobile Bodily Injury $500,000/ $1,000,000
Automobile Property Damage $100,000/ $300,000
XII - 18
AM1223
The Township shall be named as an additional insured on such
certificate of insurance.
(e) Intended recycling facility or facilities proposed to be
used by the Applicant.
(f) Any other information which the Township may
request and deem necessary prior to the issuance of a license for the
collection, transportation, processing and marketing of recyclables.
(g) Licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis, or
for a portion thereof during the initial year of the license period,
but may be revoked at any time by the Township for just cause,
including, but not limited to, violation of any of the provisions of
this Part, the regulations to be promulgated pursuant to the terms
of Section 207 of this Part, applicable State and Federal law or
regulations and contractual arrangements entered into between the
applicant and the Township.
(h) Fees for licenses shall be established by the Township
in regulations to be promulgated pursuant to the terms of Section
207 of this Part.
(I) Collection and Transportation of Recyclables. Any person
collecting and/or transporting recyclables within the Township shall prevent or
remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the collection and
transportation of such recyclables. The vehicles used to collect and transport
recyclables shall be leak-proof and enclosed to the extent necessary to ensure no
loss or spilling of recyclables from vehicles. Failure by a collector of recyclables
to clean and remove the loss or spillage of recyclables from vehicles or containers
used to collect and transport recyclables within three (3) hours after being
notified by the Township of the same shall constitute a violation of this Part. The
Township shall have the authority to inspect the vehicles used for collection and
transportation of recyclables.
(J) Unlawful Depositing of Recyclables. It shall be unlawful for any
person to deposit for collection any recyclables not generated at the address from
which collection is made or to bring any recyclables into the Township or from
one address to another in the Township for the purpose of taking advantage of
the collection and transportation service or to avoid the cost of collection and
transportation of any recyclable.
AM1223
(K) Exclusions.
(1) Nothing contained in this Part shall be deemed to prohibit
any person not regularly engaged in the business of collecting municipal
waste from hauling his/ her own municipal waste and that of the
household of which he/she is a member on an irregular or unscheduled
basis for processing and marketing in accordance with applicable State
and Federal laws and regulations.
(2) In implementing its recycling program, the Township
accords consideration for the collection, marketing and disposition of
recyclables to persons engaged in the business of recycling on
September 26, 1988, the effective date of Chapter 15 of the Municipal
Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, whether or not the
persons were operating for profit.
(Ordinance No. 215, July 9, 1990, Section IV)
Section 205. Service Fees, Billings and Charges.
(A) To encourage and maximize recycling, all service fees, billings and
charges imposed by the Township and/or authorized collectors upon the
generation of recyclables in the Township shall be based upon the volume of
recyclables collected. To effectuate this subsection, the following guidelines are
established:
(1) Collectors of recyclables shall be required, prior to obtaining
a license from the Township, to file with the office of the Manager of the
Township a complete schedule of rates evidencing that such rates are
established on a volume basis. Whenever the rate schedule changes, or
annually upon license renewal, the collector of recyclables shall file a
revised rate schedule with the office of the Manager of the Township.
(2) An exclusive contract for the collection of recyclables
generated and accumulated from single family dwellings units of up to
four (4) dwelling units within a structure shall include provisions for
billing such units on a volume basis. This provision shall not preclude the
Township or its contractors from establishing a minimum charge for the
collection, transporting, processing and marketing of recyclables as an
assessment against such single family dwelling unit for the benefit of the
health and welfare of the Township and for having a recycling program
available to the owner(s) and/or tenant(s) of such single family dwelling
XII - 20
AM1223
units in the Township. Such minimum charges shall be set at a level that is
appropriate to cover the basic cost of the collection, processing,
transportation, processing and marketing of recyclables, but shall not be
set so high as to discharge recycling
(B) The Township establishes a minimum charge of twenty dollars
($20.00), per annum, upon the owner(s) and/or tenant(s) of each single family
dwelling unit of up to four (4) dwelling units within a structure located in the
Township for the collection, transporting, processing and marketing of
recyclables as an assessment against such single family dwelling unit for the
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Township and for having a recycling program available to the owner(s) and/or
tenant(s) of such single family dwelling units in the Township. Payments of
charges imposed hereunder shall be due and payable upon the applicable billing
date, determined from time to time by the Township, at the office of the
Secretary of Township. If any such charge is not paid within sixty (60) calendar
days after the applicable billing date, an additional sum of ten (10) percent shall
be added to such charge.
(Ordinance No. 215, July 9, 1990, Section V; as amended by Ordinance No. 220,
December 23, 1990, Section 1)
Section 206. Plans to be Filed and Approved by Township. All multi-family
establishments, commercial establishments, industrial establishments and institutional
establishments conducting their own recycling program shall file with and have
approved by the Township, industrial recycling programs which shall provide for the
recycling of materials set forth in the regulations to be promulgated pursuant to the
terms of Section 207 of this Part. (Ordinance No. 215, July 9, 1990, Section VI)
Section 207. Establishment of Regulations. The Board of Supervisors of the
Township shall establish and promulgate regulations relating to the implementation of
the recycling program herein established including, but not limited to, the manner,
days, and times of collection of recyclable materials, and for the bundling, handling,
location and time and placement of such materials for collection. (Ordinance No. 215,
July 7, 1990, Section VII)
Section 208. Reports to be Filed With Township. Each collector of recyclables
within the Township shall file quarterly reports on a form prepared and furnished by
the Township and completed by such collector. The form shall state the total weight or
volume of recyclables collected, processed, transported and marketed by such collector
during the quarterly period of time, the names and addresses of the facilities to which
such collector transports recyclables for processing and marketing, together with other
AM1223
information deemed necessary by the Township to carry out the purpose of this Part.
The form shall be signed by the collector. (Ordinance No. 215, July 9, 1990, Section VIII)
Section 209. Enforcement and Administration. The Code Enforcement Officer of
the Township or such other individual appointed by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township is authorized and directed to enforce this Part. (Ordinance No. 215, July 9,
1990, Section IX)
Section 210. Violation and Penalty. Whoever violates, or does not comply with
any provision of this Part or any regulation to be promulgated pursuant to the terms of
Section 207 of this Part, shall, upon conviction thereof be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars and not more than one thousand ($1,000.00)
dollars and costs and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days.
Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision of this Part,
any regulation to be promulgated pursuant to the terms of Section 207 of this Part, or
any order issued hereunder shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance No. 215,
July 9, 1990, Section X)
Section 211. Repealer. In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or
part of this Part shall be held to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such invalidity,
illegality, or unconstitutionality shall not effect or impair any remaining provision,
section, sentence, clause or part of this Part, it being the intent of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township that such remainder shall remain in full force.
Section 212. Effective Date. The terms and provisions of Subsection (H), entitled
"Authorized Collectors of Recyclables" of Section 204, entitled "Storage and Collection
of Recyclables" of this Part shall become effective August 1, 1990. The remainder of this
Part shall become effective August 13, 1990. (Ordinance No. 215, July 9, 1990,
Section XII)
AM1223
Part 3
Designated Disposal Facility
Section 301. Title. The short title of this Part shall be "The Township of Spring
Designated Disposal Facility Ordinance", and the same may be cited in that manner.
(Ordinance No. 303, December 29, 2003, Section 1)
Section 302. Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following terms used in this Part shall have the following meanings:
"Act 101" - The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling & Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 528, as now or hereafter amended.
"Designated Disposal Facility" - The Pioneer Crossing Landfill, a
Municipal Waste landfill in Exeter Township, Pennsylvania, operating under
Department Permit No. 100346.
"Township" - The Township of Spring, Berks County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
"Township Municipal Waste" - Municipal Waste generated from
residential establishments within the Township and collected by the Township
or by a third party pursuant to a contract with the Township.
The terms "Disposal", "Department", "Landfill", "Municipal Waste",
"Municipal Waste Landfill", "Permit", and "Person", shall be defined as they are
in the Solid Waste Management Act, Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §6018.101, et seq., and
in the Department regulations promulgated thereunder, 25 Pa. Code §271.1, et
seq.
(Ordinance No. 303, December 29, 2003, Section 1)
Section 303. Designation of Disposal Facility. Pursuant to Section 304(d) of Act
101, the Township hereby designates the Pioneer Crossing Landfill, a Departmentpermitted
Municipal Waste Landfill that operates under Permit No. 100346 in Exeter
Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania, for the disposal of Township Municipal Waste
whether that waste is collected by the Township or by a third party pursuant to a
contract with the Township. (Ordinance No. 303, December 29, 2003, Section 1)
Section 304. Payment of Disposal Fees. The Township shall pay for the costs to
dispose of Township Municipal Waste at the Designated Disposal Facility whether that
waste is delivered by the Township or by a third party pursuant to a contract with the
XII - 23
AM1223
Township. The Township shall not pay for the cost to dispose of Township Municipal
Waste at a facility other than the Designated Disposal Facility. (Ordinance No. 303,
December 29, 2003, Section 1)
Section 305. Regulations. The Township shall have the power to adopt rules and
regulations relating to this Part and to the use of the Designated Disposal Facility.
(Ordinance No. 303, December 29, 2003, Section 1)
Section 306. Construction. The terms and provisions of this Part are to be
liberally constructed, so as to best achieve and to serve the goals and purposes hereof.
This Part shall be construed in pari materia with Act 97 and Act 101. (Ordinance
No. 303, December 29, 2003, Section 1)
Section 307. Severability. The provisions of this Part are severable. If any
provision of this Part or its application to any person or circumstance within the
Township is held invalid, said invalidity shall not affect any other provision or
application of this Part which can be given effect. (Ordinance No. 303, December 29,
2003, Section 1)
AM1223
Part 4
Yard Residuals Collection Facility
Section 401. Title and Purpose. The short title of this Part shall be "The Yard
Residuals Collection Facility Ordinance", and the same may be cited in that manner.
The purpose of this Part is for the Township of Spring to provide collection facilities to
the residents of the Township for Yard Residuals and regulate the use of such facilities.
(Ordinance No. 306, June 14, 2004, Section 1)
Section 402. Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following terms used in this Part shall have the following meanings:
"Act 101" - The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling & Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 528, as now or hereafter amended.
"Collection Facility" - Township designated facility for the collection of
Yard Residuals.
"Commercial Landscapers" - An individual, company or entity skilled in
the development and decorative planting of gardens and grounds.
"Lawn Mowing Company" - An individual, company or entity in the
business of mowing grass on lawns.
"Township" - The Township of Spring, Berks County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
"Yard Residuals" - shall consist solely of grass clippings and woody
materials such as tree limbs, shrubs, slashings and brush.
(Ordinance No. 306, June 14, 2004, Section 1)
Section 403. Designation of Collection Facility. The Township hereby designates
two (2) areas in the Township to provide for the collection of Yard Residuals as follows:
(A) Located in the Township of Spring along Reedy Road near the
Township Sanitary Sewage Treatment Plant; and
(B) Goose Lane located east of Sage Drive on Goose Lane
(Ordinance No. 306, June 14, 2004, Section 1)
AM1223
Section 404. Regulations. Use of the Collection Facilities shall be by the
following regulations:
(A) All Yard Residuals shall be deposited directly into the dumpsters
or an area indicated by signs;
(B) Yard residuals hauled to the site in plastic bags must be emptied
into the dumpsters or emptied at an area indicated by signs. No plastic bags are
to be left at the site. Biodegradable paper bags can be placed directly into
dumpsters or in an area indicated by signs;
(C) Only Yard Residuals shall be accepted at the Collection Facility.
No other type of recyclable material, rubbish, trash, waste, municipal waste or
garbage is accepted at the Collection Facility;
(D) Only residents of the Township of Spring may use the Collection
Facility; (NOTE: See Intermunicipal Agreement Ordinance No. 343 allowing the
residents of the Borough of Sinking Spring to access the Collection Facility)
(E) Commercial landscapers, lawn mowing companies, and other
similar entities shall be prohibited from using the Collection Facilities.
(F) Hours of operation of the Collection Facility shall be 6:00 a.m.
through 9:00 p.m. May 1 through September 30 and 6:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m.
October 1 through April 30.
The Township shall have the power to adopt additional rules and regulations relating
to this Part and to the use of the Collection Facility. (Ordinance No. 306, June 14, 2004,
Section 1)
Section 405. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty of not less than One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more than Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) plus costs of
prosecution. Each day of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance
No. 306, June 14, 2004, Section 1)
Section 406. Severability. The provisions of this Part are severable. If any
provision of this Part or its application to any person or circumstance within the
Township is held invalid, said invalidity shall not affect any other provision or
application of this Part which can be given effect. (Ordinance No. 306, June 14, 2004,
Section 1)
CHAPTER XIII
GRADING AND EXCAVATION
(See Subdivision and Land Development, Chapter )0(V11)
(Reserved for Future Use)
AL3379
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
CHAPTER XIV
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Part 1
Grass and Weeds
Vegetative Growth a Nuisance Under Certain Conditions
Exemption
Responsibility for Removing, Cutting or Trimming
Notice to Remove, Trim or Cut; Municipality May Do Work and
Collect Cost and Additional Amount
Penalties for Violation
Severability
Part 2
Nuisances
Section 201. Definitions
Section 202. Unlawful to Create Nuisance
Section 203. Abatement of Nuisance; Authority for Township to Abate
Section 204. Penalty for Violation
Section 205. Availability of Other Remedies
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Section 308.
Section 309.
Part 3
Graffiti
Graffiti is a Public Nuisance
Definitions
Prohibition of Graffiti
Possession of Graffiti Implements
Removal of Graffiti
Notice to Remove Graffiti
Remedies
Conflicts
Severability
AL3379
AL3379
Part 1
Grass and Weeds
Section 101. Vegetative Growth a Nuisance Under Certain Conditions. No
person, firm, corporation or other entity owning or occupying any real property (the
"Premises") within the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, (the
"Township") excepting only a Premises being used or occupied for agricultural
purposes in accordance with sound agricultural practices, shall permit any grass, weeds
or vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose,
to grow or remain upon such Premises so as not to exceed a height of eight inches (8")
on any property, the principal use of which is residential, and not to exceed a height of
eighteen inches (18') on any property, the principal use of which is other than
residential, or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor, or to conceal any filthy
deposit, or to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing
upon a Premises in the Township, excepting only a Premises being used or occupied for
agricultural purposes in accordance with sound agricultural practices, in violation of
any of the provisions of this Part is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to
the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Township.
(Ordinance No. 295, May 12, 2003, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 376, May 21,
2010, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 376, May 24, 2010, Section 1)
Section 102. Exemption. The Board of Supervisors shall have the sole and
exclusive right to exempt any Premises from the above provisions based upon their
conclusion that (i) an exemption is warranted due to the environment and aesthetic
benefits as well as considerations of economic efficiency as a result of the Premises
being allowed to become a meadow and (ii) such exemption shall not be detrimental to
the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Township. Said
exemption may be revoked at any time in the sole and absolute discretion of the Board
of Supervisors. (Ordinance No. 295, May 12, 2003, Section 1)
Section 103. Responsibility for Removing, Cutting or Trimming. The owner of a
Premises not otherwise exempted above, or the occupant of a Premises not so
exempted, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation growing or
remaining upon such Premises in violation of the provisions of Section 101 of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 295, May 12, 2003, Section 1)
Section 104. Notice to Remove, Trim or Cut; Municipality May Do Work and
Collect Cost and Additional Amount. The Board of Supervisors, or any officer or
employee of the Township designated thereby for this purpose, is hereby authorized to
give notice (the "Notice"), by personal service or by United States mail, to the owner or
occupant, as the case may be, of a Premises not so exempted whereon grass, weeds or
other vegetation is growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of Section 101 of
this Part. Said Notice shall direct and require such owner or occupant to remove, trim
)CIV - 3
AL3379
or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this Part,
within seven (7) days after issuance of such Notice. Whenever, in the judgment of the
Board of Supervisors, or any officer or employee of the Township designated thereby
for this purpose, it shall appear to be impracticable to give Notice as above provided,
either because the owner or occupant cannot readily be found or because a search for
the owner or occupant would entail unreasonable delay, the Board of Supervisors, or
any officer or employee of the Township designated thereby for that purpose, shall give
Notice by posting conspicuously on the Premises where such nuisance exists. Said
posted Notice shall direct and require that such nuisance be abated within seven (7)
days. In case any person, firm, corporation or other entity shall neglect, fail or refuse to
comply with such Notice within the period of time stated therein, the Board of
Supervisors, or any officer or employee of the Township designated thereby for this
purpose, may order the removal, trimming or cutting of such grass, weeds or
vegetation, and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the cost
thereof plus attorney's fees, shall be collected by the Township from such person, firm,
corporation or other entity, in the manner provided by law. The taking of actions as
herein stated shall not preclude the Township from instituting summary proceedings
against any person, firm corporation or other entity in violation of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 295, May 12, 2003, Section 1)
Section 105. Penalties for Violation. Any person, firm, corporation or other
entity who shall violate any provision of this Part may, upon conviction thereof before a
District Justice, have prescribed by the Board of Supervisors criminal fines not to exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, and may have prescribed imprisonment
to the extent allowed by law for the punishment of summary offenses. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues after notice shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalties referred to in Section 104 of this Part are in addition to the Township's
recovery of costs and charges referred to in this Section 105 of this Part. (Ordinance
No. 295, May 12, 2003, Section 1)
Section 106. Severability. If any sentence, clause, or section of this Part is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, or sections of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the
Board of Supervisors that this Part would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been
included herein. (Ordinance No. 295, May 12, 2003, Section 1)
AL3379
Part 2
Nuisances
Section 201. Definitions. The following words, as used in this Part, shall have
the meanings hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
(A) Nuisance - any use of property within the Township of Spring or
any condition upon any property within the said Township that, other than
infrequently or occasionally, shall cause or result in annoyance or disturbance to
persons beyond the boundaries of such property; interference to the health
and/ or safety of persons beyond the boundaries of such property; and/ or
disturbance to or interference with the peaceful use of the property of others in
the Township, in any case taking into consideration the location of the use or
condition, and the nature and condition of the surrounding neighborhood.
(B) Person - any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
In this Part, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the
singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(Ordinance No. 124, August 25, 1975, Section 1)
Section 202. Unlawful to Create Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to
create or maintain any nuisance anywhere within the limits of the Township of Spring.
(Ordinance No. 124, August 25, 1975, Section 2)
Section 203. Abatement of Nuisance; Authority for Township to Abate. Any
person who shall create or maintain any nuisance anywhere within the Township of
Spring shall, within ten (10) days after notice from the Board of Supervisors to do so,
remove or abate such nuisance. If such person shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove or
abate such nuisance within such time limit, the Board of Supervisors shall have
authority, in person or by its agents and/ or employees, to cause the removal or
abatement of such nuisance, and in so doing, shall have authority to enter upon the
property of such person in default. Thereupon, the Board shall collect the cost and
expense of such abatement or removal, from the person who created and/or
maintained such nuisance, such person having failed, neglected or refused to remove or
abate such nuisance, in the manner provided for the collection of municipal claims or by
an action of assumpsit without the filing of a claim. Provided: such cost and expense
may be in addition to any penalty imposed under the fourth section of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 124, August 25, 1975, Section 3)
AL3379
Section 204. Penalty for Violation. Any person violating any provision of this
Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fines and costs, to imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days. Provided: each
violation of any provision of this Part, and each day the same is continued, shall be
deemed a separate offense. (Ordinance No. 124, August 25, 1975, Section 4)
Section 205. Availability of Other Remedies. This Part shall not be construed to
be the sole means for abatement of nuisances within the Township of Spring, and
nothing shall preclude any person from proceeding individually or with other injured
persons, to effect the abatement of a private nuisance. Furthermore, in the exercise of
the powers herein conferred, the Township may institute proceedings in courts of
equity. (Ordinance No. 124, August 25, 1975, Section 5)
AL3379
Part 3
Graffiti
Section 301. Graffiti is a Public Nuisance. The Board of Supervisors find that
graffiti is a public nuisance. Graffiti is offensive, contributes to neighborhood
deterioration, lends to the depreciation of property defaced by graffiti and the
surrounding property and tends to remain on property unless promptly removed. The
Board of Supervisors must take all reasonable measures to prevent and eradicate graffiti
in order to minimize its detrimental impact upon the health, safety and welfare of the
public. (Ordinance No. 360, September 8, 2008, Section 1)
Section 302. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
within Part 3 of this Chapter shall have the following meanings:
"Graffiti" - Any inscription, work, symbol, figure, mark or design that is
etched, scrawled, stained, drawn, painted on or adhered to any property's
surface without the express consent of the property owner or the property
owner's agent, including, but not limited to any wall, underpass, overpass,
trestle, tree, sign, pole, post, building, fixture or other improvement whether
permanent or temporary, regardless of content or nature of the material that has
been applied, and which is visible from any public property or public
right-of-way, or from any private property other than the property on which the
graffiti exists. Graffiti shall not include temporary, water soluble markings,
symbols and inscriptions.
"Graffiti Implement" - any implement capable of marking a surface,
including, but not limited to aerosol or pressurized paint containers, markers,
gum labels, paint brushes and tools capable of etching or scaring. Graffiti
Implement shall not include implements which make temporary marks that are
water soluble, such as chalk.
"Gum Labels" - any material such as, but not limited to, decals, stickers,
posters or labels which are backed with a glue or adhesive material which after
being affixed to property cannot be removed from the property in an intact
condition with minimal effort.
"Minor" - any person under the age of 18.
"Perpetrator" - any Person convicted, adjudicated or otherwise
determined to be liable under this Part.
"Person" - any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
XIV - 7
AL3379
"Property" - all public and private property.
"Township" - Township of Spring.
(Ordinance No. 360, September 8, 2008, Section 1)
Section 303. Prohibition of Graffiti. No person shall place or cause to be placed
on any Property in the Township or on any Property which is visible to anyone within
the Township. (Ordinance No. 360, September 8, 2008, Section 1)
Section 304. Possession of Graffiti Implements. It shall be illegal for a Minor to
possess Graffiti Implement(s) on any Property unless the Property owner has consented
to the Minor's possession of the Graffiti Impalement on such Property. (Ordinance
No. 360, September 8, 2008, Section 1)
Section 305. Removal of Graffiti. No Person owning Property within the
Township shall allow Graffiti visible to the public to remain on such Person's Property.
(Ordinance No. 360, September 8, 2008, Section 1)
Section 306. Notice to Remove Graffiti. Upon discovering Graffiti on private
property, any Person authorized by the Township Board of Supervisors shall issue
written notice to the property owner, agent or occupant to promptly remove the
Graffiti. If Graffiti is not removed by the Person, agent or occupant within ten (10) days
of the mailing of the first notice to remove, a second notice to remove the Graffiti shall
be issued, authorizing the Township or agent of the Township to enter the property and
remove the Graffiti at the property owner's expense. The failure to remove the Graffiti
within ten (10) days of the second notice shall constitute a violation of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 360, September 8, 2008, Section 1)
Section 307. Remedies.
(A) Fine. Any Person who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction or adjudication by
summary delinquency proceeding shall be sentenced to pay a fine no less than
one hundred dollars ($100) and no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), plus
the cost of prosecution and the cost of the removal of the Graffiti and repair of
the Property or in default of payment, shall be subject to imprisonment or
detention not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each day a violation of this Part
continues, shall count as a separate offense;
(B) Penalties. Except where the legal fees, administrative and filing
costs exceed the cost of removal, a bill for the cost of removal shall be delivered
to the Property owner, occupier or authorized agent of the Property owner or
XIV -8
AL3379
Perpetrator and in the event of non-payment, the Township may file a lien
against the Property or sue the Perpetrator for such costs. Liability for the cost of
removal shall be in addition to liability for any fine imposed; or
(C) Mitigation. In lieu of or in mitigation of such fines and penalties;
upon agreement with or among the Perpetrator, as well as, if appropriate, the
District Attorney or representative of the Township, the Property owner or other
identifiable victims, the Perpetrator may participate in the Berks County Graffiti
Abatement Program.
(Ordinance No. 360, September 8, 2008, Section 1)
Section 308. Conflicts. Whenever the requirements of this Part are in conflict
with other Parts, the most restrictive, or those imposing a higher standard shall be
imposed. (Ordinance No. 360, September 8, 2008, Section 1)
Section 309. Severability. The provisions of this Part are severable. If any
section, clause sentence, part or provision hereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall
not affect or impair any of the remaining sections, clauses, sentences, pars or provisions
of this Part. It is hereby declared to the intent of the Township that this Part would
have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, clause, sentence,
part or provision has not been included herein. (Ordinance No. 360, September 8, 2008,
Section 1)
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204.
Section 205.
Section 206.
Section 207.
Section 208.
Section 209.
Section 210.
Section 211.
Section 212.
CHAPTER XV
HOUSING
Part 1
Rental Housing Registration
Background
Definitions
Renting
Designation of Local Contact
Enforcement
Penalty
Severability
Part 2
Pre-Settlement Inspection
Background
Definitions
Adoption of Rules, Regulations and Inspection Fees
Property Transfer Certificate
Inspections
Exempt Persons
Validity
Enforcement; Service of Notices and Orders; Hearings
Penalties
Applicability
Intent
Severability
AL3406
XV -2
AL3406
Part 1
Rental Housing Registration
Section 101. Background. The Township of Spring desires to ensure the fair and
impartial collection of the Earned Income Tax and the Per Capita Tax imposed by the
Township and Per Capita Tax imposed by the Wilson School District. In order to
ensure such fair and impartial imposition of taxes, the Township requires a listing of all
residents of the Township. (Ordinance No. 305, February 23, 2004, Section 1; Amended
by Ordinance No. 371, June 22, 2009, Section 1)
Section 102. Definitions.
(A) Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(B) Dwelling. Any building or structure, except temporary housing,
which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used or available for use or
available to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
(C) Dwelling Unit. Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used or available for use or available to be used for living or
sleeping.
(D) Lineal Descendant. A person who is in the direct line of decent
from the ancestor who is the legal owner of the dwelling unit. The descent
includes husband and wife, parent and child, brother and sister, and
grandparent and grandchild. It does not include a collateral line of decent such
as cousins, aunts, uncles, nephews, or nieces.
(E) Multiple Dwellings. Any dwelling containing two (2) or more
dwelling units.
(F) Owner. Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others
shall have:
(1) Legal or equitable title to any dwelling or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(2) Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as
owner or agent of owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner.
XV -3
AL3406
(G) Person. Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership
or other entity.
(H) Rooming House. Any dwelling, or part thereof, containing one or
more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three (3) or
more persons, who are not the husband, wife, son, daughter, mother, father,
sister or brother of the owner or operator.
(I) Township. The Township of Spring, Berks County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 305, February 23, 2004, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 371,
June 22, 2009, Section 1)
Section 103. Renting.
(A) Whoever, as owner or agent, rents or holds out to let any dwelling
unit, rooming unit or other living unit subject to the provisions of this Part for a
period in excess of fourteen (14) days shall supply the Secretary of the Township
with the following information:
(1) The street address and mailing address (if different from the
street address) of any such dwelling, rooming house or boarding house.
(2) The number of dwelling units, rooming units or other living
units located within said dwelling, rooming house or boarding house,
which number shall in no event exceed the number of such units provided
for on the housing permit issued to the owner or agent on behalf of the
owner.
(3) The name of each person occupying each dwelling unit,
rooming unit or other living unit.
(4) The period of time for which the rental is made.
(B) Such information shall be supplied to the Secretary of the
Township annually and, in addition, such information pertaining to any
dwelling unit, rooming unit or other living unit shall also be supplied to the
Secretary of the Township within ten (10) days after the occupancy of such
dwelling unit, rooming unit or other living unit shall change.
(Ordinance No. 305, February 23, 2004, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 371,
June 22, 2009, Section 1)
XV - 4
AL3406
Section 104. Designation of Local Contact. Any Owner who does not reside
within fifty (50) miles of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall
notify the Secretary of the Township in writing of a designated responsible agent for the
Owner. The designated responsible agent for Owner shall reside within fifty (50) miles
of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and shall have the authority to
fully act on behalf of the Owner and respond to inquiries of the Township.
(Ordinance No. 305, February 23, 2004, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 371,
June 22, 2009, Section 1)
Section 105. Enforcement. Any Codes Enforcement Officer or Assistant Codes
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Spring, or other officer, employee or staff of the
Township of Spring as designated from time to time by the Board of Supervisors, is
hereby designated and authorized to enforce this Part. (Ordinance No. 305,
February 23, 2004, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 371, June 22, 2009, Section 1)
Section 106. Penalty.
(A) Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of
this Part or any order, notice, rule or regulation made in connection herewith
shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and, in default of the
payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the Berks County Prison for a
period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
(B) Every violation of this Part shall constitute a separate offense, and
each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance No. 305, February 23, 2004, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 371,
June 22, 2009, Section 1)
Section 107. Severability. If any sentence, clause, or section of this Part is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses or sections of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board
of Supervisors that this Part would have been adopted had such unconstitutional,
illegal or invalid sentence, clause, or section thereof not been included herein.
(Ordinance No. 305, February 23, 2004, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 371,
June 22, 2009, Section 1)
AL3406
Part 2
Pre-Settlement Inspection
Section 201. Background. The Township of Spring wants to ensure that all
single family dwellings and multiple family dwellings meet certain zoning and certain
property maintenance requirements prior to property transfer. In order to effectively
and efficiently ensure that the dwelling units are in compliance, the Township Code
Enforcement Officer or his/her agent must inspect such dwelling units before the
transfer of title. (Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1)
Section 202. Definitions.
Agent - Any person, partner or corporation who for monetary or other
consideration aids a seller in the sale of property. Liability shall be limited to
failure to notify the seller of the obligations imposed by this Part.
Board of Supervisors - The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
Code Enforcement Officer. Any person specifically designated as such by
the Board of Supervisors to enforce this Part, and shall include the duly
authorized representatives of said Code Enforcement Officer.
Dwelling Unit -A building or portion thereof, providing one (1) or more
rooms arranged for the use of one (1) or more individuals living together as a
single house keeping unit, and having no cooking or sanitary facilities in
common with any other unit.
Lineal Descendant - A person who is in the direct line of decent from the
ancestor who is the legal owner of the dwelling unit. The term includes husband
and wife, parent and child, brother and sister, and grandparent and grandchild.
It does not include a collateral line of decent such as cousins, aunts, uncles,
nephews, or nieces.
Multiple Family Dwelling -A building arranged, designed, and intended
to provide two (2) or more dwelling units. Individual dwelling units may share
party walls with other units and either have common outside access areas or
have individual outside access areas. Types of such buildings shall include:
townhouses, apartments, and /or condominiums.
Notice of Violation - A written notice issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer directing any repair or remediation, corrective or other action relating to
XV -6
AL3406
any deficiencies as set forth in a report which may include a time frame within
which any such action must be taken.
Owner - Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others shall have:
(1) Legal or equitable title to any dwelling or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(2) Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as
owner or agent of owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner.
Person - Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or
other entity.
Single Family Dwelling - A building arranged, intended, or designed to
be occupied exclusively as a residence for one (1) family and having no common
wall with an adjacent building. Types of such buildings shall include mobile
homes and modular units.
Township - The Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1).
Section 203. Adoption of Rules, Regulations and Inspection Fees. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Part and may
make rules and regulations necessary for its administration. Such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with this Part and shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors
for approval. If the rules and regulations so submitted to the Board of Supervisors are
approved by the Board of Supervisors, the same shall be filed in the office of the Code
Enforcement Officer and in the office of the Secretary of the Township as an addendum
to this Part. Such rules and regulations as may be adopted shall then be deemed to be a
part of this Part and to have the same effect as this Part. (Ordinance No. 341, June 11,
2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1)
Section 204. Property Transfer Certificate.
(A) No existing multiple family dwelling or single family dwelling
shall be transferred by conveyance, lease or other means, occupied by a tenant or
new owner after the transfer of title by deed or other means, until an inspection
has been completed by the Code Enforcement Officer and a Property Transfer
Certificate issued.
AL3406
(B) Application. Applications for issuance of a Property Transfer
Certificate shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer by the seller, buyer,
or agent for the seller or buyer of the property, no later than thirty (30) business
days prior to settlement and/or transfer of ownership. Applications shall
contain such information as the Code Enforcement Officer may require. Any
application filed within thirty (30) days before settlement will be processed in
due course and may cause the issuance of a Property Transfer Certificate to be
delayed beyond scheduled settlement date.
(C) Fees. An inspection fee shall be charged for each property
inspected and said fee must accompany the application form when it is
submitted in accordance with the Township Fee Schedule, as revised from time
to time by Resolution.
(Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1)
Section 205. Inspections.
(A) Upon receipt of a completed application, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall, within ten (10) business days, relying upon the application or in the
Codes Officer's discretion, by inspection as follows:
(1) Utility and Storm Drainage Easements and road
rights-of-way must be clear of all obstructions, including those resulting
from landscaping;
(2) Fences are located according to setbacks and yard
requirements, properly permitted, in good repair, and of proper height
(with self-closing and latching gate if used as a barrier for a pool);
(3) Pools and Spas are properly permitted, located according to
setbacks and yard requirements, in good repair, contain no stagnant
water, and are properly fenced;
(4) Sheds are properly permitted, placed according to proper
setback and yard requirements from the lot lines and in proper location in
rear yard behind house;
(5) Decks are properly permitted, placed according to proper
setback and yard requirements and comply with attachment, baluster
spacing and railing height requirements;
(6) Curb, sidewalk and driveway entrance ramps are in a safe
and adequately maintained condition;
XV -8
AL3406
(7) Sanitary sewer connections are in such condition as to
prevent and/or control inflow and infiltration of waters into the sanitary
sewer collection system and sump pumps and/or rain leaders are not
connected to the sanitary sewer system;
(8) Dwelling units reconcile with the maximum number of units
permitted according to Township records;
(9) Proper sump pump discharge locations are adequate and
properly placed;
(10) The type, location and number of smoke detectors have been
verified;
and,
(11) All non-residential uses conform with Township records;
(12) Number of bedrooms have been verified.
(B) Re-inspections. Upon correction of all violations, the applicant
shall notify the Township in writing for a follow-up inspection, which shall be
conducted within ten (10) business days from notification. If, following the
re-inspection, the property is determined to be in compliance with the standards,
a Property Transfer Certificate shall be issued to the applicant. If additional
follow-up inspections are required due to the fact that the applicant did not
comply with the violation report, the applicant shall be charged an additional fee
in accordance with the Township Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time by
Resolution.
(C) Documentation. The Seller and Buyer's signatures are required to
acknowledge to have read and understood the inspection report and to make
corrections to any deficiencies as listed on the inspection report.
(D) Exceptions. The Code Enforcement Officer may not require
changes which are technically infeasible due to the age or construction of an
existing building.
(Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1)
Section 206. Exempt Persons. No fee shall be required of an owner who is one
(1) of the following:
AL3406
(A) Legal owner of a dwelling unit that is leased or rented to a lineal
decedent of the legal owner.
(B) The United States Government, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the Township of Spring or any agency thereof.
(Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1)
Section 207. Validity. The validity of the Property Transfer Certificate is
contingent upon compliance with all applicable Township Ordinances and it is
revocable upon violations of those Ordinances. The Property Transfer Certificate does
not warrant or guarantee on the part of the Township or any officer, agent or employee
of the Township, the soundness, fitness, safety or adequacy of the facilities inspected.
The Property Transfer Certificate shall not be deemed to give rise to any liability on the
part of the Township or any officer, agent, employee, or designee thereof. All such
liability, and any remedy therefore, shall remain that of the seller or transferor of any
structure covered hereby. (Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007,
Section 1)
Section 208. Enforcement; Service of Notices and Orders; Hearings.
(A) Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer believes, or has cause to
believe, that there is a violation of the provisions of this Part or any rules,
regulations or codes (including but not limited to the Uniform Construction
Codes and International Property Maintenance Code) adopted by the Township
and related hereto, the .Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice of the
violation to the person responsible therefore, and such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing and shall clearly state the nature or condition
of the violation.
(2) State the name of the person who the Code Enforcement
Officer deems responsible therefore, together with the name of the owner
of the premises involved.
(3) State the date of the notice and the number of days allowed
for compliance with said notice.
(4) Be served upon the owner of the premises involved and all
other persons, if any, named in the notice personally or by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, sent to the last
known address of such owner and such other person or persons.
AL3406
(5) The notice may, in addition, contain any other pertinent
data, information or statements which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems appropriate.
(B) Any person affected by a notice of violation, determination or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or pursuant to this Part may appeal said
notice, determination or order to the Board of Supervisors. Any such appeal
must be filed in writing with the Secretary of the Township of Spring within ten
(10) days after the receipt of such notice, determination or order. At the time of
filing such appeal, the appellant shall pay to the Secretary of the Township of
Spring a fee, the amount of which shall from time to time be established by
Resolution of the Board of Supervisors, to cover the costs of such appeal. The
Board of Supervisors shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty (30)
days after the date the appeal is filed. Notice of the hearing shall be given not
less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing to the appellant, to the
Code Enforcement Officer and to any other person who may request such notice.
At the hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall review the notice, determination or
order of the Code Enforcement Officer or the rule or regulation which is the
subject of the appeal, take such testimony, hear such witnesses and, by a vote of
the majority of its members, shall reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify
the determination appealed from and shall make such order or decision as in its
opinion should be made. Within twenty (20) days after said hearing, the Board
of Supervisors shall advise the appellant, in writing, of its decision, and a copy of
said decision shall be filed with the Secretary of the Township and with the
Secretary of the Township of Spring. Decisions of the Board of Supervisors may
be further appealed to the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County,
Pennsylvania by the appellant within thirty (30) days after date of mailing of the
decision of the Board of Supervisors, or as otherwise provided by law.
(C) Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an
emergency condition exists which requires immediate action to protect public
health and/ or safety, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue an order declaring
the existence of such emergency and requiring action to be taken to remedy such
emergency. Such emergency order shall be effective immediately upon issuance.
Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately.
(Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1)
Section 209. Penalties.
(A) Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of
this Part or any order, notice, rule or regulation made in connection herewith
shall pay a civil penalty not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more
XV - 11
AL3406
than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), together with costs, including reasonable
attorneys fees payable to the Township of Spring.
(B) Each instance of non-compliance with this Part shall constitute a
separate violation, and each day such violation persists shall constitute a
separate violation.
(C) The Township shall be entitled to any and all remedies as may be
otherwise available at law or equity.
(Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1)
Section 210. Applicability. This Part shall not apply to any valid Agreements of
Sale entered into and dated prior to the effective date of this Part. (Ordinance No. 341,
June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1)
Section 211. Intent. It is declared that enactment of this Part is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of this Township. (Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007,
Section 1)
Section 212. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Part is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the
Board of Supervisors that this Part would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been
included herein. (Ordinance No. 341, June 11, 2007, Effective August 1, 2007, Section 1)
AL6494
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 108.
Section 109.
Section 110.
Section 111.
Section 112.
Section 113.
Section 114.
CHAPTER XVI
IMPACT FEES
Title
Purpose
General Findings and Conditions
Definitions
Imposition
Uses
Exemptions
Calculation of Impact Fees
Administration of Impact Fee
Credits
Refunds
Transportation Impact Fee as an Additional Requirement
Severability
Impact Fee Study Area Plan
AL6494
AL6494
Section 101. Title. This Chapter shall be known as the "Township of Spring
Transportation Impact Fee Ordinance". (Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 102. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a
transportation capital impact fee program to ensure that the Township's transportation
infrastructure system is available and adequate to support new growth and
development. To advance this objective, there is hereby created a transportation capital
impact fee (hereinafter "Fee") for new development payable to the Township at the
time of building permit issuance. (Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 103. General Findings and Conditions. The Board of Supervisors hereby
finds and declares that:
(A) The conditions and standards for the determination and imposition
of the Fee are set forth herein and otherwise shall follow those set forth in Act
209 of 1990, as amended (hereinafter "Act"), and consist of:
(1) The analysis, advice, and recommendations of the
Transportation Impact Fee Advisory Committee;
(2) The Township of Spring Land Use Assumptions Report as
adopted by the Board of Supervisors on July 23, 2007, as may be amended
from time to time;
(3) The Township of Spring Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as
adopted by the Board of Supervisors on March 24, 2008, as may be
amended from time to time;
(4) The Township of Spring Transportation Capital Improvement
Plan as adopted by the Board of Supervisors on April 28, 2008, as may be
amended from time to time;
(5) Such other conditions and standards as the Board of
Supervisors may by resolution identify from time to time as being relevant
and material to the imposition of the Fee and consistent with the Act and
any amendments thereto.
(B) The collection, disbursement, and accounting of the Fee shall be
administered by the office of the Township Secretary, subject to review,
oversight, and control by the Board of Supervisors.
(C) The time, method, and procedures for payment of the Fee shall be
as set forth in Sections 105 and 108 of this Chapter.
)<VI - 3
AL6494
(D) The procedure for credits against or refunds of the Fee shall be as
set forth in Sections 110 and 111 of this Chapter.
(E) The calculation of the Fee shall be as set forth in Section 108 of this
Chapter.
(F) Such exemptions of the Fee as the Board of Supervisors shall chose
to enact shall be as set forth in Section 107 of this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 104. Definitions. The terms and definitions set forth in §502-A of the Act
are hereby adopted and incorporated into this Chapter by reference. (Ordinance
No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 105. Imposition. The Fee is hereby enacted and imposed upon new
development for the purpose of off-site public transportation capital improvements
authorized by the Act and outlined in this Chapter. Said Fee shall apply, and be
uniformly applicable to, all new development and/or subdivisions within the
transportation service area(s) identified herein. The Fee shall be a condition precedent
to final approval of a land development/subdivision plan or the issuance of a building
permit.
No building permit shall be issued for new development within a transportation
service area unless the Fee, as imposed by and calculated pursuant to this Chapter, has
been paid. The fee shall apply to an expansion of an existing use only if that expansion
shall increase the number of PM peak hour trips.
The geographical areas of the Township for which the Fee shall be collected is
generally characterized as the intersection of Fritztown Road and Chapel Hill Road, the
intersection of Wernersville Road and Jennifer Court, Mohns Hill Road and Vinemont
Road as depicted on the Impact Fee Study Area Plan within the Land Use Assumptions
Report, and as more fully set forth in Section 114 of this Chapter. (Ordinance No. 358,
May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 106. Uses. The Fee collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be expended
for costs incurred for transportation capital improvements attributable to new
development and designated in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan within the
Impact Fee Study Area in which the new development is located. The Fee may also be
used for the acquisition of land and rights-of-way, engineering, legal and planning
costs, debt service related to road improvements, and all other costs allowed under the
provisions of the Act. (Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
XVI -4
AL6494
Section 107. Exemptions. The Fee shall not be collected for subdivisions or
developments under the following conditions:
(A) New growth that has been determined by the Board of Supervisors
to serve an overriding public interest shall be provided a credit against the Fee of
up to one hundred percent (100%). Some examples of this could include, but
shall not be limited to, municipal uses, educational uses, or non-profit uses. To
qualify for the credit, applicants shall be required to submit a exemption request
in writing to the Board of Supervisors outlining their proposed use and
describing the overriding public interest served.
(B) De minimus applications shall be exempted from the Fee. De
minimus applications shall mean those subdivisions and developments that can
be shown to generate less than two (2) additional PM peak hour trips, without
rounding, using the most current version of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers publication, Trip Generation, or mutually agreed upon traffic study. To
qualify for the exemption, applicants shall be required to place a waiver request
on their final plat and submit information to support their request.
(Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 108. Calculation of Impact Fees.
(A) The Fee in the Impact Fee Study Area Plan is Seven Hundred
Eighty-Three Dollars and 23/100 Cents ($783.23) per PM peak hour trip as set
forth in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, subject to such exemptions
and credits as determined by the Board of Supervisors and /or allowed as
required by Pennsylvania law.
(B) The amount of the Fee may be amended from time to time by
Resolution of the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the Act.
(C) The Fee is hereby imposed upon all new subdivision and
development including expansion and change in use and shall be determined as
of the date of preliminary land development or subdivision approval by
multiplying the per trip cost established for the designated Impact Fee Study
Area by the estimated number of PM peak hour trips to be generated in
accordance with the most current version of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers publication, Trip Generation manual. The provision of this Ordinance
may have retroactive application for a period not to exceed eighteen (18) months
after the adoption of the Resolution creating an Impact Fee Advisory Committee
for preliminary or tentative application for land development, subdivision or
PRD to the fullest extent permitted by law.
XVI - 5
AL6494
(D) In the event that the trip generation characteristics of a use are not
sufficiently documented in the Trip Generation manual, the Fee shall be
determined by the information contained in the required Traffic Impact Study
per the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance as approved
by the Township Transportation Engineer.
(Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 109. Administration of Impact Fee.
(A) The Township Secretary, or his/her designee, shall collect the Fee
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(B) The Township Treasurer, or his/her designee, shall establish an
impact fee fund where the Fee shall be deposited. This fund shall be deposited
in an interest bearing account(s) in a financial institution authorized to receive
deposits of the Township. Interest earned from this fund shall be credited to that
account and shall be used solely for the same purpose as the original Fee.
(C) The impact fee fund shall be reflected in the Township Budget and
show expected credits and payments for each project.
(D) The Township Secretary or Treasurer shall maintain and keep
adequate financial records for each account that shall show the source and
disbursement of all revenues. He/she shall ensure that the disbursement of
funds shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified
in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan.
(Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 110. Credits. Any applicant who shall perform, at his own expense and
with the consent and agreement of the Board of Supervisors, off-site improvements
shall be eligible for a credit towards the Fee in the amount of the actual cost of such
improvements as verified by the Township. The Board of Supervisors shall not be
obligated to accept an offer of improvement construction by an applicant.
(A) If an applicant makes such improvements, he must enter into an
agreement with the Board of Supervisors prior to the issuance of any building
permit. The agreement must establish the estimated cost of the improvement,
the schedule for the initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement
that the improvement shall be completed to Township and Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards and criteria and any other terms and
conditions that are deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors.
XVI - 6
AL6494
(B) Any credit shall not exceed the amount of the Fee for each
development. However, provided that the applicant has other developments
within the Impact Fee Study Area that are in the same ownership and have
received preliminary approval, credits calculated to be greater than the Fee due
may be applied to the Fee for the applicant's other developments.
(C) Applicants shall be required to post financial security, sufficient in
the judgment of the Township Engineer, to cover the cost of any improvements
installed by the applicant for which a credit is sought.
(D) An applicant, seeking a credit and with Board of Supervisors
approval, shall be entitled as a credit against the Fee in the amount equal to the
fair market value of land dedicated by the applicant and accepted by the
Township for future right-of-way, realignment, or widening of existing
roadways provided that any on-site land dedication shall not be counted unless
it exceeds the requirements of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(E) An applicant, seeking a credit and with Board of Supervisors
approval, shall be entitled as a credit against the Fee in the amount equal to the
construction value of any road improvement that is contained in the
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan that was performed at the applicant's
expense.
(Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 111. Refunds. Fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be refunded,
together with earned accrued interest thereon, to the payor of the Fee under the
following circumstances:
(A) In the event that the Township completes or terminates an adopted
capital improvements plan for an Impact Fee Study Area and there remains at
the time of termination or completion undispersed funds in the accounts
established for that purpose, the Township shall provide written notice by
certified mail to those persons who previously paid the fees which remain
undispersed of the availability of said funds for refund of the person's
proportionate share of the fund balance.
(B) If the Township fails to commence construction of any Impact Fee
Study Area improvements within three (3) years of the scheduled construction
date set forth in a transportation capital improvements plan, any person who
paid the Fee pursuant to that transportation capital improvements plan shall,
upon written request to the Township, receive a refund of that portion of the Fee
XVI - 7
AL6494
attributable to the contribution for the uncommenced road improvement, plus
the interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment. However, no refund
shall be paid for any improvement project actually begun prior to the receipt of
such refund request.
(C) If, upon completion of any road improvements project contained in
the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan by the Township, the actual
expenditures of the capital project are less than 95% of the costs properly
allocable to the fee paid, the Township shall, upon written request to the
Township, refund the pro rata difference between the budgeted costs and the
actual expenditures, including interest accumulated thereon from the date of
payment, to the applicant.
(D) If the development for which the Fee was paid is not commenced
prior to the expiration of building permits the Fee with accumulated interest
shall be refunded, upon written request to the Township, to the applicant. If the
building permit as issued for the development is altered and the alteration
results in a decrease in the amount of the Fee due, the difference between the
new Fee and Fee previously paid shall be refunded, upon written request to the
Township, to the applicant. The applicant, at his option, may roll over the Fee
paid to cover a renewal of, or new building permit.
The allocation of refunds shall be determined by generally accepted accounting
practices. In the event that any of the funds remain unclaimed following one year after
the notice, which notice shall be provided to the last known address provided by the
payor of the fees to the Township, the Township shall transfer any funds so remaining
to the Township Capital Fund without any further obligation to refund said funds. It is
the responsibility of the payor to provide the Township with, and to maintain, his
current address of his place of business. (Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 112. Transportation Impact Fee as an Additional Requirement. The Fee
is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements or
fees imposed by the Township on land development and building permit issuance.
Nothing herein contained shall alter or affect the Township's existing ordinances and
regulations regarding on-site improvements. However, in no event shall an applicant
be required to pay for off-site transportation capital improvements in addition to, or in
excess of, the required Fee. (Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
Section 113. Severability. Should any sentence, section, clause, part or provision
of this Chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same
shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the
part declared to be invalid. (Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008, Section 1)
AL6494
Section 114. Impact Fee Study Area Plan. (Ordinance No. 358, May 12, 2008,
Section 1)
EIGURPL ag. 1
DEFINED P°_ANNI1\113 AR = A
PLANNING AREA No. 1 (6.70 SQ. MI.)
STATE GAME LANDS
O15. STUDY INTERSECTION AND NUMBER
U.S. 222 IMPROVEMENTS
I C
Qum ., 00- FI''1,.;jRY0,041V1
,ffauti, I
' r. '
-K.
,c44,
i7.37
p.
vs, ft
A
1dr, A.A.AP
4,1 r
, IS
' ". ,
,_\ "y h' or. I -
/C
" 1." 4.6
p........, - -f,k,:_,,,,::.,-,..,.. \-/ .: .
" i
g..."..,
A A)re-,
i L
v 1
'') C 4 \''-17ix4 \- -,,,........ ., ,-.... \_/
...i. .,.; ..7, , ,
.,,,...
....<....
,
.,ff.L-.,,.. ,.(, ,,:,... 1, 4-4::,..---- ?Li .-%.._,\
x ,----,
...,...
.,
, ttl,(4,---:, ,,,,,,\4).=,_, Ln-
_2-,-\i3i-.1-----.,-- ,,---)
,,----...,-------..!
,,,....,,,,,........._ \,
---... ., , ....,:.'..,-----7,13,--:1.:-..-T--,-,--:,.../:. '''''''''''''3,------'/ ,,k5: ii
f . ::V \)..r \,3 '
.- egt: '4, '' ..%\,<,''t, \ 7
....
\ 1----.--It\c '. . NN,\k,, ).
c.,..t>,...i ,,.....-
, S ''''.. ,,,;_ ' 1
Pt Apr .± ...-.`"\-, 4,.,,,,,,-LfL, ..7'.
ov;
/
i6c iiAi t \ 4,7 \>, - lj r
' '
i rs>.).%
. e. \ ,...(%'\./ "
;-4. itur.,,,,I, ..,:.;r .g..
1
n
`..---U "---.
' 7 ' 1
)' ,qe-. (1_,.,..... ... .\ \ ..,:....-,
\
1'
7,4 MACAW IMP,
LAire. PA 1010-1A0 P
0 WM -117 low. 6
GREAT . AEY CONSIEMTS IMO.= 1, N.M. !ATM (.411.7...
M.D 2.1 fOr TD =ALE a/vo
MIME in
AFFICIALII. 1123011171175-E -00111 2
10D2554
CHAPTER XVII
LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Part 1
Peddling/ Amusements
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 108.
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204.
Section 205.
Section 206.
Section 207.
Section 208.
Section 209.
Section 210.
Section 211.
Section 212.
License Required for Certain Businesses
Transient Merchants
Hawking, Peddling and Selling
Registration with Township Secretary Required
Amusements
Application Fees Paid to Township Secretary
Severability
Penalty
Part 2
Public Gatherings
Title
Definitions
Prohibited Activity
Permit Requirement
Application
Bond of Indemnity
Conditions of Approval
Conduct of Public Gathering
Conformance with Other Law
Denial/Revocation of Permit
Penalties
Severability
10D2554
10D2554
Part 1
Peddling; Amusements
Section 101. License Required for Certain Businesses. It shall be unlawful for
any person or persons, firm, company or corporation or any officials representing any
person or persons, firm, company or corporation to engage in or conduct any business
venture or endeavor hereinafter mentioned without previously obtaining a license and
payment therefor made in advance as hereinafter prescribed. (Ordinance No. 23,
May 9, 1955, Section 1)
Section 102. Transient Merchants. To enter into or conduct a transient retail
business in the Township for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or property of
whatever kind, whether the whole or greater part of the same shall be represented or
advertised to be the goods, wares, or merchandise of the estate of any bankrupt,
assignee, or person or persons, firm, company or corporation about to quit business, or
damage in any way, except upon the payment of a license fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each calendar month or fraction thereof. (Ordinance No. 23, May 9, 1955,
Section 3)
Section 103. Hawking, Peddling and Selling. From and after the passage of this
ordinance no person shall be employed, engaged or concerned in the business of
hawking, peddling, or selling produce or merchandise, works of art, magazines, books,
pamphlets, publications, or any other kind of article for sale, or shall be engaged in
soliciting orders for such produce, merchandise, works of art, magazines, books,
pamphlets, publications, or any other kind of article for sale within the limits of the
Township of Spring, without having previously taken out a license therefor to sell or
offer, or expose for sale such articles or any of them, or the soliciting of orders therefor,
without having paid such sum or sums, as are hereinafter fixed, into the Township
Treasury and receive a license therefor. License fees shall be twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per calendar year or any part thereof, or such other license fee as may hereafter
be established by appropriate resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring.
It is further provided that this Section shall not apply
(A) to farmers selling their own produce, or
(B) to the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose, or
10D2554
(C) to any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meats and meat products, or milk and milk products.
(Ordinance No. 23, May 9, 1955, Section 4; as amended by Ordinance No. 248,
December 26, 1995, Section 1)
Section 104. Registration with Township Secretary Required. In order to protect
the public against fraud and imposition, all persons intending to make sales or soliciting
orders for the sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, and other articles, from
house to house, or in buildings within the limits of the Township of Spring, shall be
required to register with the Secretary of the Township of Spring stating the kind or
character of goods or merchandise they intend selling, their names, occupation,
residence and reference as to their character for honesty and integrity, as well as
reference to the person, firm or corporation whom they represent and who are to
supply the goods and materials sold. The giving of such information shall be a
condition precedent to the granting of such license and upon verification the Secretary
of the Township of Spring shall forthwith issue said permit [license] to applicant. In
case said statements and references are not verified, permits [licenses] shall be refused.
Any person selling, or offering to sell, or soliciting orders from house to house for such
goods, wares, or merchandise, without having first obtained such a permit [license],
shall be subject to the fine herein stated. (Ordinance No. 23, May 9, 1955, Section 5)
Section 105. Amusements. To show, exhibit, or conduct in this Township
amusements to which an entrance admission is charged except upon payment of license
fees therefor as follows:
Circuses: forty ($40.00) dollars per day;
Circuses and menageries combined: fifty ($50.00) dollars per day;
Side shows: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per day;
Merry-go-rounds: five ($5.00) dollars per day;
Theatrical and moving-picture exhibitions: fifty ($50.00) dollars per day
or five ($5.00) dollars per month;
Skating rinks: twenty-five cents ($0.25) per day;
Public dances: two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per day;
Similar amusements: the same rate per day as those above-mentioned
which they most nearly resembled;
XVII -4
10D2554
Provided: no license fee shall be charged for lectures on scientific or literary subjects,
exhibitions of paintings, or statuary, conducted by the citizens of the Township, nor for
musical or literary entertainment given for benevolent, religious, educational or
charitable purposes. (Ordinance No. 23, May 9, 1955, Section 6)
Section 106. Application Fees Paid to Township Secretary. All applications for
licenses under this Part shall be made and paid for to the Secretary of the Township of
Spring. (Ordinance No. 23, May 9, 1955, Section 7)
Section 107. Severability. The provisions of this Part shall be severable and if
any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional or beyond and outside the
power of the Township of Spring to prohibit, the decisions so holding shall not be
construed to affect the validity of any of the remaining portions of this Part. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Supervisors of the Township of Spring that this Part would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional or unauthorized provisions not been
included therein. (Ordinance No. 23, May 9, 1955, Section 8)
Section 108. Penalty. Any person, firm, company, or corporation, or any officials
representing any person or persons, firm, company, or corporation, violating the
provisions of this Part, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense and in default of payment thereof in any case, shall be imprisoned in the
Township Lockup for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. (Ordinance No. 23,
May 9, 1955, Section 9)
10D2554
Part 2
Public Gatherings
Section 201. Title. This Part shall be known as and cited as the "Township of
Spring Public Gathering Ordinance." (Ordinance No. 237, December 13,1993, Section I)
Section 202. Definitions. As used in this Part, unless the context requires
otherwise:
EMPLOYEES - persons employed by the sponsor (as herein defined).
FAMILY MEMBERS - persons related by blood or marriage, however
distant, to the sponsor (as herein defined).
MEMBERS - persons whose memberships in the sponsor (as herein
defined) predate the day upon which the public gathering is to occur by at least
thirty (30) days.
PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY - an agent and his principal,
occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or person other than owner, having
possession or control of property in the Township of Spring on which the public
gathering is to occur.
PUBLIC GATHERING - all gatherings of individuals reasonably
anticipated to attract more than five hundred (500) in number, for a period of
two (2) or more hours, excluding:
(1) A public gathering for religious purposes.
(2) A public gathering sponsored in whole or in part by public or
private schools and/or colleges.
(3) A public gathering for purposes of lawful picketing.
(4) A public gathering sponsored in whole or in part by a
governmental agency.
(5) A public gathering at which attendance is limited solely to
employees, family and members (all as herein defined) and their guests.
provided, however, that all picnics, festivals, carnivals, circuses, shows
and entertainment activities reasonably anticipated to attract more than
five hundred (500) in number, for a period of two (2) or more hours, shall
be subject to the terms and provisions of this Part.
)(VII -6
10D2554
SPONSOR(S) - any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
corporation, joint venture or any other legal entity whatsoever who initiates,
organizes, promotes, permits, conducts or causes to be advertised a public
gathering.
(Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section II)
Section 203. Prohibited Activity. It shall be unlawful for any sponsor, owner of
property, or person in charge of property to initiate, organize, promote, permit, conduct
or cause to be advertised a public gathering unless a permit has been obtained pursuant
to this Part. A separate permit shall be required for each public gathering for the period
of time designated by the permit. (Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section III)
Section 204. Permit Requirements. No public gathering shall be held within the
boundaries of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, unless the
sponsor(s) and the owner of the property or the person in charge of the property upon
which the public gathering will occur, jointly apply for and are granted a permit as
hereinafter provided:
(A) No permit shall be granted for a public gathering of more than
forty-eight (48) hours duration unless the application specifically requests, and
the permit specifically allows, an extension of that period.
(B) No applicant shall be under twenty-one (21) years of age.
(C) No permit may be transferred or assigned.
(D) In case of disputes over the number of persons reasonably
anticipated to attend the public gathering, the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring reserves the right to make a final decision as to the number
of persons reasonably anticipated to attend the public gathering.
(Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section IV)
Section 205. Application.
(A) Written application for each public gathering shall be made to the
Township of Spring according to the following schedule:
(1) For a public gathering numbering five hundred (500) to two
thousand (2,000) persons, at any one (1) time, written application must be
made thirty (30) days prior to the first day upon which public
XVII -7
10D2554
announcement, promotion or advertising is to be made or the day upon
which the public gathering is to commence, whichever first occurs.
(2) For a public gathering numbering two thousand (2,000) or
more persons, at any one (1) time, written application must be made sixty
(60) days prior to the first day upon which public announcement,
promotion or advertising is to be made or the day upon which the public
gathering is to commence, whichever first occurs.
(B) Application shall be made on forms provided by the Township of
Spring and shall contain, at least, the following information:
(1) The full legal names, addresses and telephone numbers of all
Sponsor(s).
(2) The full legal name and address of the owner and the person
in charge of the property to be utilized for the public gathering.
(3) If the Sponsor(s) is/are a partnership or joint venture, all
partners and parties to the joint venture shall sign as applicant. If the
Sponsor(s) is/ are a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation and
a corporate resolution authorizing the application shall be made a part of
the application.
(4) The location and address of the property to be utilized for
the public gathering.
(5) The program for the public gathering or, if no program is
prepared, a narrative statement as to the purpose for which the public
gathering is to be conducted.
(6) A diagrammatic plan of the proposed site of the public
gathering showing the locations and dimensions of the area where the
programmed entertainment, amusement or recreation is to be conducted,
areas for spectators or persons attending the event, all structures existing
and to be constructed, proposed parking area and service roads, potable
water facilities, sanitary facilities, sewage disposal facilities, medical
services facilities, facilities for and distribution of security personnel and
facilities for food and beverage storage, preparation and service, as well as
camping facilities and projected plans for enclosure, if necessary, of the
proposed site.
10D2554
(7) Evidence that all permits and licenses as required by the
State and County statutes, ordinances and regulations enacted thereunder
have been obtained.
(8) A statement of number of persons expected to attend the
public gathering and the duration of the same.
(9) Specific information and details relating to:
(a) Temporary overnight accommodations for
individuals.
(b)
thereof.
Sanitary and waste disposal facilities and providers
(c) Transportation and parking facilities.
(d) Security and protection of surrounding areas,
including specific reference to the number of security personnel
assisting in the control of traffic and supervision of those attending
and providers thereof.
(e) On site medical facilities and providers thereof.
(f) Trash removal and site restoration and providers
thereof, immediately following the public gathering.
(g) Lighting and other utility services.
(10) Certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in Pennsylvania, evidencing comprehensive
general liability, or special event public liability, in an amount of at least
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage.
(11) Examples of all proposed advertising of the event, if any.
(12) Applicants' statement that they shall abide by the terms and
provisions of this Part, and all laws, rules and regulations of the United
States, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Berks and Township
of Spring.
(Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section V)
XVII - 9
10D2554
Section 206. Bond of Indemnity.
(A) As an additional condition to the issuance of a permit for a public
gathering as defined herein, the Township may require, at its discretion after
consideration of the application submitted, the applicants to submit a bond, with
licensed commercial surety, letter of credit or cash, as a security deposit in an
amount to be determined in accordance with the schedule set forth below and in
a form approved by the Township Solicitor to save and protect and indemnify
the Township from any loss or expense sustained as a result of (1) loss and
damage to Township streets, pavements, bridges, road signs and all other
Township property caused by persons sponsoring, working at, or attending and
participating in the public gathering and any vehicles or other instrumentalities
in their control; and (2) failure of the persons to whom a permit was issued to
perform their obligations under the permit granted by the Township of Spring
including, but not limited to, such things as restoring the premises where the
public gathering was held to a sanitary condition, or providing necessary
security or traffic control.
(B) The corporate bond of indemnity or cash deposit shall be in the
following amounts:
Persons Reasonably Anticipated Cash Deposit or Bond Amount
501 to 2,000 $1,000.00
2,001 to 3,500 $2,000.00
3,501 to 5,000 $5,000.00
5,001 to 10,000 $10,000.00
Over 10,000 $25,000.00
(Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section VI)
Section 207. Conditions of Approval. Any permit issued by the Township of
Spring shall be expressly conditioned upon satisfaction and completion of the
conditions recited in this Section. Furthermore, failure to satisfy the following
conditions shall constitute grounds for the immediate revocation of the permit by the
Township of Spring and the cancellation of the public gathering:
(A) Sanitary Facilities. Written approval of the Sewage Enforcement
Officer of the Township of Spring relating to the adequacy of sanitary toilet
facilities and sewage disposal facilities at a public gathering as described in
applicant's application.
(B) Public Safety.
)(VII - 10
10D2554
(1) Security. Sponsor(s) shall demonstrate that a plan, and
means to implement the plan, exists to provide for adequate traffic control
and crowd control, which plan is approved by a designated Township
Police Department representative.
(2) Enclosures. Sponsor(s) shall demonstrate that a plan, and
means to implement the plan, exists to have the location where the public
gathering is to be held enclosed with snow fencing or other similar
material of equivalent strength of not less than four (4) feet in height, if
admission is charged and attendance is reasonably expected to exceed two
thousand (2,000) persons.
(3) Medical Services. Sponsor(s) shall demonstrate that a plan,
and a means to implement the plan, exists to provide sufficient medical
services to the public gathering. Identification of the company or person
supplying this service shall be provided.
(4) Parking Facilities. Sponsor(s) shall demonstrate that a plan,
and a means to implement the plan, exists to provide adequate parking
facilities appropriate to the anticipated number of persons in attendance.
For onsite parking there shall also be provided adequate ingress and
egress to and from parking areas to facilitate the movement of vehicles at
any time or from the parking areas and to permit access for emergency
vehicles.
(Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section VII)
Section 208. Conduct of Public Gathering.
(A) Public gathering permittees shall maintain the sanitary and sewage
facilities, parking facilities, security and traffic control personnel, medical service
facilities and other facilities and utilities provided in accordance with the plans
submitted and approved, and in a safe and healthful manner.
(B) No permittee or persons having control of the public gathering,
shall condone any illegal conduct on the premises including, but not limited to,
disorderly conduct or illegal possession, sale or use of intoxicating beverages or
drugs.
(C) The burden of preserving order during the public gathering is upon
the permittees of the public gathering. Any violations of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or its rules and regulations, or of the terms and
conditions of this Part, or other ordinances of Berks County or of the Township
of Spring, or of the conditions of the permit granted hereunder may be cause for
XVII - 11
10D2554
immediate revocation of the permit by the Township of Spring upon notification
to the person in charge that a violation exists and the failure of the person in
charge to take immediate action to correct the violation. Upon revocation of any
permit, the permittee of the public gathering shall immediately terminate the
assembly and provide for the orderly dispersal of those in attendance.
(D) The Township of Spring, its authorized agents and representatives,
shall be granted access to the public gathering at all times for the purpose of
inspection and enforcement of the terms and conditions imposed herein.
(E) No entertainment, amusement or use of sound amplification
equipment shall be provided or permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
10:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday and midnight and 10:00 a.m. Friday and
Saturday.
(F) Sponsor(s) of the public gathering and/ or the person in charge of
property, or their designated agents or representatives, shall at all times be in
attendance at the public gathering and shall be responsible for insuring that no
person shall be allowed to remain on the premises who is violating any State or
Township laws, ordinances, rules or regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and/ or the Township of Spring.
(G) Public gatherings operating without a permit under this Part based
on a reasonable anticipation of less than five hundred (500) persons in attendance
shall limit attendance therein to four hundred ninety-nine (499) persons, and
printed tickets, if utilized, shall not number more than four hundred ninety-nine
(499).
(H) At the conclusion of the program, the permittee shall terminate the
assembly or gathering and shall supervise the orderly dispersal of those in
attendance. No one shall be permitted to remain overnight on the licensed
premises, except permanent residents, unless temporary overnight
accommodations were previously approved by the Township of Spring, in
writing, pursuant to the application process of this Part.
(I) For public gatherings where a public highway will require partial
or full closure for the event, a street usage permit must be obtained in addition to
any permit required under this Part. A separate application must be obtained
from the Township of Spring.
(Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section VIII)
Section 209. Conformance with Other Law. This Part shall in no way be a
substitute for, nor eliminate the necessity of, complying with any and all Federal and
XVII - 12
10D2554
State laws, rules and regulations, County and Township ordinances which are now, or
may be in the future, in effect which pertain to the conduct of public gatherings.
(Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section IX)
Section 210. Denial/ Revocation of Permit. Misrepresentation of any information
submitted to the Township of Spring may constitute a basis for the denial of a permit.
Noncompliance of any portion of this Part may also constitute a basis for the revocation
of a permit. (Ordinance No. 237, December 13,1993, Section X)
Section 211. Penalties.
(A) Any person, association, partnership, firm, corporation, joint
venture or any other legal entity who initiates, organizes, promotes, permits,
conducts or causes to be advertised a public gathering without obtaining the
permit provided in this Part, or who knowingly conducts, permits or allows a
public gathering with a permit but in violation of the terms and provisions of
this Part and of the permit granted, or who shall counsel, aid or abet such
violation or failure to comply, upon conviction thereof by any District Justice,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.00),
together with costs. In default of the payment of any fine, the defendant shall
be sentenced to jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
(B) Nothing herein contained shall preclude the Township of Spring
from instituting proceedings at law or in equity to prevent and /or cease the
operation of a public gathering not in conformity with the terms and provisions
of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section XI)
Section 212. Severability. The provisions of this Part shall be severable, and if
any provisions hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, invalid or illegal, by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the
remaining provisions of this Part. It is hereby declared as legislative intent that this Part
would have been enacted had such unconstitutional, invalid or illegal provisions not
been included herein. (Ordinance No. 237, December 13, 1993, Section XII)
ORDINANCENO. / //
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING, BERKS
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING PART 2 ENTITLED
"PUBLIC GATHERINGS" OF CHAPTER XVII ENTITLED
"LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS"
OF THE TOI^/NSHIP OF SPRING CODE OF ORDINANCES BY
AMENDING SECTION 208 ENTITLED 'CONDUCT OF PUBLIC
GATHERINGS' TO PROHIBIT ADULT BUSINESS USES OR OTHER
ACTIVITIES WHICH INCLUDE NUDITY OF PATRONS OR
EMPLOYEES
BE IT ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania (the "Township") and it is hereby enacted and
ordained by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 208 entitled "Conduct of Public Gatherings", of Part 2
entitled "Public Gatherings" , of Chapter XVII entitled "Licenses, Permits and General
Business Regulations", of the Code of Ordinances of the Tov,rrship of Spring is hereby
amended and restated in its entirety as follows:
"Section 208. Conduct of Public Gathering.
(A) Public gathering permittees shall maintain the sanitary and
sewage facilities, parking facilities, security and traffic control personnel,
medical service facilities and other facilities and utilities provided in
accordance with the plans submitted and approved, and in a safe and
healthful manner.
(B) No permittee or persons having control of the public
gathering, shall condone any illegal conduct on the premises including,
but not limited to, disorderly conduct or illegal possession, sale or use of
intoxicating beverages or drugs.
(C) No adult business use or other activity in which
participation by nude patrons or employees is an integral characteristic of
such use or activity shall be promoted, co-located, or conducted
contemporaneously with any part of or in relation to any public gathering,
admission to which is open to the general public. For purposes of this
subparagraph (C), the term "nltde" shall have such meaning as defined at
Section 5903 of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S. 55903, and
"contempor4neously" shall mean imy time during the period in which the
permit for public use is effective or during the same 24hour period during
| 10290102-Ordinance Public Gatherinp.s
which any other activity subject of the public gathering permit is
conducted.
(D) The burden of preserving order during the public gathering
is upon the permittees of the public gathering. Ary violations of the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or its rules and regulations, or of
the terms and conditions of this Part, or other ordinances of Berks County
or of the Township of Spring, or of the conditions of the permit granted
hereunder, may be cause for immediate revocation of the permit by the
Township of Spring upon notification to the person in charge that a
violation exists and the failure of the person in charge to take immediate
action to correct the violation. Upon revocation of any permit the
permittee of the public gathering shall immediately terminate the
assembly and provide for the orderly dispersal of those in attendance.
(E) The Township of Spring, its authorized agents and
representatives, shall be granted access to the public gathering at all times
for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of the terms and conditions
imposed herein.
(F) No entertainment, amusement or use of sound amplification
equipment shall be provided or permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and L0:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday and midnight and L0:00 a.m.
Friday and Saturday.
(G) Sponsor(s) of the public gathering and/or the person in
charge of properfy, or their designated agents or representatives, shall at
all times be in attendance at the public gathering and shall be responsible
for insuring that no person shall be allowed to remain on the premises
who is violating any State or Township laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or the Township
of Spring.
(H) Public gatherings operating without a permit under this Part
based on a reasonable anticipation of less than five hundred (500) persons
in attendance shall limit attendance therein to four hundred ninety-nine
(499) persons, and printed tickets, if utilized, shall not number more than
four hundred ninety-nine (499).
(D At the conclusion of the program/ the permittee shall
terminate the assembly or gathering and shall supervise the orderly
dispersal of,those in attendance. No one shall be permitted to remain
overnight on the licensed premises, except permanent residents, unless
I 10290l02-Ordinance Public Gatherings_
temporary overnight accommodations were previously approved by the
Township of Spring, in writing, pursuant to the application process of this
Part.
0 For public gatherings where a public highway will require
partial or full closure for the event a street usage permit must be obtained
in addition to any permit required under this Part. A separate application
must be obtained from the Township of Spring. "
SECTION 2. A11 ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. If any article, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation,
restriction, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this Ordinance is, for any reason,
declared to be illegal, unconstitutional or invalid by any Court of competent
jurisdiction, this decision shall not affect or impair the validiff of the Ordinance as a
whole, or any other article, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation,
reskiction, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or remaining portion of the within
Ordinance. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, hereby declares that it would have adopted the within Ordinance and
each article, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence,
clause, phrase and word thereof, irrespective of the limitations, restrictions, sentences,
clauses, phrases, or word that may be declared illegal, unconstitutional or invalid.
SECTION 4. This Ordinance shall become effective at the earliest date permitted
by law following the date of its enactment.
SECTION 5. The Code of Ordinances, as amended, of the Township of Spring,
Berks County, Pennsylvania shall be and remain unchanged and in full force and effect
except as amended, supplemented, and modified by this Ordinance. This Ordinance
shall become a part of the Township of Spring Code of Ordinances upon adoption.
aJ
1 10290102-Ordinance Public Gatherings
DULY ORDAINED and ENACTED as an Ordinance $is&2ehuu oil4,^4 , 2014. -T
0,*L:t(.;
Alan S. Kreider, Vice Chairman
Attest:
lsrAl.l
I 10290102-Ordinance Public Gatbrings_
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF TFIE
TOI\AISHIP OF SPRING
Berks County, Peqpsylvania
Kyle M. Hummel
MUNICIPAL CERTIFIC ATION
I, Sbe-r: I 'Roworr , (Aesletant) Secretary of the Township of
Sptirg Berks County, Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance No.
1 tt was advertised in the Reading Eagle, a daily newspaper of general circulation in
the Township of Spring, on , 201.4, and was duly enacted and
approved as set forth at a Regular
20t4.
ISEALI
I 10290102-Ordinance Publb Gatlrrings_
eting of the Board of Supervisors held onfrS?,
CHAPTER XVIII
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
(See Zoning, Chapter XXXII)
(Reserved for Future Use)
AL3080
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Sections 107
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204.
Section 205.
Section 206.
Section 207.
Section 208.
Section 209.
Section 210.
Section 211.
Section 212.
Section 213.
Section 214.
Sections 215
CHAPTER XIX
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Part 1
General Regulations
Definitions and Interpretation
Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking Regulations
Temporary and Emergency Regulations
Experimental Regulations
Authority of Police Officers
Penalty for Destroying, Etc.
- 110 Reserved for Future Ordinances
Part 2
Traffic Regulations
Motor Vehicles not to be Driven on Sidewalks
Speed Limits Established
Traffic Signals at Certain Intersections
U-Turns Prohibited
Stop Intersections Established
Certain Classes of Vehicles Prohibited on Certain Highways
Vehicle Weight Limits Established
Unlawful to Operate Motor Vehicles or Tractors on Highways
Closed for Construction or Repair
Play Highways Authorized
Accident Reports Required
One-Way Streets
Limitations on Privilege of Passing
Yield Intersection Established
Stop Controls at Locations other than Intersections
- 230 Reserved for Future Ordinances
Part 3
Parking Regulations
Section 301. Parking without Lights Authorized
Section 302. Vehicles to be Parked within Marked Spaces
XIX-1
AL3080
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Section 308.
Section 309.
Section 310.
Section 311.
Sections 312
Section 401.
Section 402.
Section 403.
Section 404.
Section 405.
Sections 406
Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations
Parking Prohibited on All Bridges
Parking Prohibited in Specific Locations Certain Days and.Hours
Parking Time Limited in Specific Locations Certain Days and
Hours
Special Purpose Parking Zones Established; Parking Otherwise
Prohibited
Handicapped Persons and/or Disabled Veterans Parking Zones
Parking Prohibited for Vehicles 25,001 Pounds or More Gross
Weight at Certain Locations
Parking or Storage of Major Recreational Equipment
Penalty for Violation.
- 320 Reserved for Future Ordinances
Part 4
Snow and Ice Emergency
Declaration of Snow and Ice Emergency
Parking Prohibited on Specific Highways During Emergency;
Restrictions on Operation of Motor Vehicles and Tractors on Such
Streets
Placement of Signs Along Highways Affected; Information on
Existence of Emergency
Highways Affected
Penalty for Violation
- 410 Reserved for Future Ordinance
Part 5
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
Section 501.
Section 502.
Section 503.
Section 504.
Section 505.
Section 506.
Section 507.
Section 508.
Section 509.
Section 510.
Authority to Remove and Impound Illegally Parked Vehicles
Approved Storage Garages
Garages to be Bonded
Towing and Storage Charges
Notification of Removal and Impounding
Effect of Payment of Towing and Impounding Charges Without
Protest
Effect of Payment of Charges Under Protest
Records of Vehicles Removed and Impounded
Owner or Operator of Vehicle Remains Liable for Fine or Penalty
Restrictions upon Removal of Vehicles
XD(-2
AL3080
Sections 511 - 520 Reserved for Future Ordinances
AL3080
AL3080
Part 1
General Regulations
Section 101. Definitions and Interpretation.
(A) Words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in The Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force,
or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
(B) The term "legal holidays" as used in this ordinance shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
(C) In this ordinance, the singular shall include the plural, the plural
shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 102. Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking Regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances
or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the Township of Spring.
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 103. Temporary and Emergency Regulations. The Board of Supervisors
shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time
of emergency:
(A) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/ or parking regulations;
(B) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic
and /or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than seventy-two (72)
hours.
Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Police Department
in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a
vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulations, or who shall move, remove,
destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of
any such regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in
the law or elsewhere in this Chapter for a violation of such nature, and, in case of a
XlX-5
AL3080
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this
Chapter, to a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a number of days
equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of unpaid balance of fine and costs.
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 104. Experimental Regulations. The Board of Supervisors may, from time
to time, designate places upon and along the highways in the Township where, for a
period of not more than ninety (90) days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this Chapter. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or
restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made by authority of this Section. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this Chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this
Chapter, to a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a number of days
equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of unpaid balance of fine and costs.
Provided: the purpose of this Section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinance
of the Township relative to traffic and parking. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007,
Section 1)
Section 105. Authority of Police Officers. The police officers of the Township are
hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways of the Township, and at
intersections thereof. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 106. Penalty for Destroying, Etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully destroy, remove, injure, or deface any guidepost or sign or index board legally
erected upon or near any public street, road, or bridge by the Supervisors, or by any
club, association, or other organized body for the direction, guidance, or safety of
travelers. It shall also be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, remove, injure or
deface any temporary traffic-control device legally erected for the purpose of enhancing
traffic or worker safety in a construction or maintenance work zone, including, but not
limited to, cones, batons, barrels, barricades, signs, sign trucks, arrow boards or other
devices specified in a traffic safety plan approved by the Township or Department of
Transportation. Any person violating this Section shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second or any subsequent offense,
with costs of prosecution, together with the value of such sign so destroyed, removed or
XIX-6
AL3080
defaced, and in default of such payment, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not
more than ten (10) days. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 107-110. Reserved for Future Ordinances (Ordinance No. 351, December
27, 2007, Section 1)
AL3080
Part 2
Traffic Regulations
Section 201. Motor Vehicles Not to be Driven on Sidewalks. No person shall
operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in the Township; nor shall any
person operate a motor vehicle upon or across any sidewalk except in order to gain
access to or egress from a driveway or alley at such locations where the curb, if such
sidewalk is curbed, shall have been properly cut down for the purpose. Any person
who shall violate any provision of this Section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than
ten (10) days. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 202. Speed Limits Established. The following speed limits are hereby
established:
Highway Between Speed Limit
Adamstown Road Vinemont Road and Adamstown 40 mph
Borough line
Beacon Drive Spohn Road and Iroquois Avenue 35 mph
Beacon Drive Spohn Road and Old Fritztown 25 mph
Road
Belmont Avenue Intervilla Avenue and 25 mph
Sinking Spring Borough Line
Berks Place Grandview Boulevard and 25 mph
Van Reed Road
Bran Road Fritztown Road and Mohn's Hill 40 mph
Road
Broadcasting Road Paper Mill Road and State 40 mph
Hill Road
Broadcasting Road State Hill Road and Wellington 25 mph
Boulevard
Broadcasting Road Tulpehocken Road and Paper 35 mph
XD(-8
AL3080
Mill Road
Chapel Hill Road Fritztown Road and Old 30 mph
Lancaster Pike
Charles Boulevard Wheatfield Road and Cumru 25 mph
Township Line
Clark Avenue Hillvale Avenue and Reading 25 mph
Boulevard
Colony Drive Paper Mill Road and State 25 mph
Hill Road
Daniel Drive Old Fritztown Road and western 25 mph
intersection with Regency Drive
Dwight Street Garfield Avenue and Penn 25 mph
Avenue
Dwight Street Penn Avenue and Grandview 25 mph
Boulevard
Fairview Street Woodside Avenue and Grandview 25 mph
Boulevard
Frederick Street Morgan Drive and Old Fritztown 35 mph
Road
Garfield Avenue Dwight Street and Shillington 25 mph
Road
Gelsinger Road Chapel Hill Road and Grings 40 mph
Hill Road
Grandview Boulevard Snyder Road and Sinking Spring 25 mph
Borough Line
Gring Drive Snyder Road and Broadcasting 25 mph
Road
Gring's Hill Road Old Fritztown Road and Cumru 30 mph
Township Line
XD( -9
AL3080
Halsey Avenue Hillvale Avenue and western 25 mph
intersection with McKinley Avenue
Harvard Boulevard Jefferson Boulevard and Cumru 25 mph
Township Line
Hiester Boulevard Shillington Road and Garfield 25 mph
Avenue
Hillvale Avenue Iroquois Avenue and Jefferson 25 mph
Avenue
Holtzman Road Fritztown Road and East Cocalico 35 mph
Township boundary line
Iroquois Avenue Beacon Drive and Shillington Road 35 mph
Jefferson Avenue Hillvale Avenue and Jefferson 25 mph
Boulevard
Jefferson Boulevard Cambridge Avenue and Jefferson 25 mph
Avenue
Keiser Boulevard Broadcasting Road and Village 25 mph
Drive
Lawrence Avenue Harvard Boulevard and Jefferson 25 mph
Avenue
Mail Route Road Kocher Road and one-half mile 35 mph
South of Kocher Road
Martin's Road Gring's Hill Road and Sinking 25 mph
Spring Borough Line
Meridian Boulevard Broadcasting Road and Paper 35 mph
Mill Road
Merritt Parkway Whitfield Boulevard and Sinking 25 mph
Spring Borough Line
Mohn's Hill Road Cumru Township Line and 40 mph
XLX-10
AL3080
Monte llo Road
Morgan Drive
Noble Street
North Meridian
Boulevard
North Village Drive
Old Fritztown Road
Old Fritztown Road
Old Fritztown Road
Old Lancaster Pike
Perkasie Avenue
Reading Boulevard
Reedy Road
Regency Drive
Sage Drive
St. Alban's Drive
Vinemont Road
Fritztown Road and South
Heidelberg Township line
Old Fritztown Road and
Shillington Road
Morwood Avenue and Cecil Avenue
Paper Mill Road and Broadcasting
Road
Keiser Boulevard and Van Reed
Road
Fritztown Road and Gring's
Hill Road
Grings Hill Road and Frederick
Street
Revere Boulevard and Frederick
Street
Vinemont Road and Fur low Road
Penn Avenue and Fairview Street
Wyomissing Borough line and
Marshall Avenue
Sinking Spring Borough line and
State Hill Road
Daniel Drive and Martin's Road
Cumru Township Line and
Goose Lane
Whitfield Boulevard and
Sunset Drive
XD( -11
25 mph
35 mph
25 mph
25 mph
25 mph
30 mph
35 mph
25 mph
35 mph
25 mph
35 mph
25 mph
25 mph
25 mph
25 mph
AL3080
Shakespeare Drive Shillington Road and Spohn 25 mph
Road
Snyder Road Grandview Boulevard and Van 25 mph
Reed Road
Spohn Road Windmill Road and Old Fritztown 25 mph
Road
Tulpehocken Road Wyomissing Borough Line and 25 mph
Broadcasting Road
Tulpehocken Road Broadcasting Road and Paper 35 mph
Mill Road
Village Drive Van Reed Road and Keiser 25 mph
Boulevard
Vinemont Road Old Lancaster Pike and 40 mph
Fritztown Road
Weidman Avenue Reedy Road and Sinking Spring 25 mph
Borough Line
Wellington Boulevard Snyder Road and Wyomissing 25 mph
Borough Line
West Wyomissing Penn Avenue to Revere Boulevard 35 mph
Boulevard
Whitfield Boulevard Van Reed Road and Reedy Road 25 mph
Wilshire Boulevard Van Reed Road and Reedy Road 25 mph
Woodside Avenue Penn Avenue and Fairview Street 25 mph
Wyoming Drive Martin's Road and Iroquois 25 mph
Avenue
Any person who shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of that established
therefore, upon any highway or portion thereof specified in this Section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) and costs of
prosecution. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five (5)
XJX -12
AL3080
miles shall pay an additional fine of two dollars ($2.00) per mile for each mile in excess
of five (5) miles per hour over the maximum speed limit. In default of payment of such
fine and costs, the person so convicted shall be imprisoned for a number of days equal
to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of unpaid balance of fine and costs.
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 203. Traffic Signals at Certain Intersections. At the following
intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or if heretofore erected are hereby
ratified), and traffic at such intersections shall be directed by such signals:
Bradley Avenue and Shillington Road
Broadcasting Road and S R 277 Northbound Ramps
Broadcasting Road and S R 77? Southbound Ramps
Broadcasting Road and Keiser Boulevard
Broadcasting Road and North Meridian Boulevard
Dwight Street and Van Reed Road
Fritztown Road and Old Fritztown Road
Iroquois Avenue and Shillington Road
North Meridian Boulevard and Broadcasting Square Drive
Paper Mill Road and Broadcasting Road
Paper Mill Road and Broadcasting Square Drive
Paper Mill Road and Century Boulevard
Paper Mill Road and Colony Drive
Paper Mill Road and Meridian Boulevard
Penn Avenue and S R 777 Southbound Ramps
Penn Avenue and Cecil Avenue
Penn Avenue and Dwight Street
XDC-13
AL3080
Penn Avenue and Morwood Avenue
Penn Avenue and Perkasie Avenue
Penn Avenue and Stevens Avenue
Penn Avenue and Woodside Avenue
Revere Boulevard and Cloister Court
Revere Boulevard and Harvard Boulevard
Revere Boulevard and West Wyomissing Boulevard
Shillington Road and S R 277 Southbound Ramps
Shillington Road and Shakespeare Drive
Shillington Road and Spring Towne Center Eastside Drive
State Hill Road and Broadcasting Road
State Hill Road and Salem Road
State Hill Road and Van Reed Road
State Hill Road and Westview Drive
State Hill Road and Yerger Boulevard
Van Reed Road and Paper Mill Road
Van Reed Road and Snyder Road
West Wyomissing Boulevard and Reading Boulevard
Any operator of a vehicle who shall disobey the directions of any traffic signal shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of unpaid balance
of fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
XDC14
AL3080
Section 204. U-Turns Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle or tractor to make a U-turn at any of the following highway intersections in the
Township. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of unpaid balance
of fine and costs.
Dwight Street and Ellen Avenue
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 205. Stop Intersections Established. The following intersections are
hereby established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are
hereby confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching
the second-named highway upon the first-named highway, in the direction or
directions hereby indicated. All vehicles and tractors approaching any such intersection
upon the first-named highway, in the direction or directions hereby indicated in each
case, shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
intersection:
Stop Highway
Acorn Drive
Adamstown Road
Albert Drive
Alden Lane
Alicia Circle
Amherst Avenue
Andre Court
Andrew Court
Andrew Drive
Through Highway
Hearthstone Lane
Vinemont Road
Old Fritztown Road
Province Road
Charles Boulevard
Stanford Avenue
Harvard Boulevard
Princeton Avenue
Filmore Avenue
Broadcasting Road
Overland Avenue
Huyette Drive
XIX-15
Direction of Travel
West
North
North
South
West
North and South
East and West
East and West
West
West
West
West
AL3080
Overland Avenue
Goddard Drive
East
East and West
Apache Drive Wyoming Drive South South
Wyoming Drive North West
Apple Drive Wellington Boulevard South
Apple Place Wellington Boulevard North and South
Buckman Avenue North
Arrowhead Trail Old Fritztown Road North
Ashley Drive Marcor Drive East
Thomas Place West
Augusta Drive East Martin's Road West
Wyoming Drive North
Augusta Drive West Martin's Road East
Regency Drive South
Avon Avenue Spohn Road West
Bainbridge Circle Frederick Street East
Bard Avenue Avon Avenue North
Shakespeare Drive South and North
Andrew Drive South
Bare Path Hearthstone Lane South
Beacon Drive Spohn Road East and West
Old Fritztown Road South
Beaver Road Blimline Road North
Bell Drive Sledge Avenue North and South
Snyder Road North
Berks Place South
XD( -16
AL3080
Belmont Avenue
Berks Place
Billy Drive
Blimline Road
Blue Gate Lane
Bradley Avenue
Bran Road
Bressler Drive
Brevity Lane
Brian Lane
Broadcasting Road
Buckman Avenue
Norman Street
Park Place
Stevens Avenue
West Court Boulevard
Cecil Avenue
Intervilla Avenue
Garden Lane
Van Reed Road
Wassner Drive
Bran Road
Deer Creek Road
Hearthstone Lane
South Mountain Drive
Avon Avenue
Shakespeare Drive
Spohn Road
Mohn's Hill Road
Berks Place
Burkey Drive
Gring Drive
Sledge Avenue
Snyder Road
Grandview Boulevard
Van Reed Road
Whitfield Boulevard
Yerger Boulevard
Buckman Avenue
Gring Drive
Tulpehocken Road
Redwood Avenue
East and West
West
East and West
East
East and West
East
East and West
West
East and West
South
West
East
North
North and South
South
North
South
South
East
West
East
North and South
South
West
South
North
North and South
North and South
North
South
Evergreen Drive West
M-17
AL3080
Burkey Drive
Cacoosing Drive
Calco Avenue
Cambridge Avenue
Canberra Court
Carmen Drive
Cecil Avenue
Chapel Hill Road
Charles Boulevard
Charlotte Avenue
Chesire Court
Church Road
Clark Avenue
Cleveland Avenue
Colt Street
Colony Drive
Bressler Drive
Evergreen Drive
Buckman Road
Wernersville Road
Old Fritztown Road
Jefferson Boulevard
Bainbridge Circle
Gring Drive
Wellington Boulevard
Belmont Avenue
Mohn's Hill Road
Old Lancaster Pike
Matthew Drive
Wheatfield Road
Halsey Avenue
Hillvale Avenue
Frederick Street
Mail Route Road
Hillvale Avenue
Dwight Street
Logan Avenue
Morwood Avenue
West Wyomissing Blvd.
Wilson Street
Grand Boulevard
Sage Drive
Alden Lane
XD( -18
North
East and West
South
North and South
North
West
West
North
South
North and South
North and South
South
North and South
South
North
South
East
West
South
West
East and West
East and West
East and West
East and West
East
West
North and South
AL3080
Clover Drive Gring Drive South
Commerce Drive Keiser Boulevard West
Meridian Boulevard East
Connor Court Billy Drive/ Kate Drive South
Concord Road Gage Avenue North and South
Lexington Drive South
Colony Drive East
Conestoga Drive Sage Drive North
Colt Street South
Cornell Avenue Jefferson Boulevard West
Cotswold Road Reedy Road East
Chiselford Drive North
Coventry Lane Kathleen Lane West and North
Craig Avenue Independence Drive South
Lilac Lane North
Cromwell Drive Paper Mill Road North
Westwood Road West
Curtis Road Brevity Lane North and South
Dwight Street East
Stevens Avenue Northeast and
Southwest
Cypress Lane Broadcasting Road East
Gring Drive West
Dalin Drive Linda Lane South
Daniel Drive Old Fritztown Road South
Regency Drive South
Deborah Drive Regency Drive South
Daniel Drive North
XIX-19
AL3080
Deer Creek Court Deer Creek Road East
Deer Creek Road Old Lancaster Pike North
Dogwood Drive Dalin Drive East and West
Merritt Parkway East and West
Reedy Road West
St. Alban's Drive East
Dorchester Avenue Filmore Avenue North and South
Wadsworth Avenue North and South
Duffield Lane Chiselford Drive North
Cotswold Road West
Durwood Drive Dalin Drive West
Independence Drive North
Dwight Street Belmont Avenue North and South
East Court Boulevard Belmont Avenue North
Eisenhower Court Eisenhower Court North
Girard Avenue South
Ellen Avenue Dwight Street North
Brevity Lane South
Elm Place East Court Boulevard West
Dwight Street East
Elmwood Avenue Harvard Boulevard East
Princeton Avenue East and West
Elsworth Drive Wheatfield Road North
Emerson Avenue Shakespeare Drive West
Erie Drive Regency Drive South
Esther Circle Marie Drive South
XD( -20
AL3080
Evergreen Drive
Fairview Street
Fillmore Avenue
Franklin Place
Frederick Street
Gage Avenue
Garden Lane
Garfield Avenue
Gelsinger Road
Gerard Avenue
Girard Avenue
Glenfield Court
Gloucester Avenue
Goddard Avenue
Wellington Boulevard
Bressler Drive
Woodside Avenue
Telford Street
Grandview Boulevard
Harvard Boulevard
Clover Drive
Morgan Drive
Old Fritztown Road
Colony Drive
Sherwood Drive
Lenore Place
Hiester Boulevard
Marshall Avenue
Morwood Avenue
Shillington Road
West Lawn Avenue
Wilson Street
West Wyomissing Blvd.
Gring's Hill Road
Chapel Hill Road
Peachwood Drive
Clark Avenue
Eisenhower Court
Harrison Avenue
Reading Boulevard/
Clark Avenue
Hillvale Avenue
Colony Drive
Old Fritztown Road
X1X-21
North and South
West
East and West
East and West
West
East
South
North
East
East
West
North
West
East and West
East and West
South
East and West
East and West
East and West
East
West
North
East and West
East
East
East and West
West
West
South
AL3080
Gold Street
Goose Lane
Grandview Boulevard
Gravel Hill Lane
Gring Drive
Gring's Hill Road
Grizzly Road
Hain Road
Hale Court
Halsey Avenue
Harper Road
Harrison Avenue
Harvard Boulevard
Hearthstone Lane
Hiester Boulevard
Henry Circle
Herington Drive
Old Fritztown Road
Chapel Hill Road
Berks Place
Dwight Street
Snyder Road
Stevens Avenue
Timber Lane
Burkey Drive
Evergreen Drive
Snyder Road
Old Fritztown Road
Old Lancaster Pike
Old Fritztown Road
Broadcasting Road
Hillvale Avenue
McKinley Avenue
Broadcasting Road
Cleveland Avenue
Garfield Avenue
Reading Boulevard
Jefferson Boulevard
Gring's Hill Road
Persimmon Drive
Shillington Road
Lutz Drive
Wheatfield Road
XIX-22
East
West
East and West
East and West
East
East and West
West
East and West
East and West
East and West
North
South
North
East
South
East and West
West
North
North and South
North and South
North and South
South
North and South
South
South
North
AL3080
Hiester Boulevard Girard Avenue
Highland Street
Hillvale Avenue
Howard Street
Huyett Drive
Independence Drive
Indiandale Road
Intervilla Avenue
Ironstone Lane
Ivy Lane
Jacob Drive
Jefferson Avenue
Jefferson Boulevard
Jennifer Court
Perkasie Avenue
Telford Avenue
Woodside Avenue
Riegel Avenue
Spohn Road
Garfield Avenue
Hiester Boulevard
Belmont Avenue
Grandview Boulevard
Penn Avenue
Beacon Drive
Bard Avenue
Dogwood Drive
Merritt Parkway
St. Albans Drive
Whitfield Boulevard
Vinemont Road
Highland Street
Noble Street
Penn Avenue
South Mountain Drive
Hearthstone Lane
Kevin Court
Burkey Drive
Goddard Avenue
Overland Avenue
West Wyomissing Blvd.
Wadsworth Avenue
Fritztown Road
XD( -23
North
East and West
East and West
East and West
East and West
West
East and West
East and West
North and South
North
South
South
East
North and South
East and West
East
North
North
North
North and South
South
North
South
West
East
West
East
East and West
North and South
West
AL3080
Jerome Place Bressler Drive West
John Henry Drive Overland Avenue South
Joshua Drive Goddard Avenue South
John Henry Drive South
Kate Drive Bran Road South
Katherine Drive Susanna Drive South
Daniel Drive North
Kathleen Lane Village Drive South and East
Kay Court Gring Drive North
Keats Drive Andrew Drive South
Emerson Avenue North
Keiser Boulevard Village Drive West
Westview Drive South
Kendel Court Frederick Street East
Belmont Avenue North and South
Penn Avenue South
Kevin Court Evergreen Drive South
Kickapoo Drive Mohegan Drive South
Regency Drive West
Kingston Drive Wyoming Drive North
Keppel Avenue
Kocher Road Mohn's Hill Road East
Mail Route Road West
Kutz Court
Laird Street
Linda le Road West
Belmont Avenue North and South
Grandview Boulevard North
Penn Avenue South
X1X-24
AL3080
LaSalle Drive Snyder Road East
Berks Place West
Laurel Road Snyder Road East
Garden Lane South
Lawrence Avenue Harvard Boulevard South
Jefferson Avenue North
Wadsworth Avenue North and South
Leland Avenue Jefferson Boulevard West
Lenape Drive Pequot Drive South
Wyoming Drive North
Lenore Court Lenore Place West
Lenore Place Linda le Drive East
Lexington Drive Westwood Road West
Colony Drive East
Lilac Lane
Lincoln Avenue
Linda Lane
Linda le Road
Logan Avenue
Lucinda Lane
Mail Route Road
St. Alban's Drive East
Merritt Parkway West
West Lawn Avenue
West Wyomissing Blvd.
Harrison Avenue
East and West
East and West
East and West
Sunset Drive North and South
Wilshire Boulevard North and South
Snyder Road East
Berks Place West
Garfield Avenue North and South
Portland North
Reading Avenue North and South
Lucinda Lane East
Village Drive South
Vinemont Road South
XIX-25
AL3080
Marcor Drive Weidman Avenue South
Wilshire Boulevard South
Marie Drive Sage Drive West
Michael Drive East
Marshall Avenue Cleveland Avenue North
Martin's Road Old Fritztown Road South
Matthew Drive Marie Drive South
McKinley Avenue Harrison Avenue East and West
Halsey Avenue North and South
Meridian Boulevard Broadcasting Road East
Merion Drive August Drive East South
Wyoming Drive North
Merritt Parkway
Mesa Drive
Sunset Drive North and South
Whitfield Boulevard North
Wilshire Boulevard North and South
Colt Street South
Sage Drive North
Michael Drive Charles Boulevard East
Miller Road Gelsinger Road West
Gring's Hill Road East
Mohawk Drive Mohegan Drive South
Regency Drive North
Mohegan Drive Regency Drive East and West
Mohn's Hill Road Vinemont Road North and South
Monroe Avenue West Wyomissing Blvd. East and West
Harrison Avenue West
Montieth Avenue Hillvale Avenue South
XD( -26
AL3080
Charlotte Avenue North
Morgan Drive Old Fritztown Road South
Morwood Avenue Reading Avenue North and South
McKinley Avenue West Wyomissing Blvd. East and West
Harrison Avenue East and West
Nash Road Martin's Road West
Wagner Circle East
New Street Grandview Boulevard North
Noble Street Morwood Avenue East
Perkasie Avenue East and West
Telford Avenue East and West
Woodside Avenue East and West
Riegel Avenue East and West
Cecil Avenue West
Norman Street Grandview Boulevard North
Penn Avenue South
North Wagner Circle
Oak Lane
Octagon Avenue
Iroquois Avenue North
Burkey Drive South
Clover Drive North
Sunset Drive North and South
Wilshire Boulevard North and South
Independence Drive North
Old Lancaster Pike Blimline Road South
Fur low Road South
Old Wernersville Road Fritztown Road East
Wernersville Road West
Oneida Drive Wyoming Drive North South
Ossington Avenue Garfield Avenue West
Hiester Boulevard East
XD(-27
AL3080
Overland Avenue
Oxford Avenue
Paper Mill Road
Park Place
Pequot Drive
Peachwood Drive
Perkasie Avenue
Persimmon Drive
Plymouth Circle
Portland Avenue
Prendergast Road
Princeton Avenue
Province Road
Quarry Drive
Radcliffe Avenue
Ray Road
Reading Avenue
Goddard Avenue
Old Fritztown Road
Jefferson Boulevard
West
South
West
Southbound SR222 Ramp West
Tulpehocken Road
Belmont Avenue
Dwight Street
Regency Drive
St. Alban's Drive
Octagon Avenue
Fairview Street
Spring Street
Blue Gate Lane
Colony Drive
Morwood Avenue
Van Reed Road
Harvard Boulevard
Jefferson Boulevard
Revere Boulevard
Colony Drive
Snyder Road
Jefferson Avenue
Halsey Avenue
Weidman Avenue
West Lawn Avenue
West Wyomissing Blvd.
XD(-28
West
South
East
West
East
West
South
North and South
West
East
East
East
North and South
North
South
East
South
South
North
North
East and West
West
AL3080
Reading Boulevard
Rebecca Drive
Redwood Drive
Reedy Road
Regency Drive
Riegel Avenue
Rocky Drive
Rosewood Court
Saddle Court
Sage Drive
Salem Road
St. Alban's Drive
Shakespeare Drive
Shearer's Road
Shelby Drive
Grand Boulevard
Logan Avenue
Morwood Avenue
Marshall Avenue
West Lawn Avenue
Old Fritztown Road
Spohn Road
Gring Drive
Wellington Boulevard
State Hill Road
Whitfield Boulevard
Daniel Drive
Martins Road
Penn Avenue
Fairview Street
Grandview Boulevard
Quarry Drive
Van Reed Road
Evergreen Drive
Mesa Drive
Goose Lane
Province Road
Wilshire Boulevard
Whitefield Boulevard
Avon Avenue
Spohn Road
Mail Route Road
Nash Road
XIX-29
East
East and West
East and West
East and West
East and West
South
East
North
North and South
North
North and South
East
East and West
South
South
North
West
East
South
West
South
North
North and South
North
North and South
West
North
North
AL3080
Shellbark Drive Hearthstone Lane
Blue Gate Lane
Sherwood Road Cromwell Drive
Simon Drive Andrew Drive
Goddard Avenue
Singer Road Paper Mill Road
Snyder Road
South Mountain Drive
South Wagner Circle
Spohn Road
Spring Ridge Drive
Spring Street
Springside Drive
Stanford Avenue
Stevens Avenue
Sunset Drive
Laurel Road/ Wellington
Boulevard
Gring Drive
Yerger Boulevard
Gring's Hill Road
Bare Path
Iroquois Avenue
Old Fritztown Road
Bradley Avenue
Northbound SR222 Ramps
Intervilla Avenue
Riegel Avenue
Woodside Avenue
Telford Avenue
Perkasie Avenue
Revere Boulevard
Dorchester Avenue
Jefferson Boulevard
Lawrence Avenue
Van Reed Road
Marcor Drive
XD(-30
East
West
North
East
West
North
East and West
East and West
West
West
East and West
South
South
North
South
West
East and West
East and West
East and West
East and West
North
East and West
Northeast and
Southwest
East and West
West
West
AL3080
Susanna Drive
Sylvan Place
Telford Avenue
Temple Drive
Tennyson Avenue
Thomas Place
Timber Lane
Tom Lisa Court
Unami Drive
Village Drive
Vinemont Road
Wadsworth Avenue
Wassner Drive
Weidman Avenue
Wellington Avenue
Daniel Drive
Deborah Drive
Weidman Avenue
Spring Street
Fairview Street
Penn Avenue
Beacon Drive
Spohn Road
Shakespeare Drive
Bradley Avenue
Octagon
Van Reed Road
Wilshire Boulevard
Marcor Drive
Acorn Drive
Hain Road
Wyoming Drive North
Van Reed Road
Old Lancaster Pike
Wellington Avenue
Sledge Avenue
Snyder Road
Reedy Road
Cambridge Avenue
Harvard Boulevard
Oxford Avenue
Leland Avenue
Stanford Avenue
MX-31
West
East
North
North and South
North and South
South
East
West
East and West
West
West
East and West
North and South
South
North
North
North and West
West
East
East
North and South
East
West
South
North and South
East
North and South
North and South
AL3080
Wellington Blvd. Broadcasting Road
Snyder Road
Fritztown Road
z Penn Avenue
Wernersville Boulevard
West Court Boulevard
West Lawn Avenue
Westview Drive
Westwood Road
West Wyomissing Court
Wheatfie ld Road
White Oak Drive
Whitfield Blvd.
Whittier Blvd.
Wilshire Boulevard
Wilson Avenue
Wilson Street
Windmill Road
Woodside Avenue
Cleveland Avenue
Broadcasting Road
Cromwell Drive
York Road
Sherwood Road
West Wyomissing Boulevard
Chapel Hill Road
Gring's Hill Road
Bare Path
Blue Gate Lane
Dalin Drive
Merritt Parkway
Shakespeare Drive
Macor Drive
Merritt Parkway
Octagon Avenue
Reedy Road
Reading Boulevard
Belmont Avenue
Penn Avenue
Iroquois Avenue
Spohn Road
Highland Street
XIX-32
East and West
West
East
South
North and South
West
South
North and South
North and South
West
West
East
East
West
East and West
East and West
West
East and West
East and West
East and West
West
South
North and South
South
West
East
North and South
AL3080
Woods Way
Wyoming Drive
Wyoming Drive South
York Road
Van Reed Road
Iroquois Avenue
Martin's Road
Martin's Road
Lexington Drive
West
East and West
East and West
East
North
Any operator of a vehicle who shall fail to come to a full stop, within a reasonable
distance, before entering any stop intersection, as hereinabove required, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a
number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of the unpaid balance
of the fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 206. Certain Classes of Vehicles Prohibited on Certain Highways. It shall
be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle, motor home, truck or truck tractor,
or tractor, having a maximum gross vehicle weight rating over twenty-six thousand
(26,000) pounds, as indicated by the manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating on plate
affixed to such vehicle by the manufacturer except a passenger vehicle (but not
including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or towing any other vehicle) upon
any of the following portions of the highways in the Township, except for local
deliveries:
Highway
Bradley Avenue
Bradley Avenue
Brevity Lane
Broadcasting Road
Broadcasting Road
Chapel Hill Road
Charles Boulevard
Colony Drive
Between
Shillington Road and Shakespeare Drive
Hilivale Avenue and Shakespeare Drive
Van Reed Road and Grandview Boulevard
State Hill Road and Redwood Avenue
State Hill Road and Tulpehocken Road
Old Lancaster Pike and Mohn's Hill Road
Wheatfield Road and Cumru Township Line
State Hill Road and Paper Mill Road
XIX-33
AL3080
Cromwell Drive
Dogwood Drive
Dwight Street
Garfield Avenue
Goose Lane
Grings Hill Road
Hain Road
Harvard Boulevard
Hiester Boulevard
Hillvale Avenue
Iroquois Avenue
Jefferson Blvd.
Martin's Road
Meridian Boulevard
Mohn's Hill Road
Morwood Avenue
North Village Drive
Old Fritztown Road
Perkasie Avenue
Princeton Avenue
Reading Boulevard
Paper Mill Road and dead end of Cromwell Drive
Reedy Road and St. Alban's Drive
Van Reed Road and Penn Avenue
Shillington Road and Grand Boulevard
Cumru Township Line and Chapel Hill Road
Cumru Township line and Old Fritztown Road
Cumru Township Line to Old Fritztown Road
Revere Boulevard and Wyomissing Borough Line
Shillington Road and Garfield Avenue
Shillington Road and Iroquois Avenue
Beacon Drive and Hillvale Avenue
Cumru Township Line and Jefferson Avenue
Borough of Sinking Spring Line to Gring's Hill Road
Paper Mill Road and Broadcasting Road
SR 277 and Chapel Hill Road
Penn Avenue and Wyomissing Borough Line
Van Reed Road and Keiser Boulevard
Revere Boulevard and Fritztown Road
Penn Avenue and Wyomissing Borough Line
Revere Boulevard and Jefferson Boulevard
Borough of Wyomissing Line and West Wyomissing
Boulevard
XIX-34
AL3080
Riegel Avenue
S. Dwight Street
Sage Drive
Salem Road
Shakespeare Drive
Singer Road
Snyder Road
Stevens Avenue
Thomas Place
Tulpehocken Road
Village Drive
Weidman Avenue
Westview Road
West Wyomissing Blvd.
Whitfield Blvd.
Wilshire Blvd.
Woodside Avenue
Penn Avenue and Grandview Boulevard
Penn Avenue and Garfield Avenue
Old Lancaster Pike and Goose Lane
State Hill and Province Road
Shillington Road and Spohn Road
Paper Mill Road and Glouchester Avenue
Van Reed Road and Grandview Boulevard
Van Reed Road and Penn Avenue
Van Reed Road and Octagon Avenue
Wyomissing Borough Line and Paper Mill Road
Van Reed Road and Keiser Boulevard
Reedy Road and Sinking Spring Borough Line
State Hill Road and Broadcasting Road
Revere Boulevard and Penn Avenue
Reedy Road and Van Reed Road
Van Reed Road and Reedy Road
Penn Avenue and Grandview Boulevard
For purpose of this Section, "local delivery" shall only include delivery of
household-related goods or materials to an existing residential dwelling or a residential
dwelling that is under construction and for which a building permit has been issued by
the Township. Otherwise, any vehicle exceeding 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight
may only be operated upon these highways pursuant to a permit issued upon written
request of the operator and submission of financial security in such amount as deemed
necessary by the Township Roadmaster to secure the Township for damage to the
highway or highways as may reasonably be anticipated as a result of such vehicle's
operation upon the highway or highways.
XDC-35
AL3080
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment
a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of the unpaid balance
of the fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 207. Vehicle Weight Limits Established. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any motor vehicle or other tractor, trailer, or tractor-trailer
combination, having a gross weight in excess of that herein respectively prescribed,
upon any of the following highways, bridges, or portions thereof:
Highway
Reedy Road
Reedy Road
Between
Maximum
Gross Weight
A point approximately 1,590 feet 6,000 lbs.
North of Whitfield Boulevard and
the Lower Heidelberg Township Line
A point approximately 2,400 feet 18,000 lbs.
South of State Hill Road and the
Lower Heidelberg Township Line
Any person operating a vehicle or other tractor, trailer, or tractor-trailer
combination, upon any of the foregoing highways, bridges or portions thereof in excess
of the foregoing weight limitations shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of
the unpaid balance of the fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007,
Section 1)
Section 208. Unlawful to Operate Motor Vehicles or Tractors on Highways
Closed for Construction or Repair. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
vehicle or tractor upon any highway in the Township that is under construction,
resurfacing or repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same
is closed to vehicular traffic. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of the unpaid
balance of the fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 209. Play Highways Authorized. The Board of Supervisors is hereby
authorized to designate as play highways, whenever it shall deem such action advisable
XD(-36
AL3080
and for whatever period of time deemed appropriate, any portion of any highway in
the Township whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such highway shall be
set apart for this purpose under the direction of the Board of Supervisors. No person
shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any play highway at any time when
such highway shall be so designated, except in case of emergency, with special
permission of the Board of Supervisors or of the police officer in charge, who shall first
clear such play highway of all persons using such highway for the purpose for which it
was set aside. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of
the unpaid balance of the fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007,
Section 1)
Section 210. Accident Reports Required. The operator of any motor vehicle
involved in an accident in the Township and required by law to report such accident to
any department or agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other person
required to make such report shall, at the time of making such report to the
Commonwealth, make a written report to the Chief of Police of the Township
containing the same information. Any person failing to make the report to the Chief of
Police hereby required shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten
dollars ($10.00) of the unpaid balance of the fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351,
December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 211. One-Way Streets. The following one-way streets are hereby
established:
One-Way Street Between Direction of Travel
Alley South of Penn Avenue Woodside Avenue and East
Telford Avenue
Hiester Boulevard Shillington Road and North
Garfield Avenue
Garfield Avenue Dwight Street and South
Hillvale Avenue
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in
default thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for a number of days equal to one (1) day
XIX-37
AL3080
for each ten dollars ($10.00) of the unpaid balance of the fine and costs. (Ordinance
No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 212. Limitations on Privilege of Passing. The following non-passing
streets are hereby established:
Non-Passing Street Between
Jefferson Avenue West Wyomissing Boulevard and
Jefferson Boulevard
Jefferson Boulevard Jefferson Avenue and Cambridge Avenue
West Wyomissing Jefferson Avenue and Penn Avenue
Boulevard
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in
default thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for a number of days equal to one (1) day
for each ten dollars ($10.00) of the unpaid balance of the fine and costs. (Ordinance
No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 213. Yield Intersection Established. The following yield intersections are
hereby established:
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Lenore Place Laurel Road West
Any operator of a vehicle who shall fail to yield right of way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute a hazard
during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection of roadways,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of
the unpaid balance of the fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007,
Section 1)
Section 214. Stop Controls at Locations other than Intersections. At the
following locations, official traffic signals shall be erected (or if heretofore erected are
hereby ratified), and traffic at such locations shall be directed by such signals:
Road Direction Description
XD( -38
AL3080
Mail Route Road East 207 feet East of the South Heidelberg
Township Line
Mail Route Road West 307 feet East of the South Heidelberg
Township Line
Any operator of a vehicle who shall disobey the directions of any traffic signal shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of unpaid balance
of fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Sections 215 - 230. Reserved for Future Ordinances. (Ordinance No. 351,
December 27, 2007, Section 1)
AL3080
Part 3
Parking Regulations
Section 301. Parking Without Lights Authorized. The boundary limits of the
Township of Spring are hereby established as a zone in which motor vehicles may
remain standing without lights as long as legally parked, and all highways within such
boundary limits are hereby designated as highways where motor vehicles may remain
standing without lights as long as legally parked. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27,
2007, Section 1)
Section 302. Vehicles to be Parked Within Marked Spaces. Wherever a space
shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every
vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding such space.
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 303. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations. Parking shall
be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Highway Side Between
Amherst Avenue South Dorchester Avenue and a point 500 feet
West of Dorchester Avenue
Belmont Avenue South Wilson Street and a point 50 feet West of
Wilson Street
North Intervilla Avenue and Cecil Avenue
North Cecil Avenue and alley to West of Cecil
Avenue
Berks Place East Grandview Boulevard and a point 75 feet
South of Grandview Boulevard
Bradley Avenue Both Shillington Road and a point 106 feet
North of Shillington Road
Both Shillington Road and a point 136 feet
South of Shillington Road
Broadcasting Road East State Hill Road and Andre Court
Cecil Avenue East Penn Avenue and a point 50 feet North of
Penn Avenue
East Belmont Avenue and a point 50 feet South
of Belmont Avenue
XIX-40
AL3080
Highway Side Between
West Belmont Avenue and a point 50 feet South
of Belmont Avenue
West Penn Avenue and a point 70 feet North of
Penn Avenue
East Highland Street and a point 30 feet South
of Highland Street
Dwight Street East Garfield Avenue and Cleveland Avenue
East Grandview Boulevard and Ellen Avenue
West Van Reed Road and Ellen Avenue
East Van Reed Road and a point 100 feet South
of Van Reed Road
Fairview Street South Grandview Boulevard and a point 122 feet
East of the centerline intersection with
Grandview Boulevard
Fairview Street North Grandview Boulevard and a point 45 feet
East of the centerline of the intersection
with Grandview Boulevard
Girard Avenue Both Harrison Avenue West to terminus thereof
in Township Recreation Area
Grandview Boulevard South Fairview Street and a point 328 feet East of
Fairview Street
Harrison Avenue West Girard Avenue and a point 46 feet North
of Monroe Avenue
Both Girard Avenue and a point 100 feet South
of Reading Boulevard
Harvard Boulevard West Revere Boulevard and a point 114 feet
North of Revere Boulevard
Highland Street South Cecil Avenue and a point 30 feet East of
Cecil Avenue
Hillvale Avenue Both Garfield Avenue and a point 66 feet West
of Garfield Avenue
North Garfield Avenue and Bradley Avenue
Howard Street East Belmont Avenue and Grandview
Boulevard
XIX-41
AL3080
Highway
Iroquois Avenue
Keppel Street
Laird Street
Lancaster Pike
Meridian Boulevard
Noble Street
Norman Street
Old Fritztown Road
Penn Avenue
Side
Both
Both
West
East
West
Both
South
North
East
Both
Both
South
South
Between
Shillington Road and a point 112 feet
North of Shillington Road
Shillington Road and a point 124 feet
South of Shillington Road
Penn Avenue and a point 204 feet North of
Penn Avenue
Belmont Avenue and Grandview
Boulevard
Blimline Road and a point North of
Blimline Road
Paper Mill Road and a point 475 feet South
of Paper Mill Road
A point 66 feet East of Woodside Avenue
to a point 103 feet East of Woodside
Avenue
A point 68 feet East of Woodside Avenue
to a point 103 feet East of Woodside
Avenue
Belmont Avenue and Grandview
Boulevard
Frederick Street and Hain Road
A point 125 feet East of Wilson Street and
Sinking Spring Borough Line
Woodside Avenue and a point 426 feet
North of Woodside Avenue
A point 96 feet West of Morwood Avenue
to a point 167 feet West of Morwood
Avenue
South West Lawn Post Office
North
North
Perkasie Avenue and a point 72 feet East
of Perkasie Avenue
Persakie Avenue and a point 72 feet West
of Perkasie Avenue
AL3080
Highway
Perkasie Avenue
Revere Boulevard
Snyder Road
Spohn Road
State Hill Road
Stevens Avenue
Tulpehocken Road
Van Reed Road
Side Between
North Woodside Avenue and a point 280 feet
East of Woodside Avenue
East Penn Avenue and a point 55 feet North of
Penn Avenue
East Penn Avenue and a point 105 feet South of
Penn Avenue
North Harvard Boulevard and Princeton Avenue
Both Van Reed Road and Bressler Drive
Both East Wellington Boulevard and Bressler
Drive
Both Van Reed Road and Yerger Boulevard
West Between a point 496 feet North of
Shakespeare Drive and a point 433 feet
South of Avon Avenue
Both Broadcasting Road and a point 188 feet
West of Broadcasting Road
North Wyomissing Borough Line and North side
of Broadcasting Road
East Penn Avenue and 360 feet South of
Belmont Avenue
West Penn Avenue and Belmont Avenue
Both Wyomissing Borough Line and
Broadcasting Road
North Between a point 5,001 feet East of Van
Reed Road and a point 2,500 feet West of
Broadcasting Road
East Dwight Street and a point 92 feet North of
Dwight Street
West Sinking Spring Borough Line and Snyder
Road
West Sinking Spring Borough Line and
Whitfield Boulevard
East Snyder Road and a point 553 feet South of
Snyder Road
XIX-43
AL3080
Highway
Village Drive
West Wyomissing
Boulevard
Westview Drive
Whitfield Boulevard
Wilson Street
Windmill Road
Woodside Avenue
Wyoming Drive
Yerger Boulevard
Side
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
South
North
Between
Van Reed Road and North Village Drive
Reading Avenue and Penn Avenue
180 feet South of Reading Boulevard and
280 feet North of Monroe Avenue
Revere Boulevard and a point 150 feet
North of Revere Boulevard
Shillington Road (S.R. 0724) and a point
1,090 feet North of Shillington Road (S.R.
0724)
Broadcasting Road and Keiser Boulevard
Keiser Boulevard and a point 150 feet West
of Keiser Boulevard
Both St. Alban's Drive and Van Reed Road
Both Belmont Avenue and a point 50 feet South
of Belmont Avenue
West Belmont Avenue and a point 159 feet
North of Belmont Avenue
South
West
Both
East
West
Both
North
South
West Snyder Road and Brian Lane
Iroquois Avenue and Spohn Road
Grandview Boulevard and Penn Avenue
Penn Avenue and Noble Street
Noble Street and a point 65 feet North of
Noble Street
Noble Street and a point 100 feet North of
Noble Street
Area between 180 feet East of Iroquois
Avenue and 298 feet East of Iroquois
Avenue
Area between 218 feet East of Kingston
Drive and 346 feet East of Kingston Drive
Kingston Drive and a point 56 feet East of
Kingston Drive
MX-44
AL3080
Highway Side Between
East Snyder Road and a point 230 feet South of
Snyder Road
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 375,
May 24, 2010, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 379, August 8, 2011 Section 1)
Section 304. Parking Prohibited on All Bridges. Parking is hereby prohibited on
all bridges located in the Township at any and all times. (Ordinance No. 351,
December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 305. Parking Prohibited in Specific Locations Certain Days and Hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations as all times on the days and
between the hours hereby indicated:
Highway Side Between Days Hours
Curtis Road North Dwight Street and a point 270 feet Monday - 7:00 A.M.
and West of Dwight Street Friday To
South 9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
Dorchester West Wadsworth Avenue and Filmore Everyday 8:00 A.M.
Avenue Avenue To
4:00 P.M.
Dwight
Street
West Ellen Avenue and Grandview
Boulevard
Monday - 7:00 A.M.
Friday To
9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
Fairview North A point 161 feet West of Riegel Monday - 7:00 A.M.
Street Avenue to a point 419 feet West of Friday To
Riegel Avenue 9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
AL3080
Fairview North Riegel Avenue to a point 560 feet Monday - 7:00 A.M.
Street West of Riegel Avenue Friday To
9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
Fairview South A point 460 feet West of Riegel Monday - 7:00 A.M.
Street Avenue to Riegel Avenue Friday To
9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
Garfield North A point 212 feet East of West Lawn Everyday 8:00 A.M.
Avenue Avenue and a point 574 feet West of To
Morwood Avenue 4:00 P.M
Grandview South Dwight Street and Laird Street Monday - 7:00 A.M.
Boulevard Friday To
9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
Grandview South A point 328 feet East of Fairview Monday - 7:00 A.M.
Boulevard Street and Berks Place Friday To
9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
Highland North Cecil Avenue and Intervilla Avenue Monday - 7:00 A.M.
Street and Friday To
South 9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
AL3080
Howard
Street
West Grandview Boulevard and Belmont
Avenue
Laird Street West Grandview Boulevard and Belmont
Avenue
Noble Street South A point 29 feet West of Telford
Avenue and a point 77 feet West of
Telford Avenue
Norman
Street
Riegel
Avenue
Quarry
Drive
Telford
Avenue
West Grandview Boulevard and Belmont
Avenue
East Grandview Boulevard and Fairview
and Street
West
Monday -
Friday
Monday -
Friday
7:00 A.M.
To
9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
7:00 A.M.
To
9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
Sunday 7:00 A.M.
To
11:00 A.M.
Monday -
Friday
Monday -
Friday
7:00 A.M.
To
9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
7:00 A.M.
To
9:00 A.M.;
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
West Between a point 180 feet and 270 feet Monday - 9:00 A.M.
South of Rocky Drive Friday To
12:00 P.M.
West Penn Avenue and a point 166 feet
North of Penn Avenue
Monday - All Day
Friday
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 379,
August 8, 2011, Section 2)
MX-47
AL3080
Section 306. Parking Time Limited in Specific Locations Certain Days and
Hours. No person shall park a vehicle, or allow the same to remain parked, for longer
than the time herein indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours herein indicated:
Highway Side Between Days Parking Time
Hours Limit
Cecil East A point 50 feet North Everyday 8:00 A.M. 20
Avenue of Penn Avenue to a To minutes
point 100 feet North 6:00 P.M.
of Penn Avenue
Cecil West A point 50 feet North Monday - 8:00 A.M. 2 hours
Avenue of Penn Avenue to a Saturday To
point 145 feet North
of Penn Avenue
Cleveland North West Wyomissing Monday - 9:00 A.M. 15
Avenue Boulevard and a point Saturday To minutes
81 feet East of West 5:00 P.M.
Wyomissing
Boulevard
Dwight East A point 100 feet South Everyday 7:00 A.M. 1 hour
Street of Van Reed Road and To
a point 192 feet North 3:00 P.M.
of Ellen Avenue
East Court East A point 165 feet North Everyday 8:00 A.M. 2 hours
Boulevard of Penn Avenue and a To
point 402 feet South of 4:00 P.M.
Elm Place
Grandview South Laird Street to a point Monday - 7:00 A.M. 2 hours
Boulevard 777 feet East of Laird Friday To
Street 3:00 P.M.
Grandview North A point 735 feet West Monday - 7:00 A.M. 2 hours
Boulevard of Berks Place and a Friday To
point 860 feet East of 3:00 P.M.
Dwight Street
Morwood East Penn Avenue and a Everyday All Day 1 hour
Avenue point 165 feet North
of Penn Avenue
Noble Street South 2132 Noble Street Monday - 9:00 A.M. 2 hours
Friday To
6:00 P.M.
AL3080
Highway Side Between Days Parking Time
Hours Limit
Penn South A point 130 feet East Everyday All Day 15
Avenue of Woodside Avenue minutes
to a point 251 feet East
of Woodside Avenue
Penn South Telford Avenue to a Everyday All Day 15
Avenue point 105 feet West of minutes
Telford Avenue
Stevens East A point 165 feet North Everyday 8:00 A.M. 2 hours
Avenue of Penn Avenue and To
Belmont Avenue 4:00 P.M.
Telford West Penn Avenue and a Monday - 9:00 A.M. 2 hours
Avenue point 130 feet North Friday To
of Penn Avenue 5:00 P.M.
Telford West Penn Avenue and a Monday - All Day 2 hours
Avenue point 166 feet North Friday
of Penn Avenue
West Court West A point 112 feet North Everyday 8:00 A.M. 2 hours
Boulevard of Penn Avenue and a To
point 649 feet South of 4:00 P.M.
Belmont Avenue
West East Reading Avenue and Everyday 7:00 A.M. 1 hour
Wyomissing a point 60 feet South To
Boulevard of Reading Avenue 8:00 A.M.
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 379,
August 8, 2011, Section 3)
Section 307. Special Purpose Parking Zones Establishedi Parking Otherwise
Prohibited. The following are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or tractor, or to allow the same to
remain parked, in any such zone, except as specifically provided for in such zone:
Highway Side Location Authorized
Purpose of Vehicle
Cleveland North A point 73 feet East of West Fire and other
Avenue Lawn Avenue and a point official vehicles
640 feet West of Morwood
Avenue
South A point 80 feet East of West Fire and other
Lawn Avenue and a point official vehicles
640 feet West of Morwood
XD(-49
AL3080
Highway Side Location Authorized
Purpose of Vehicle
Avenue
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 379,
August 8, 2011, Section 4)
Section 308. Handicapped Persons and/or Disabled Veterans Parking Zones.
The following are hereby established as parking zones for handicapped persons and/or
disabled veterans, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or tractor,
or to allow the same to remain parked, in any such zone, except persons parking
vehicles lawfully bearing registration plates or parking placards issued to such
handicapped persons and/or such disabled veteran.
507 Amherst Avenue
2704 Avon Avenue
213 Bainbridge Circle
10 Cecil Avenue
2001 Cleveland Avenue
2025 Cleveland Avenue
2129 Cleveland Avenue
2778 Cleveland Avenue
2264 Cleveland Avenue
2418 Cleveland Avenue
2421 Cleveland Avenue
317 Dorchester Avenue
2507 Eisenhower Court
2125 Fairview Street
Locations
XD(-50
AL3080
2432 Fairview Street -2 spaces
2517 Girard Avenue
Grandview Boulevard - Wilson Senior High
Grandview Boulevard - Wilson Administration Building
2399 Grandview Boulevard
2413 Grandview Boulevard
Hillvale Avenue at Midvale Manor Playground
21 Intervilla Avenue
116 Intervilla Avenue
204 Interville Avenue
2304 Jefferson Avenue
53 Keppel Avenue
611 Lawrence Avenue
2340 Lincoln Avenue
2409 Lincoln Avenue
9 Monte llo Road
40 Monte llo Road
Morwood Avenue at Reading Boulevard - West Wyomissing Chapel
Noble Street - Advent Lutheran Church
2120 Noble Street
2219 Noble Street
XD(-51
AL3080
7774 Noble Street
1829 Portland Avenue
2041 Reading Avenue
2144 Reading Avenue
2151 Reading Avenue
2237 Reading Avenue
2241 Reading Avenue
2242 Reading Avenue
2254 Reading Avenue
2907 Shillington Road
2114 Spring Street
2409 Spring Street
720 West Wyomissing Boulevard
105 Wilson Street
111 Woodside Avenue
207 Woodside Avenue
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1; as amended by Ordinance No. 362,
October 14, 2008, Section 1)
Section 309. Parking Prohibited for Vehicles 25,001 Pounds or More Gross
Weight At Certain Locations. Parking of vehicles of a gross vehicle weight of 25,001
pounds or greater is hereby prohibited in the following locations in the Township at
any and all times:
Highway
Frederick Street
Side
Both
XD( -52
Between
Old Fritztown Road and
AL3080
Morgan Drive
Morgan Drive
Both Old Fritztown Road and
Shillington Road (S.R. 0724)
(Ordinance No. 375, May 24, 2010, Section 2)
Section 310. Parking or Storage of Major Recreational Equipment. Other than a
vehicle registered as a passenger car, station wagon or truck having a registered gross
weight of less than nine thousand (9,000) pounds, it shall be unlawful for any person to
park or allow to remain parked any vehicle, upon a public road, street or highway, for a
time period in excess of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, from October 15 to and
including April 15 of any year. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1;
Amended by Ordinance No. 375, May 24, 2010, Section 2)
Section 311. Penalty for Violation. Any person who shall violate any provision of
Part 3 hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of fifteen dollars
($15.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a number of days equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of
the unpaid balance of the fine and costs. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007,
Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 375, May 24, 2010, Section 2)
Section 312 - 320 Reserved for Future Ordinances. (Ordinance No. 351,
December 27, 2007, Section 1; Amended by Ordinance No. 375, May 24, 2010, Section 2)
AL3080
Part 4
Snow and Ice Emergency
Section 401. Declaration of Snow and Ice Emergency. In order to facilitate the
movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of excessive snow and ice on the
highways or portions of highways named in Section 404 of this Part, the Chairman of
the Board of Supervisors, in his discretion, may declare an emergency due to such
hazards. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 402. Parking Prohibited on Specific Highways During Emergency;
Restrictions on Operation of Motor Vehicles and Tractors on Such Streets. After any
such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be unlawful during the period of such
emergency for any person to park a motor vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to
remain parked, on any highway or portion thereof named in Section 404 of this Part, or
to operate any motor vehicle or tractor on any such highway or portion thereof unless
such vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with adequate equipment to provide sufficient
traction to keep such vehicle or tractor in motion so that other traffic on such highways
will not be blocked or seriously impeded. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007,
Section 1)
Section 403. Placement of Signs Along Highways Affected; Information on
Existence of Emergency. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors
in determining the highways affected by this Park, such persons as the Board of
Supervisors may designate or the Chief of Police shall place around the utility poles on
the highways or portions thereof designated in Section 404 of this Part signs reading:
SNOW
EMERGENCY
ROUTE
SNOW TIRES OR
CHAINS REQUIRED
NO PARKING
DURING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES
TOWED AWAY
The Board of Supervisors or the Chief of Police shall also, through radio, newspaper or
other available media, disseminate information as to the existence of such an
emergency. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
AL3080
Section 404. Highways Affected. The highways or portions thereof to which the
provisions of this Part shall be applicable during all periods of emergency declared as
provided in Section 401 are:
[Reserved for future use]
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 405. Penalty for Violation.
(A) At any time during a period of emergency declared as provided in
Section 401, any person who shall park a motor vehicle or tractor anywhere upon
or along any of the highways or portions thereof listed in Section 404, shall be
guilty of a violation of this Part, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a number of days
equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of the unpaid balance of the fine
and costs.
(B) Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor upon any
highway or portion thereof listed in Section 404 of this Part, if such vehicle or
tractor shall become stalled upon any of such streets during a period of
emergency declared as provided in the first Section of this Part, if such stalling
shall have been by reason of the failure to have such vehicle or tractor equipped
with the equipment hereinabove prescribed, shall be guilty of a violation of this
Part, and, upon conviction thereof, such person shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a number of days
equal to one (1) day for each ten dollars ($10.00) of the unpaid balance of the fine
and costs.
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Sections 406 - 410. Reserved for Future Ordinance. (Ordinance No. 351,
December 27, 2007, Section 1)
AL3080
Part 5
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
Section 501. Authority to Remove and Impound Illegally Parked Vehicles. The
Chief of Police of the Township is hereby authorized to remove and impound or to
order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked on any of the streets,
highways or public property in the Township in violation of any provision of the law or
of any ordinance of the Township. Provided: no such vehicle shall be remove or
impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this Part. (Ordinance
No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 502. Approved Storage Garages. The following garages are hereby
designated as approved storage garages and as pounds for the storage of such
impounded vehicles:
Spitler's Garage
R.D. #1
Wernersville, PA 19565
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 503. Garages to be Bonded. Every such approved storage garage or
pound shall be bonded in the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for the
indemnifying of the owner of every such impounded vehicle against the loss thereof, or
injury or damage thereto, while in the custody of such pound-keeper. (Ordinance
No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 504. Towing and Storage Charges.
(A) The following are hereby fixed and established as the charges that
shall be made for the towing and storage of any motor vehicle removed and
impounded under the authority of this Part:
(1) Fifty-five and 00/100 dollars ($55.00) to remove and
impound, each motor vehicle other than a tractor and/or a trailer.
(2) Twenty-five and 00/100 dollars ($25.00) per day, or
fraction thereof, for the storage of each motor vehicle other than a tractor
and/or a trailer.
AL3080
(B) Charges for the removal, impounding and storage of a tractor
and/or a trailer shall be in such amounts as periodically established by the Board
of Supervisors of the Township of Spring.
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 505. Notification of Removal and Impounding. Within twelve (12) hours
from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority granted by this Part, notice of
the fact that such vehicle has been impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police of the
Township to the owner of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place
from which such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding, and
the pound in which it shall have been impounded. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27,
2007, Section 1)
Section 506. Effect of Payment of Towing and Impounding Charges Without
Protest. The payment of any towing and impounding charges, authorized by this Part,
shall, unless such payment shall have been made "under protest," be final and
conclusive, and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid.
(Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 507. Effect of Payment of Charges Under Protest. In the event that any
towing and impounding charges, so imposed, shall be paid "under protest," the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a magistrate or court of record having
jurisdiction, in which case such defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive
such notice as is provided in the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses, and
shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing. (Ordinance No. 351,
December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 508. Records of Vehicles Removed and Impounded. The Chief of Police
shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall be able at all reasonable times to
furnish the owners or the agents of the owners thereof with information as to the place
of storage of such vehicle. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 509. Owner or Operator of Vehicle Remains Liable for Fine or Penalty.
The payment of towing and storage charges authorized by this Part shall not operate to
relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for
violation of any law or ordinance on account of which such vehicle was removed and
impounded. (Ordinance No. 351, December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 510. Restrictions upon Removal of Vehicles. No vehicle shall be removed
under the authority of this Part if, at the time of the intended removal thereof, the
owner or person for the time being in charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a
XD(-57
AL3080
willingness and intention to remove such vehicle immediately.
December 27, 2007, Section 1)
Section 511 - 520. Reserved for Future Ordinances.
December 27, 2007, Section 1)
(Ordinance No. 351,
(Ordinance No. 351,













































ORDINANCE NO. "/ )2.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING, BERKS COLTNTY,
PENNSYLVANIAV AMENDING THE TO\,\A{SHIP OF SPRING CODE OF
ORDINANCES, CHAPTER XIX ENTITLED "MOTORVEHICLES AND TRAFFIS'
BY: (1) SUPPLEMENTING SECTION 205 ENTITLED "STOP INTERSECTIONS
ESTABLISHEA" OF PART 2 ENTITLED "TRAFFIC REGULATIONS" TO
ESTABLISH A STOP INTERSECTION ON BELMONT AVENUE AT TFIE
INTERSECTION OF DWIGHT STREET TRAVELING EAST AND WEST;
(2) SUPPLEMENTING SECTION 305 ENTITLED "PARKING PROHIBITED IN
SPECIFIC LOCATIONS CERTAIN DAYS AND HOURS", OF PART 3 ENTITLED
"P ARK IN G REG UL ATI O Ng" TO ESTABLISH PARKING PROHIBITED ON TFIE
EAST SIDE OF SAGE DRIVE BETWEEN A POINT 597 FEET EAST OF COLT
STREET AND A POINT 950 FEET EAST OF COLT STREET, MONDAY
TFIROUGH FRIDAY, DURING TF{E HOURS OF 7:00 A.M. TO 9:00 A.M. AND
2:00 P.M. TO 4:00 P.M.; AND (3) SUPPLEMENTING SECTION 306 ENTITLED
"PARKING TIh4E LIMITED IN SPECIFIC LOCATIONS CERTAIN DAYS AND
HOURS" OF PART 3 ENTITLED "PARKING REGULATIONS" TOESTABLISH
A TWO HOUR TIME LIMITATION FOR PARKING ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
PENN AVENUE BETWEEN A POINT 356 FEET EAST OF TELFORD AVENUE
AND A POINT 107 FEET WEST OF PERKASIE AVENUE, MONDAY THROUGH
FRIDAY, BETWEEN THE HOURS OF 8:00 A.M. TO 5:00 P.M.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED,by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Peu-rrsylvania (the 'Township"), and it is heneby ENACTED AND
ORDAINED by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1,. Section 205 entitled "Stop Intersecdons Established", of Part 2 entitled
'Traffic Regulations" of Chapter XIX entitled "Motor Vehicles and TraffiC', of the Township of
Spring Code of Ordinances, is hereby supplemented by adding thereto the following stop
intersection:
Stop Highway
Belmont Avenue
Through Highwav
Dwight Street
Direction of
Travel
East and West
SECTION 2. Section 305 entitled ''Parking Prohibited.in Specific Locations Certain Days
and Hours", of Part 3 errtitled "Parking Regulation{', of Chapter XIX entitled "Motor Vehicles
and TraffiC', of the Township of Spring Code of Ordinances, is hereby supplemented by adding
thereto the following location parking is prohibited on certain days and at certain times:
Hiehwav Side Between Davs Hours
Sage Drive East A point 597 feetEast of Colt Street Monday - 7:00 A.M.
and a point 950 feet East of Colt Friday To
Street 9:00 A.M.
and
2:00 P.M.
To
4:00 P.M.
SECTION 3. Section 306 errtitled ''Parking Time Limited in Specific Locations Certain
Days and Hours", of Part 3, entitled "Parking Regulations", of Chapter XIK errtitled 'Motor
Vehicles and Traffic" , of lheTownship of Spring Code of Ordinances is hereby supplemented by
adding thereto the following location parking is limited to two (2) hours on certain days and at
certain times:
Hiehwav
Penn
Avenue
Side Between
South A point 356 feet East
of Telford Avenue
and a point 107 feet
West of Perkasie
Avenue
Davs
Monday -
Friday
Parkine
Hours
8:00 A.M.
To
5:00 p.m.
Time
Limit
2 Hours
SECTIqN 4. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause, part or provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdictior; such decision of the court shall not affect the remaining sections,
sentences, clauses, parts or provisions of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
the Township that such Ordinance would have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been included herein.
SECTION 5. The Code of Ordinances/ as amended, of the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, shall be and remain unchanged and in full force and effect except as
amended, supplemented or modified by this Ordinance. This Ordinance shall become a partof
the Code of Ordinances, as amended, of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
upon adoption.
SECTION 6. All ordinances or
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
1185709
parts of ordinances of this Township which are
2
SECTION 7. This Ordinance shall become effective at the earliest date permitted by law
following the date of its enactment.
DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED this 24tn day of November,201.4.
TO\^/NSHIP OF SPRING
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Patti J. Smitfr, Chairperson
Kyle M. Hummel
MUNICIPAL CERTIF ICATION
L
Berks County,
was advertised in the Reading Eagle, a daily newspaper of general circulation in the Township of
Sp.iog, on Friday, November 14, 2014, and was duly enacted and approved as set forth at a
regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors held on Novembet 24,201,4.
Date: November 24,20'14
lsEALl
;; .(A66*6*an0secretaryoftheTownshipofSpring,
-ao n.tuUy certify that the foregoing Ordinance No. 7/ > ^ "
4
10D4868
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 108.
Section 109.
Section 110.
Section 111.
Section 112.
Section 113.
Section 114.
Section 115.
Section 116.
Section 117.
Section 118.
Section 119.
Section 120.
Section 121.
Section 122.
Section 123.
Section 124.
Section 125.
Section 126.
Section 127.
Section 128.
Section 129.
Section 130.
Section 131.
Section 132.
CHAPTER )0C
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
Part 1
Rules and Regulations
Definitions
Township's Designation of Park System
Permits
Hours
Destruction of Buildings, Equipment and Other Properties
Destruction of Plant Life and Natural Surroundings
Fires
Wild Animals and Birds
Pets and Animals
Fishing
Swimming, Bathing and Wading
Boats, Vessels and Other Water Craft
Camping
Operation and Parking of Motorized Vehicles
Horses and other Beasts of Burden
Operation of Bicycles
Trespass
Peddling and Soliciting
Unlawful Obstruction
Hindering Employees
Alcoholic Beverages
Personal Conduct
Fireworks
Firearms, Knives, Bow and Arrows, Etc.
Littering, Dumping and Pollution of Waters
Skating and Coasting
Fees and Charges and Permits
Aerial Activities
Emergency Powers
Penalties and Arrests
Severability
Singular, Plural and Gender
10D4868
Section 201.
Section 202.
Part 2
Designated Recreational and/or Open Space Areas
Recreational and/or Open Space Areas Belonging to Township of
Spring
Recreational and/or Open Space Areas Belonging to Private Parties
10D4868
Part 1
Rules and Regulations
Section 101. Definitions. Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates
otherwise, the meanings of words and/or terms used in this ordinance shall be as
follows:
(A) "Board" shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(B) "Park System" shall mean such recreational areas and/or
facilities and/or such open space areas and/or facilities designated as such
by the Township in appropriate Resolutions of Board.
(C) "Township"' shall mean the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
(D) "Use Permit" shall mean a document providing for the use of
certain lands and/or facilities of the Park System as permitted by Board, or
as permitted by such person as the Board may designate to act on its behalf.
(E) "Variance Permit" shall mean a document modifying and/or
changing any one or more of the following Sections of this Ordinance.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 1)
Section 102. Township's Designation of Park System. The following lands
and/or facilities located within the boundaries of the Township shall be designated as
part of the Township's Park System as the result of the adoption by the Board of an
appropriate Resolution designating said lands and/or facilities as such:
(A) Any lands and/or facilities owned by the Township and used, or to
be used, for recreational purposes and/or open space.
(B) Lands and/or facilities leased to the Township and used, or to be
used, for recreational purposes and/or open space, provided, however, that the
Lessor of such lands and/or facilities shall consent to the designation of such
lands and/or facilities forming part of the Park System of the Township.
(C) Such lands and/or facilities used, or to be used, for recreational
purposes and/or open space and owned by an entity, or entities, other than the
Township, provided, however, that such other entity or entities shall request the
inclusion of its said lands and/or facilities as part of the Park System of the
)0( - 3
10D4868
Township. Such entity or entities shall have the right to withdraw its said lands
and/or facilities from the Park System of the Township by giving the Township
thirty (30) days written notice of its intent so to do.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 2)
Section 103. Permits.
(A) An application for a Use Permit shall be made upon forms
provided by the Board and shall be accompanied by the required fee, if any.
(B) An application for a Variance Permit shall be made upon forms
provided by the Board and shall be accompanied by the required fee, if any.
Such application for a Variance Permit shall be made to, granted or denied by a
three (3) member panel consisting of one (1) member of the Board, one (1)
member designated by the Chief of Police of the Township, and the remaining
member designated by the Chairman of the Park and Recreation Board of the
Township. Each member of the said panel shall serve for a term of one (1) year
commencing on the effective date of this Ordinance or until his or her successor
is designated.
(C) All applications for Variance and/or Use Permits shall be made at
the office of the Board located at 2850 Windmill Road, Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, and other designated locations and filed with the Board
within a minimum of seventy-two (72) hours prior to use of a facility or area in
the Park System.
(D) In the event more applications for reservations are received than
space is available, such applications shall be considered in the order received by
the Board.
(E) No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be issued a
permit to use the Park System, during the hours more fully set forth in
Section 104 of this Ordinance, unless accompanied by a person eighteen (18)
years of age or older.
(F) Permits may be issued to persons under the age of eighteen (18)
years for the use of facilities in the Park System, during the hours more fully set
forth in Section 104 of this ordinance, if written permission from the parent or
legal guardian is provided and the parent or legal guardian shall indicate therein
his or her responsibility and conduct of the other persons in their party.
(G) The holder of a Variance Permit issued by the Board shall be held
responsible for the actions and conduct of the other persons in their party.
)(X -4
10D4868
(H) The holder of a Use Permit issued by the Board shall be held
responsible for the actions of the other persons in their party.
(I) All visitors to the parks, playgrounds and recreational areas must
comply with all rules of the Board within the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 3)
Section 104. Hours. No person shall be permitted within the Park System
between 7:00 p.m. and sunrise of each day between November 1st and February 28th and
9:00 p.m. and sunrise of each day between March 1st and October 31st, unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Supervisors or their designee.
No person shall be permitted within the Cacoosing Meadows Recreation Area or Red
Caboose Park between 7:00 p.m. and sunrise of each day between November 1st and
February 28th and 11:00 p.m. and sunrise of each day between March 1st and
October 31st, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Supervisors or their designee.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 4; as amended by Ordinance No. 345, July 23,
2007, Section 1)
Section 105. Destruction of Buildings, Equipment and Other Properties. No
person shall:
(A) Destroy, deface, alter, change or remove any monument, stone
marker, bench mark, stake, post or trail marking, or designation of any boundary
line or survey line.
(B) Cut, break, mark upon or otherwise injure any building,
equipment, bridge, drain, dam, wall, fountain, lamp post, fence, gate, hedge, or
other structure or installation.
(C) Deface, destroy or remove any legally authorized placard, notice or
sign, whether permanent or temporary, posted or exhibited within the Park
System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 5)
shall:
Section 106. Destruction of Plant Life and Natural Surroundings. No person
(A) Cut, remove or destroy any tree, sapling, seedling, bush or shrub,
whether alive or dead, or chip, blaze, box, girdle, trim or otherwise deface or
- 5
10D4868
injure any tree or shrub, or break or remove any branch, foliage, tree or shrub, or
pick, gather, uproot, remove or destroy any flower, plant or grass unless
approved by the Board.
(B) Remove or cause to be removed or to dig any sod, earth, humus,
peat, boulder, rock, gravel or sand unless approved by the Board.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 6)
Section 107. Fires. No person shall:
(A) Set or cause to be set on fire any trees, woodland, brushland,
grassland, or meadow.
(B) Build any fire except within the fireplaces, receptacles or open
spaces approved or designated by the Board for such purposes.
(C) Drop, dump, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, ashes,
burning cigars, cigarettes, tobacco paper or other flammable material.
(D) Leave fires unattended at any time or not fully extinguished before
being abandoned within the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 7)
Section 108. Wild Animals and Birds. No person shall pursue, catch, attempt to
catch, strike, molest, wound or kill any bird, wild animal or any nest, lair, den, burrow,
or the like, of any animal and/or bird.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 8)
Section 109. Pets and Animals. No person shall:
(A) Permit their dog, cat or animal classified as pet, access to, or on
parks, playgrounds and recreation areas in the Park System.
(B) Cause any pet or animal to run at large.
(C) Bring, drive or lead any animal into the Park System.
(D) Permit their dog, cat or pet to enter any public building or to be
upon any portion of the Park System except a trained seeing eye dog.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 9)
)0( -6
10D4868
Section 110. Fishing. Fishing within the Park System waters shall be permitted
only in such areas and at such times as are designated by the Board. In all cases, the
Pennsylvania fishing laws shall be applicable to all waterways within the Park System.
The failure to comply with such Pennsylvania fishing laws shall be in direct violation of
this Section. No person shall:
(A) Fish in any wild life sanctuary or outdoor area or any place where
"No Fishing" signs have been posted by the Board.
(B) Wade while fishing without having appropriate boots.
(C) Fish without being the holder of a current resident or non-resident
fishing license as may be required by applicable laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 10)
Section 111. Swimming, Bathing and Wading. No person shall:
(A) Swim, bathe or wade in any of the watercourses, pools, ponds or
sloughs unless by permit.
(B) Carry or consume any food or beverages or have in possession any
glass or metal container at any swim area or in water adjacent to
above-mentioned areas, unless otherwise designated.
(C) Bathe in any Board-operated pool/beach/watercourse areas unless
said swimming area is open for said operation.
(D) Bathe, swim or wade in any water area designated as "Unsafe for
Swimming" at such time or times within the sole discretion of the Board within
the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 11)
Section 112. Boats, Vessels and Other Water Craft. No person shall:
(A) Use or navigate any boat, vessel, yacht, canoe, raft or other
watercraft upon any watercourse, lagoon, pond, pool or slough except at such
times or places as may be provided or designated for such purpose.
10D4868
(B) Operate a boat, vessel or other watercraft in contravention of any
one or more provisions of the "Boat Law" of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as amended, 1978, Nov. 26, P.L. 1214, No. 287.
(C) Use air mattresses, inner tubes and inflatable devices except in
designated areas and may not be used elsewhere.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 12)
Section 113. Camping. No person shall:
(A) Camp except in such areas as may be provided and designated for
such purposes by the Board. No person or group shall camp without a permit
issued by the Board. No camping permit shall be issued for over a period of
three (3) consecutive days.
(B) Cause, create, or make any noise or disturbance which is a
hindrance to the peace, quiet and tranquility of the Park System.
(C) Wash dishes at pumps or drinking fountains; to fail to clean camp
sites daily or to discharge waste waters or any other wastes, except into
designated containers or approved dumping stations.
(D) Dig a trench or make any excavation on any camp site.
(E) Occupy an area contrary to assignment as indicated on Use Permit.
(F) Camp with a self-contained house trailer, camper trailer or camper
bus.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 13)
Section 114. Operation and Parking of Motorized Vehicles. No person shall:
(A) Operate a vehicle and stop, stand or park said vehicle in any place
marked as a passenger or loading zone, other than for expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers, or for the unloading and delivery or picking up of
materials.
(B) Operate a vehicle and stop, stand or park said vehicle in a
handicapped parking area, other than vehicles designated for handicapped.
10D4868
(C) Operate a vehicle and stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
roadway or in any parking area in such manner as to form an obstruction to
traffic thereon.
(D) Drive upon or park upon any lawn in any area of the Park System
unless specifically authorized or marked to do so by the Board.
(E) Operate and stop, stand or park a vehicle in such a manner as to
block any fire trail, maintenance road, entrance/exit, bike/hike trail.
(F) Operate a vehicle and park in any place where no parking signs
have been erected.
(G) Operate and park a vehicle in such a manner as to block, the exit or
removal of another vehicle.
(H) Operate a motor vehicle in excess of five (5) miles per hour in any
area of the Park System, unless a higher rate of speed has been posted.
(I) Operate any vehicle upon any area of the Park System or roadway
carelessly disregarding the rights and safety of others or in a manner so as to
endanger any person or property.
(J) Operate any type of minibike, trail bike, all terrain vehicles,
snowmobile or other motorized vehicles except in areas designated and designed
for their purposes, and then only with the approval of the Board.
(K) Fail to come to a complete stop at a stop sign.
(L) Fail to yield at a yield sign.
(M) Wash or make mechanical repairs on vehicles except in an
emergency on any vehicle.
(N) Use roadways in the Park System as thoroughfares.
In conjunction with and in addition to Section 114, Subsections (A) through (L) of
this Section, the Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania shall apply to all roadways within
the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 14)
10D4868
Section 115. Horses and Other Beasts of Burden. No person shall:
(A) Ride or lead a horse or pony upon any property administered by or
under the jurisdiction of the Board other than when prior approval has been
granted by the Board.
(B) Ride a horse in a careless, negligent or reckless manner so as to
create a nuisance or to endanger the life, property or persons within the Park
System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 15)
Section 116. Operation of Bicycles. No person shall:
(A) Randomly operate a bicycle within the Park System unless as close
to the right-hand curb or right-hand side of a designated path, trail or roadway
as conditions will permit, unless otherwise permitted.
(B) Operate any bicycle while upon any path, trail or roadway to carry
any person upon the handlebar or frame of the bicycle, except in the case where a
bicycle is equipped to carry more than one (1) person.
(C) Operate a bicycle upon such paths, trails or roadways that are
posted by the Board at dates and times previously specified in Section 4 of this
Ordinance.
(D) Leave or park any bicycle upon any road or parking lot within the
Park System which is open to the public on which motorized vehicles may be
driven.
(E) Leave or park bicycles in walkways, active play areas, but should
place bicycles in designated parking areas and use appropriate racks, when
available, within the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 16)
Section 117. Trespass. No person shall:
(A) Enter upon any grounds that have been posted by the Board with
"No Trespassing" or any sign that would indicate that the area is not open to the
general public, without first obtaining a written permit from the Board.
public.
(B) Enter any building that is not open to and regularly used by the
XX - 10
10D4868
(C) Enter upon or disturb any construction or equipment on park
properties of the Board, except authorized personnel within the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 17)
Section 118. Peddling and Soliciting. No person shall peddle or solicit business
of any nature whatever or collect any fund for any service or charity, or to distribute
handbills, or other advertising matter, to post unauthorized signs on any lands, waters,
structures or properties administered by or under the control of the Board or use such
lands, waters, structures or properties unless first obtaining written permission from
the Board. (Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 18)
Section 119. Unlawful Obstruction. No person shall force, threaten, intimidate,
fence, enclose, or by any other means, prevent or obstruct any person from entering,
leaving or making full use of the Park System, unless under the jurisdiction of the Board
consistent with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable statutes, rules and
regulations, and then only by persons authorized to do so by the Board. (Ordinance
No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 19)
Section 120. Hindering Employees. No person shall interfere with, use profanity
toward, or in any manner hinder any employees or agents of the Board who are
performing their official duties within the Park System. (Ordinance No. 163, May 26,
1981, Section 20)
Section 121. Alcoholic Beverages. No person shall possess or be under the
influence of any alcoholic beverage while in or upon any part of the Park System; any
alcoholic beverages in the possession of anyone shall be confiscated by the Township
Police, within the Park System. (Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 21)
Section 122. Personal Conduct. No person shall:
(A) Engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, lewd,
wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct tending to create a breach of
the peace, or annoy others, while in or on any property administered by or under
the jurisdiction of the Board.
(B) Commit any indecent or immoral act tending to debauch the
morals or manners of the public while in or on any facility or area of the Park
System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 22)
10D4868
Section 123. Fireworks. No person shall fire, discharge or have in their
possession any rocket, firecracker or other fireworks or any other substance of an
explosive nature unless the Board consents in writing. (Ordinance No. 163, May 26,
1981, Section 23)
Section 124. Firearms, Knives, Bow and Arrows, Etc. No person shall:
(A) Bring into or upon any areas of the Park System, nor have in their
possession, or discharge, or set off anywhere upon said properties, a revolver,
pistol, shotgun, rifle, air rifle, sling shot, air gun, or any gun, firearm or bow or
other weapon that discharges projectiles either by air, explosive substance or any
other force. Except that this Section shall not apply to any deputy sheriff, police
officer, peace officer, or other duly appointed law enforcement officer while
carrying out the duties and responsibilities of their position.
(B) Possess any type of knife, hatchet or axe unless engaged in an
activity for appropriate use.
(C) Possess any of the above items in this Section; otherwise a law
enforcement officer shall confiscate any article or weapon in the possession of
any person which is in violation of this Section within the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 24)
Section 125. Littering, Dumping and Pollution of Waters. No person shall:
(A) Discard, deposit, dump, litter or allow to blow away refuse of any
kind or nature except by placing said refuse in containers provided for such
purpose.
(B) Bring or dispose of any type of trash, refuse or debris in any area
within the Park System, whether disposing of in receptacles or not, if such refuse
did not result from usage within the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 25)
Section 126. Skating and Coasting. No person shall:
(A) Use roller skates, skateboards or any other vehicle on wheels on
court surfaces except at such times and upon such places as may be designated
or maintained for that purpose.
10D4868
(B) Skate, sled, snowshoe, walk or go upon any ice, or ski except at
such times and upon such places which may be designated or maintained for the
purpose.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 26)
Section 127. Fees and Charges and Permits. No person shall use any facility,
land or area for which a fee or charge had been established by the Board without
payment of such fee, charge or receipt of appropriate permit within the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 27)
Section 128. Aerial Activities.
(A) "Aerial Activities" shall be defined as including, but not limited to,
all motorized and non-motorized activities that require an individual(s) to be
physically located, attached and/ or connected to, on, and/ or in any vehicle or
apparatus for the purpose of or to assist with, such as parachuting, paragliding,
parasailing, hang-gliding, hot air ballooning, and flying of planes, jets, rockets
and gliders.
(B) Any and all types of "Aerial Activities" within the Park System
shall only be permitted at such times and places as specially permitted in writing
by the Township.
(C) No person shall engage in or participate in any "Aerial Activity"
except as expressly permitted in Subsection (B), above.
(Ordinance No. 322, September 12, 2005, Section 1)
Section 129. Emergency Powers. Nothing in these rules shall:
(A) Prohibit or hinder police officers or emergency personnel from
performing their official duties.
(B) Prohibit the Board from establishing rules and regulations other
than as herein provided so as to further protect the health, welfare and safety of
park visitors and property within the Park System.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 28)
10D4868
Section 130. Penalties and Arrests.
(A) Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall, for
every such offense, upon conviction thereof, in a summary proceeding before a
District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) and costs of prosecution, and in default of such payment of fine
and costs, to be sentenced and committed to the lockup of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, for a period not exceeding five (5) days, or
to the Berks County Prison, Bern Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania, for a
period not exceeding thirty (30) days. All prosecutions shall be brought in the
name of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania. All fines shall be
paid to the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Police Officers of the Township of Spring,
without warrant forthwith to arrest any offender against the provisions of this
Ordinance, and to take the person so arrested before a District Magistrate having
competent jurisdiction.
(Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 29)
Section 131. Severability. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any
sentence, clause or section of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, it is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board
of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, that this
ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause or section not have been included herein. (Ordinance No. 163, May 26,
1981, Section 30)
Section 132. Singular, Plural and Gender. Wherever used in this Ordinance, the
singular shall include the plural, the plural the singular, and the use of any gender shall
be applicable to all genders. (Ordinance No. 163, May 26, 1981, Section 31)
10D4868
Part 2
Designated Recreational and/or Open Space Areas
Section 201. Recreational and/or Open Space Areas Belonging to Township of
Spring. The areas more fully set forth in this Section shall be governed and subject to
the rules and regulations set forth in Part 1 of this Chapter.
(A) Colony Park Playground. Situate in the Village of Colony Park on
the south side of Paper Mill Road, located on the west side of residential
properties abutting Cromwell Drive, on the north side of residential properties
abutting Cromwell Drive, and bounded on the west side by lands of now or late
of Tulpehocken Ltd. A ten (10) feet wide service lane, located between 2513 and
2509 Cromwell Drive provides ingress and egress to this playground.
(B) Cornwall Terrace Playgrounds. Situate in the Village of Cornwall
Terrace, bounded on four (4) sides by residential properties fronting on
Shakespeare Drive, Tennyson Avenue, Bradely Avenue and Avon Avenue.
Twenty (20) feet wide service lanes between 2705 and 2707 Avon Avenue,
between 212 Bradely Avenue and 2715 Tennyson Avenue and between 100 and
102 Shakespeare Drive provide ingress and egress to this playground.
(C) Owls Field. Situate in the Village of West Wyomissing along the
west side of Harrison Avenue, bounded on the south by residential properties
and undeveloped lands abutting Lincoln Avenue, and bounded on the north by
undeveloped lands in the 2400 block of Girard Avenue.
(D) Red Caboose Park. Situate in the Village of West Wyomissing,
Springton Village and Presidential Arms, bounded on the north by residential
properties abutting Reading Boulevard, on the east by Owls Field, on the south
by the Village of Springton and on the west by the Village of Presidential Arms.
(E) Springside Water Detention Area. Situate south of the Village of
Lincoln Park along Traffic Route 724 between lands now or late of Springside
Manor Apartments and Greystone Country Club.
(F) Standford Avenue Detention Area. Situate west of the Village of
Lincoln Park, south of Washington Avenue and west of West Wyomissing
Boulevard and Jefferson Avenue.
(G) Clover Drive and Gring Drive Detention Areas. Situate west of the
Village of Drexelwood Townhouses along the north side of the intersection of
Clover Drive and Gring Drive.
)0( - 15
10D4868
(H) Springcrest Court Island. Situate in the Village of Springcrest
Court and forming an "island" and an area of open space between East Court
Boulevard and West Court Boulevard, bounded on the south by Penn Avenue
and on the north by 23 West Court Boulevard and 30 East Court Boulevard.
(I) Reading Boulevard Mall. Situate in the Village of West
Wyomissing and forming "islands" located between the eastbound and
westbound traffic lanes of Reading Boulevard between the 1900 and 2600 blocks
of Reading Boulevard.
Midvale Manor Playground. Situate in the Village of Midvale
Manor bounded on the north by residential properties abutting Montieth
Avenue, on the south by Hil lvale Avenue extended and on the east by residential
properties abutting Charlotte Avenue.
(K) Kline's Creek Recreation Area. Situate in the Village of Spring
Knoll and Grings Hill Estates as shown on the recorded final plans of Spring
Knoll and Grings Hill Estates, Section 4.
(L) Sage Drive Water Detention Area. Situate in the Villages of Shiloh
Hills and Tallowyck, bounded by residential properties abutting Sage Drive,
Marie Drive and Matthew Drive.
(M) Conestoga Water Detention Area. Situate in the Village of Shiloh
Hills along residential properties abutting Conestoga Drive, Colt Street and Sage
Drive.
(N) Grings Hill Water Detention Area. Situate in the Village of Grings
Hill Estates along residential properties abutting Hearthstone Lane and Acorn
Drive.
(0) Reedy Run Open Space Area. Situate along both banks of the
Cacossing Creek in the Township of Spring and the Township of Lower
Heidelberg, located in the Village of Reedy Run, abutting lands now or late of
Warren Lamm and of Sinking Spring Municipal Authority.
(P) Cacoosing Meadows Recreation Area. Situate in the Township of
Spring and Township of Lower Heidelberg, located on the north by State Hill
Road, on the east by lands now or late of Laura Reedy Estate, on the south by
lands now or late of Lester Kreider, et ux, and Michael Kreider, et ux, and on the
west by lands now or late of the Louis Thun Children Real Estate Trust and of
Arthur T. McGonigle, Jr., et al.
10D4868
(Q) Drexelwood Park. Situate in the Village of Drexelwood, bounded
on the east by residential properties abutting Apple Drive, on the south by
residential properties abutting Wellington Boulevard, on the west by residential
properties abutting Evergreen Drive and Rosewood Court and on the north by
residential properties abutting Buckman Avenue.
(R) Breneman Park Playground. Situate in the Village of Whitfield,
bounded on the east by properties abutting Dalin Drive, on the south by the
Village of Wilshire Meadows, on the west by Reedy Road and on the north by
properties abutting Dogwood Drive.
(S) Wilshire Meadows Water Detention Area. Situate in the Village of
Wilshire Meadows, bounded on the east by Linda Lane, on the south by Wilshire
Boulevard, on the west by Reedy Road and on the north by residential properties
abutting Reedy Road and Linda Lane.
(Ordinance No. 234, December 13, 1993, Section 1 and Exhibit "A")
Section 202. Recreational and /or Open Space Areas Belonging to Private Parties.
The areas more fully set forth in this Section shall be governed by the rules and
regulations set forth in Part 1 of this Chapter hereof.
(A) Wilson High School, Wilson Central Junior High School and
Whitfield Elementary School, all of the Wilson School District. Situate west of
the Borough of West Lawn and Village of Whitfield, bounded on the west by
Dwight Street, on the north by Van Reed Road, on the east by Berks Place and
residential properties abutting Berks Place and on the south by Grandview
Boulevard and residential properties abutting Grandview Boulevard.
(B) Lincoln Park Elementary School of the Wilson School District.
Situate in the Village of Lincoln Park, along the west side of Dorchester Avenue,
bounded on the north by Amherst Avenue and lands now or late of Revere
House Associates, on the west by lands now or late of Revere House Apartments
and on the south by Filmore Avenue.
(C) West Wyomissing Elementary School of the Wilson School District.
Situate in the Village of West Wyomissing along the north side of Garfield
Avenue, bounded on the west by West Lawn Avenue, on the east by Morwood
Avenue, and by an alley parallel to Garfield Avenue between West Lawn
Avenue and Morwood Avenue.
(D) Cornwall Terrace Elementary School of the Wilson School District.
Situate in the Village of Cornwall Terrace along the south side of Windmill Road,
)0( - 17
10D4868
bounded on the east by Spohn Road, on the south by Wilson Townhouses
Development and on the west by Iroquois Avenue.
(Ordinance No. 234, December 13, 1993, Section 2 and Exhibit "B")
oRDTNANCE No. {oq
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOVVNSHIP OF SPRING, BERKS
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING PART 7 ENTITLED
"RULES AND REGULATIONS" OF CHAPTER XX ENTITLED
"PARKS AND RECREATION" OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING
CODE OF ORDINANCES BY AMENDING SECTION 1.01 ENTITLED
"DEFINITIONS" TO INCLUDE DEFINITIONS FOR "OWNER',
"KEEPER" AND'SERVICE ANIMAL'AND SECTION 109 ENTITLED
,PETS AND ANIMALS' TO ALLOW FOR AND REGULATE THE
WALKING OF DOGS ALONG PORTIONS OF THE TRAIL SYSTEM
AT SHILOH HILLS PARK
. BE IT ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Spring Berks County, Pennsylvania (the "Township") and it is hereby enacted and
ordained by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 101 entitled "Definitions" of Part 1 entitled "Rules and
Regulations" of Chapter XX entitled "Parks and Recreation" of the Code of Ordinances
of the Township of Spring is hereby amended and restated in its entirety to add in
alphabetical order definitions for "Owne{',"Keeper" and "Seryice Animal'as follows:
"Section 1,01. Definitions. Unless the context specifically and
clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings of words andf or terms used in
this Ordinance shall be as follows:
(A) "Board" shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(B) "Ot me{' shall mean every person having a right of
property in any dog, cat or other animal, and every person who
keeps or harbors or has in his or her care any dog, cat or other
animal, and every person who permits any dog, cat or other animal
to remain on or about any premises occupied by him or her.
(C) "Keeper" shall mean any person who shall possess,
maintain, house or harbor or othernrise have custody of any dog,
cat or other animal, whether or not the owner of such dog, cat or
other animal and whether for compensation or otherwise.
(D) "Park System" shall mean such recreational areas
andf or facilities andf or such open space areas andf or facilities
desigfiated as such by the Township in appropriate Resolutions of
the Board.
(E) "service Animal" shall mean a service animal as
defined under the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA).
(F) "Township" shall mean the Township of Spring,
Berks County, PennsYlvania.
(G) "IJse Permit" shall mean a document providing for
the use of certain lands andf or facilities of the Park System as
permitted by the Board, or as permitted by such person as the
Board may designate on its behalf.
(H) "Variance Permit" shall mean a document modifying
andf or changing any one or more of the following sections of this
Ordinance."
SECTION 2. Section 109 entitled "Pets and Animals" of Part L entitled "Rules
and Regulations" of Chapter XX entitled "Parks and Recreation" of the Code of
Ordinances of the Township of Spring is hereby amended and restated in its entirety as
follows:
"section 109. Pets and Animals.
(A) No Owner or Keeper shall permit a dog, cat or other
animal under such person's care, custody, or ownership, not to
include a Service Animal, to enter uPon or access any park,
playground, recreation area or any building owned or occupied by
the Township in the Park System, except as set forth at
Subparagraph (B) below.
(B) The Owner or Keeper of any pet dog or dogs may
walk their dogs on and along portions of the improved walking
trail system at Shiloh Hills Park, not to include the pedestrian
easement from the Shiloh Hills Elementary School parking lot to
the northern edge of the Shiloh Hills Elementary School athletic
fields, or as otherwise designated by the Township by resolution
and posting from time to time, subject to the following
requirements, failure to comply with any, each or all of which shall
constitute a violation or violations of this Ordinance:
i. A11 dogs must be on a physically adequate
rope, strap, cord or chain leash of no more than fifteen feet
(15') in length and shall be under the control of the Owner or
' Keeper at all times;
2
ii. A11 dogs must have a current and valid license
tag issued by the Treasurer of Berks County or an
appropriate officer of the jurisdiction of the Owner's or
Keeper's domicile, attached to a collar or harness which is
kept on the dog at all times;
iii. A11 Owners and Keepers shall immediately
remove all dog feces deposited by such dog in a sanitary
method by collection and disposal in an appropriate trash
container; and
iv. Those Owners and Keepers transporting dogs
to the Shiloh Hills Park by motor vehicle shall park the
motor vehicle in the Shiloh Hills Park lot, and not on the
Shiloh Hills Elementary School lots or driveways.
(C) Any Owner or Keeper who has been cited three (3) or
more times for violating this Ordinance or any dog otherwise
determined by this Township to be a nuisance or threat to the
safety of others legally using Shiloh Hills Park or on the Shiloh
Hills Elementary School property, may be excluded from Shiloh
Hills Park upon written directive of the Township Police Chief or
Director of Parks and Recreation issued to the respective Owner or
Keeper."
SECTION 3. A drawing depicting the Shiloh Hills Park walking trails where dog
walking is permitted and the Shiloh Hills Park parking area is attached as Exhibit "A".
SECTION 4. Repeal of Ordinances. A11 ordinances or parts of ordinances
conflicting or inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 5. Severability. If any article, section, subsection, provisiory
regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this Ordinance is,
for any reason, declared to be illegal, unconstitutional or invalid by any Court of
competent jurisdictiory this decision shall not affect or impair the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole/ or any other article, section, subsectiory provisiory regulation,
limitation, restrictiory sentence, clause, phrase, word, or remaining portion of the within
Ordinance. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, hereby declares that it would have adopted the within Ordinance and
each article, section, subsectiory provisiory regulation, limitatiory restrictiory sentence,
clause, phrase and word thereof, irrespective of the limitations, restrictions, sentences,
clauses, phrases, or word that may be declared illegal, unconstitutional or invalid.
107495303
SECTION 6. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective at the earliest
date permitted by law following the date of its enactment..
SECTION 7. Code of Ordinances. The Code of Ordinances, as amended, of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania shall be and remain unchanged and
in full force and effect except as amended, supplemented, and modified by this
Ordinance. This Ordinance shall become a part of the Township of Spring Code of
Ordinances upon adoption.
DULY ORDAINED and ENACTED as an Ordinance this 28tt. day of May,2013.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE
TO\^/NSHIP OF SPRING
Berks County, Pennsylvania
lsEALl
4
yle M. Hummel
MUNICIPAL CERTIFICATION
l, 5L "-u I Rou,qn . essist€st) secretary of the Township of
Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania do hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance No. t'/ott was advertised in the Reading Eagle, a daily newspaper of general circulation in
the Township of spring, on Yt,-F / 7 . 2019, and was duly enacted and
approved as set forth at a ReguHr Meeting of the Board of Supervisors held on
May 28,2013.
ISEALI
5
.t.-" *;:
EXHIBIT "A"
Shiloh Hills Park Walking Trail and Parking Lot Drawing
1lt\-,
I
^.S:,
tJ.
ul
frr
:t'a
1-
t:
i
I
I
4rt
lil*
$lt tti
.ltl
'...(' Y \\ f\\a
{} ,s ii
clt :?
.E'fr
;? i' 3AF
5 *E
E H€
r€i €b hB' 3rc g o j
'49."
-e*{E*
5 x5
&
o.
q
@
?,
5
ii,P
\'wj
")i k:'
*$L ,L$'1.:=
*tt.:f
r.a_,Ji ."j '" ,. .*qi i r0
r i'r 't
----,1 r' !
"" .i\ t 11 I rr i
&, ."\{._t -",.,.'
ff*i - tt
[*.i\
l'.:\
\,
i 1'
I
:
:
i
TOI^/NSHIP OF SPRING
BERKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
ORDINANCE No. {, /
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOI^/NSHIP OF SPRING
AMENDING THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING'S RULES
AND REGULATIONS FOR THE PARK SYSTEM
Pursuant to the authority contained in the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
S 66601 and 53 P.S. S 67203, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring Berks
County, Pennsylvania (the "Township"), does hereby ENACT and ORDAIN amended
rules and regulations to govern the use and enjoyment of the Township's Park System.
AND NOW, THEREFORE be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township as follows:
Sectionl. Chapter XX of the Township of Spring Code of Ordinances (the
"Code of Ordinances"), entitled "Parks and Recreatiornl Areas" , Part L entitled "Rules
and Regulations", Section 124 entrtled "Firearms, KniVeS, Bow and Arrows, Etc.", iS
hereby amended as follows:
Section 1"24. Firearms. Knives, Bow and Arrows, Etc.
A. It shall be unlawful within the Park System for any person to
discharge a firearm or to use a weapon other tharu as follows:
(1) Constables, sheriffs, prison or jail wardens, or their
deputies, policemen of this Commonwealth or its political subdivisions/ or
other law enforcement officers while engaged in their official duties,
including butnot limited to training sessions;
(2) Officers or employees of the United States duly
authorized to carry and discharge a firearm while engaged in their official
duties;
(3) Ary individual who discharges a firearm when
legally necessary to protect human life; to injure, defend against or kill a
dangerous animal, or as otherwise provided by law; and
(4) Any individual who has applied for and has been
issued a Variance Permit pursuant b Section 103 of this Chapter.
B. Nothing in this Section shall exempt any person or persons
from being subject to all the rules and regulations promulgated and set
[1279002
I
forth by Pennsylvania Title 34 known as the "Pennsylvania Game Law", as
amended.
Section 2. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances conflicting with any
provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed irsofar as the same affects this
Ordinance.
Section 3. If any section, provision or part of this Ordinance shall be held
unconstitutional or illegal, such unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the
validity of the remaining sections, provisions or parts of this Ordinance. The Board of
Supervisors hereby declares that it would have enacted and ordained the remaining
sections, provisions or parts of this Ordinance if it had known that such sections,
provisions or parts thereof would he declared unconstitutional.
Section 4. The Code of Ordinances, as amended, of the Township of Spring,
Berks Counfi Pennsylvania shall be and remain unchanged and in full force and effect
except as amended, supplemented, and modified by this Ordinance. This Ordinance
shall become a part of the Township of Spring Code of Ordirnnces upon adoption.
ENACTED this 27h day of April, 2015. This Ordinance shall take effect
immediately.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
TOI^/NSHIP OF SPRING
Berks County, Pennsylvania
Alan S. Kreider, Chairperson
ATTEST:
: ''li;
MI.]NICIPAL CERTIFICATION
L (,AcalsmQ Secretary of the Township of
Sp"irg, Berks , Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance No.
4/t was advertised in the Reading Eagle, a daily newspaper of general circulation in --r------r--'-
the Township of Spring on Friday, Aptil 17,2015, and was duly enacted and approved
as set forth at a Regular Meeting of the Board of Supervisors held on April 27 ' 2015.
lsEALl
ttt-zzsffiz









CHAPTER XXI
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Part 1
Title and Purpose
Section 101. Title
Section 102. Short Title
Section 103. Purposes
Section 201. Definitions
Section 202. Specific Terms
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Section 308.
Section 309.
Section 310.
Section 311
Section 312.
Section 313.
Section 314.
Section 315.
Part 2
Definitions
Part 3
Submission and Review Procedures
General
Pre-Application Conference
Submission of Plans and Pre-Application Information
Review of Plans and Information
Application for Tentative Approval
Review of Tentative Plan
Public Hearings
The Findings
Status of Plan After Tentative Approval
Application for Final Approval (Final Development Plan)
Review of Final Plan
Development in Stages
Performance Guarantee
Release of Performance Guarantee
Dedication and Maintenance Guarantee
Part 4
Plan Requirements
Section 401. Pre-Application
Section 402. Tentative Plan
Section 403. Final Plan
Part 5
Development Standards
Section 501. Eligibility
Section 502. Permitted Uses
Section 503. Permitted Accessory Uses
Section 504. Permitted Density
Section 601.
Section 602.
Section 603.
Section 604.
Section 605.
Section 606.
Section 607.
Section 608.
Section 609.
Section 610.
Section 611.
Section 612.
Section 613.
Section 614.
Section 615.
Section 616.
Part 6
Design Standards
Design, Bulk and Location Requirements
Area and Bulk Regulations
Tree Conservation and Erosion Control
Streets
Sanitary Sewage Disposal
Water Supply
Storm Drainage
Utility Easements
Erosion and Sediment Controls and Guidelines
Parking and Truck Loading Requirements
Lighting
Storage of Trash and Rubbish
Access and Traffic Controls
Sign Regulations
Natural Features and Open Space Analysis
Supplementary Regulations
AL7425
Part 7
Improvement Specifications
Section 701. General Requirements
Section 702. Required Improvements
Part 8
Standards for Location and Management of Common Open Space,
Recreation Facilities and Required Open Space
Section 801. Common Open Space and Recreation Facilities
Section 802. Required Open Space
Part 9
Management, Maintenance and Repair of Public Facilities
And Community Services
Section 901. Responsibility
Part 10
Administration and Review
Section 1001. Permits
Section 1002. Post Completion Regulations
Section 1003. Revisions and Amendment
Section 1004. Modifications
Section 1005. Appeals and Challenges
Section 1006. Fees
Section 1007. Keeping of Records
Section 1008. Responsibility
Section 1009. Severability
XXI-3
AL7425
Section 1101.
Section 1102.
Section 1103.
Part 11
Appendix
Certification of Accuracy
Certification of Ownership, Acknowledgement of Plan and Offer of
Dedication
Certificate of Municipal Approval
AL7425
Part 1
Title and Purpose
Section 101. Title. An Ordinance supplementing the Township of Spring's
Zoning Ordinance (Chapter )00U1) and the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) in order to implement in the Township the purposes and
intent of Planned Residential Development as defined and authorized by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 93 of
1972) and establishing qualifications, procedures and standards for such development.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 101)
Section 102. Short Title. This Chapter shall be known, and may be cited as "The
Township of Spring Planned Residential Development Ordinance of 1987."
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 102)
Section 103. Purposes. The Township of Spring desires to take full advantage of
modern design, construction, technology and planning methods and thus seeks to
permit Planned Residential Development, under certain conditions meeting certain
design standards of the Municipality. In order to ensure sound comprehensive planning
for the potential use of the land within the piecemeal and unrelated development of
large tracts of land within the Municipality, this Chapter is established. This Chapter is
intended to achieve, among others, the following purposes and objectives:
(A) To provide an optional approach to community development with
provisions to permit more efficient use of land and of public services on other
than a lot by lot basis.
(B) To further the objectives of the Township's Comprehensive Plan
approved by the Planning Commission and adopted by the Board of
Supervisors.
(C) To encourage innovations in residential development so that the
growing demand for housing may be met by greater variety in type, design and
layout of dwellings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space
ancillary to said dwellings.
(D) To encourage a more efficient use of land and public services and
to reflect changes in the technology of land development so that the economics
so secured may be for the benefit of those who need homes and housings.
(E) To encourage more flexible land development which will respect
and conserve natural resources such as streams, lakes, floodplains, groundwater,
)0G -5
AL7425
wooded areas, steeply-sloped areas and areas of unusual beauty or importance
to the natural ecosystem.
(F) And, in aid of these purposes, to provide a procedure which can
relate the type, design and layout of residential development to the particular
site and the particular demand for housing existing at the time of development in
a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values within existing
residential areas, and to assure that the increased flexibility of regulations over
land development established hereby is carries out pursuant to sound,
expeditious and fair administrative standards and procedures.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 103)
AL7425
Part 2
Definitions
Section 201. Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms, phrases
and words are defined as follows:
(A) Tense, Gender and Number - Words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and the
neuter; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
(B) General Terms - The word "shall" or "must" is always mandatory;
the word "may" is permissive, the words "used for" includes "designed for,"
"arranged for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." The word
"building" includes "structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the
phrase "or part thereof."
(C) Terms, Phrases and Words Not Defined - When terms, phrases or
words are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or
such as the context may imply.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27,1987, Section 201)
Section 202. Specific Terms. Terms or words used herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated, shall have the following meanings:
Accessory Buildings: A building (such as a private garage, garden shed,
private toolhouse or children's playhouse or a noncommercial greenhouse)
which is subordinate and accessory to a principal building on the same lot and
which is used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal
building.
Accessory Structure: A structure serving a purpose customarily incidental
to the use of the principal building and located on the same lot as the principal
building.
Accessory Use: A use subordinate and customarily incidental to the
principal use on the same lot.
Advertising Signs: See Signs, Advertising.
Alley: A private way affording only secondary means of access to adjacent
property.
)0a - 7
Alteration: Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the
existing facilities of a building or structure, or any enlargement thereof, whether
by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving of such
building from one location or position to another.
Applicant: A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filled an application for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
Area: The extent of surface contained within the boundaries or extremities
of land.
Area Designation Line: A line drawn on the plan of the proposed
development designating the limit of various uses, as permitted by this Chapter,
drawn for the purpose of area and density computations.
Attached Building: See Building, Attached.
Attic: That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or
partly within the roof framing.
Basement: A story partly below the finished grade but having at least
one-half of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling) above the
average level of the finished grade where such grade abuts the exterior walls of
the building. A basement shall be considered as one story in determining the
permissible number of stories.
Block: A tract of land or a lot or group of lots, bounded by streets, public
parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies of water, boundary lines of
the Municipality, or by any combination of the above.
Block or Lot Frontage: That portion of a block or lot which fronts on a
single street.
Building: Any combination of materials forming any structure which is
erected on the ground and permanently affixed thereto, designed, intended or
arranged for the housing, shelter, enclosure or structural support of persons,
animals or property of any kind. A multi-family building divided by unpierced
masonry division walls extending from the ground to the underside of the roof
shall not be deemed to be more than one (1) building for purpose of this Chapter.
Building Area: The maximum horizontal cross-sectional area.
AL7425
Building, Attached: A building which has two (2) or more walls or
portions thereof in common with an adjacent building.
Building, Coverage: The percentage which when multiplied by the lot area
will determine the permitted building area of all roofed structures and buildings.
Building, Detached: A building which has no parts or walls in common
with an adjacent building.
Building Length: The longest horizontal distance of any building wall,
measured from exterior face to exterior face by walls
Building Line or Building Setback Line: A line, established by the required
front yard, defining the minimum distance between any building or structure or
portion thereof to be erected or altered, and an adjacent right-of-way or street
line. Such line shall be measured at right angles from the street right-of-way line
and shall be parallel to said right-of-way line.
Building, Semi- Detached: A building which has one (1) wall, or portions
thereof, in common with an adjacent building.
Bulk: A term used to describe the size, volume, area or shape of buildings
or other structures and their physical relationship to each other, to open space, or
to tracts of land, to lot lines, or to other buildings or structures.
Carport: A roofed-over structure open on two (2) or more sides and used
in conjunction with a dwelling for the storage of private motor vehicles.
Cartway (Roadway): The portion of a street right-of-way paved or
unpaved, intended for vehicular use.
Cellar: A story partly below the finished grade, having more than one-half
of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling) below the average
level of the adjoining finished grade where such grade abuts the exterior walls of
the building. A cellar shall not be considered a story in determining the
permissible number of stories.
Certificate of Use and Occupancy: A statement, based on an inspection,
signed by the Zoning Administrative Officer, setting forth that a building,
structure, sign and/ or land complies with this Chapter, and/ or that a building,
structure, sign and/or land may be lawfully employed for specific uses, or both,
as set forth therein.
AL7425
Clear Sight Triangle: An area of unobstructed vision at the street
intersection defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance from the
intersection of street center lines.
Common Open Space: A parcel or parcels of land or a combination of land
and water within a planned residential development and designed and intended
for the use or enjoyment of residents of the planned residential development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities.
Common open space shall be substantially free of structures but may contain
such improvements as are in the development plan as finally approved and as
are appropriate for recreational use by the residents. Center landscaped island
turnarounds on cul-de-sac streets shall be considered common open space.
The buildings, structures and improvements which are permitted
in the common open space must be appropriate to the uses which are
authorized for the common open space and must conserve and enhance
the amenities of the common open space having regard to its topography
and unimproved condition.
Common Open Space includes:
(a) Land area of the site not covered by buildings and
parking structures, except recreational structures.
(b) Land which is accessible and available to all
occupants of the planned residential development.
Common Open Space does not include:
(a) Existing or proposed street rights-of-way.
(b) Parking areas or driveways.
(c) School buildings or school ground.
(d) Commercial areas, and the buildings, accessory
buildings, parking and loading facilities for these commercial areas.
(e) Required open space.
Comprehensive Plan: The Township of Spring's Comprehensive Plan.
County Planning Commission: The Berks County Planning Commission.
XXI - 10
AL7425
Crosswalk (Interior Walk): A publicly or privately owned right-of-way for
pedestrian use extending from a street into a block or across a block to another
street.
Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any
general and public use, reserving to himself no other rights than those that are
compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the
property has been devoted.
Density: Unless otherwise stipulated in this Chapter, the term density
shall mean gross density which shall be determined by dividing the total number
of dwelling units by the total amount of land in the tract to be developed minus
all land within the future right-of-way of existing streets.
Detached Building: See Building, Detached.
District: A portion of the Municipality, within which certain uniform
regulations and requirements or combinations thereof apply under the
provisions of the Municipality's Zoning Ordinance (Chapter XXXII).
Developer: Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to make a subdivision of
land or a land development.
Development Plan: A proposal for the development of a planned
residential development, prepared in accordance with this Chapter, including a
plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of building
and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets,
driveways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The
phrase "provisions of the development plan" when used in this Chapter shall
mean both the written and graphic material.
Development in Stages: A development program extending over the
period of development during which the annual number of housing units and
mandatory improvements required by this Chapter are constructed.
Dwelling: A building designed or used as the living quarters for one (1) or
more families. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include rooming
house, tourist home, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, dormitory, fraternity,
sorority house or other group residence. For purposes of this Chapter, the
following types of dwellings are defined:
AL7425
(1) Single Family Detached Dwelling: A detached building
arranged, designed and intended for occupancy exclusively by one family.
The term "Single Family Detached Dwelling" shall be deemed to include a
factory built "Modular Home" placed on a permanent perimeter
foundation.
(a) Modular Home Dwelling (defined by the
Pennsylvania Industrialized Housing Act / Act 70): Any structure
designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or in
substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation, on the building site; housing units defined as mobile
homes are excluded from this definition.
(2) Two-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling: A building arranged,
designed and intended for occupancy by two (2) families living
independent of each other in separate dwelling units which are entirely
separated by vertical walls and which are unpierced except for access to
the outside or to a common cellar. This type of dwelling is commonly
called a twin or duplex home.
(3) Two-Family Detached Dwelling: A building arranged,
designed or intended for occupancy by two (2) families living
independently of each other in separate dwelling units that are separated
primarily by horizontal floors as opposed to vertical walls.
(4) Multiple Family Building: A building arranged, designed
and intended for three (3) or more dwelling units and which include the
following housing types:
(a) Garden Apartment: A multi-family building in which
the individual dwelling units have entrances from common
hallways. The building is on a lot which is held in single and
separate ownership which have yards in common but which may
also have other joint facilities and services.
(b) Single Family Attached Dwelling: A dwelling unit
within a building which has no more than six (6) attached dwelling
units (including the end unit). Each unit is arranged, designed,
intended for and occupied exclusively by one (1) family. Each
dwelling unit is separated by unpierced vertical fire walls and has
at least one (1) separate entrance from the outside and where each
structure has two (2) side yards except end units which have one
)0(1 - 12
AL7425
side yard. This includes most dwellings commonly referred to as
"townhouses" or "rowhouses."
Dwelling Unit: One or more living or sleeping rooms together with
separate cooking and sanitary facilities which are accessible from the outdoors,
whether directly or through an entrance hall shared with other dwelling units
and used or intended to be used by a family.
Easement: A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, and within which the lessee or
owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structure, but shall have the
right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent with the rights
of the grantee.
Endorsement: The application of the reviewing body's signature and the
governing body's signatures and seal on the Record Plan.
Engineer: A licensed professional engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, foster
relationship or adoption (or a group of not more than four (4) persons not related
by blood, marriage or adoption) living together in a single dwelling and
maintaining and functioning as a common household. The term "family" shall be
deemed to include any domestic employees or gratuitous guests, but shall not
include any roomer, boarder, lodger nor persons residing in a group home.
Findings: The Governing Body shall, within thirty (30) days following the
conclusion of the public hearing, notify the landowner in writing either granting
tentative approval of the development plan, granting tentative approval subject
to certain conditions, or denying tentative approval of the development plan.
Floor Area or Gross Floor Area: The total space of all floors, as measured
to the outside surfaces of exterior walls (or from the centerline of party walls
separating two buildings), but excluding cellars, crawl spaces, garages, carports,
attics without floors, open porches, balconies and terraces.
Garage, Private: An enclosed space for the storage of one or more private
motor vehicles provided that not business, occupation or service is conducted
nor space therein leased to a nonresident of the premises.
Governing Body: The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring,
Berks County, Pennsylvania.
X)G - 13
AL7425
Gross Residential Density: The number of dwelling units per acre in a
planned residential development, computed by dividing the total number of
dwelling units which the applicant proposes to construct by the total number of
acres in the planned residential development. The total number of acres shall not
include any area of the property within existing street rights-of-way or areas
proposed for commercial development.
Gross Stage Residential Density: The number of dwelling units per acre
permitted within a designated section or stage of a planned residential
development.
Grade: Grade shall be the arithmetic mean of the maximum and minimum
finished ground elevation adjoining the buildings.
Height of Buildings: The vertical distance from the grade at the front of
the building or the average of the grades of the street fronts, if building faces
more than one street, to the highest point of the roof beams of a flat roof and to
the mean height between eaves and ridge for gables, hipped and pitched roofs.
Height of Signs or Other Structures: The vertical distance measured from
the grade at the front of the structure or sign to its highest point. The highest
point in the case of a sign shall include the supporting structure.
Home Occupation: An accessory use which:
(1) is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling
unit and
(2) is carried on only within the dwelling unit.
Improvements: Any type of structure, excavation or paved area, excluding
driveways and walkways or curbs.
Land Development:
(1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts or parcels or land for any purposes involving a) a group of two or
more buildings, or b) the division or allocation of land or space between
or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or
for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
AL7425
(2) A subdivision of land.
Landowner: The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any condition) or a leasee (if he is authorized under the
lease to exercise the right of the landowner) or other person having a proprietary
interest in land.
Lot: A tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint
ownership, not necessarily a lot or lots shown on a duly recorded map, which is
occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures and accessory
buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required. The
term lot shall also mean parcel, plot, site or any similar term.
Lot Area: The space contained within the lot lines, excluding space within
all existing and future or ultimate street rights-of-way.
Lot, Corner: A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two or
more intersecting streets, and which has an interior angle of less than 135 degrees
at the intersection of two (2) street lines.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which, do not abut a
street.
Lot, Through: An interior lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
Lot Line: Any line dividing one (1) lot from another.
Lot Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
the minimum front yard setback lines. In no case shall the minimum street
frontage be less than one-half (1/2) of the required lot width.
Marker: A rust-proof metal pipe or pin of at least three-fourth inch (3/4")
diameter and at least twenty-four inches (24") in length.
Monument: A stone or reinforced concrete monument complying with the
size and shape specifications of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey.
Municipality: The Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
Municipal Authority: An Authority created by the Governing Body
responsible for, but not limited to the construction, operation and/ or
)0G - 15
AL7425
maintenance of water storage, and distribution and/or sewage collection and
treatment facilities.
Municipal Engineer: A duly registered professional engineer employed by
the Municipality or engaged as a consultant thereto.
Municipal Solicitor: An attorney at law appointed by the Governing Body
or his duly authorized representative.
Municipal Zoning Officer: The agent or official designated by the
Governing Body to administer and enforce the Municipal Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter )00C11).
Net Residential Area: Those areas of the planned residential development
not in common open space or within existing street rights-of-way. Net residential
areas contain proposed dwelling units, streets, walkways and parking areas.
Net Residential Density: The number of dwelling units per net residential
area in the planned residential development, computed by dividing the number
of dwelling units which the applicant proposes to construct by the total number
of acres within the net residential area.
Nonconforming Structure or Building: A structure or building, or part
thereof, which does not conform to the applicable provisions or requirements of
this Chapter, either at the time of enactment of this Chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments thereto, where such building or structure lawfully
existed prior to the enactment of this Chapter or amendment. Such
nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming Use: A building, structure, sign or use of land which does
not conform to the applicable regulations of this Chapter, either at the time of the
enactment of this Chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto, but
which did not violate any applicable use regulations prior to the enactment of
this Chapter or amendments. However, no existing use shall be deemed
nonconforming solely because of the existence of less than the required off-street
parking spaces.
Official Plans: The Comprehensive Development Plan and/or Official
Map and/or Topographical and/or such other Plans, or portions thereof, as may
have been adopted by the Municipality pursuant to statute for the area in which
the planned residential development is located.
Parking Lot: An off-street surfaced area designed solely for the parking of
motor vehicles, including driveways, passageways and maneuvering space
appurtenant thereto.
Parking Space: An off-street space available for the parking of one (1)
motor vehicle and measuring a minimum of ten feet (10') by twenty feet (20'),
unless waived by the Municipal Planning Commission and the Municipal
Planning Commission approves a smaller parking space exclusive of driveways,
passageways and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto.
Plan, Sketch: An informal plan drawn to exact scale, indicating salient
existing features of the tract and showing approximate street and lot layout as a
basis for consideration, prior to preparation of a Tentative Plan.
Plan, Tentative: A preliminary planned residential development plan (and
including all required supplementary data), in lesser detail than a Final Plan,
showing approximate proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration
prior to preparation of a Final Plan prepared by an Engineer.
Plan, Final: A complete and exact planned residential development plan
(and including all required supplementary data), prepared for official recording
as required by statute, to define property rights and proposed streets and other
improvements prepared by an Engineer.
Plan, Record: The linen copy of the Final Plan which contains the original
endorsements of the County Planning Commission and the Municipality(ies) and
which is intended to be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds and
prepared by an Engineer.
Planned Residential Development: A contiguous area of land, controlled
by a single landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of
dwelling units, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot size,
bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space to the
regulations established in any one residential district created from time to time,
under the provisions of a Municipal Zoning Ordinance (Chapter XXXII).
Planning Commission or Municipal Planning Commission: The Planning
Commission of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
Plat: A map or plan of a planned residential development, whether
tentative or final.
AL7425
Public Grounds: Includes 1) parks, playgrounds and other public areas,
and 2) sites for publically owned buildings and facilities.
Public Notice: Notice published once a week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality. Such notice shall state the
time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not more than thirty (30)
days nor less than fourteen (14) days from the date of the hearing.
Quadraplex: A detached structure containing four (4) dwelling units with
each dwelling unit having separate entrances, two (2) exposures and two (2)
walls in common with adjacent dwelling units.
Required Open Space: Front, side and rear yards as required by this
Chapter and any other area required to satisfy the net residential density
requirement.
Reserve Strip: A parcel of ground in separate ownership separating a
street from other adjacent properties, or from another street.
Reverse Frontage Lot: A lot extending between and having frontage on
two generally parallel streets, (excluding service streets), with vehicular access
solely from one street.
Right-of-Way: The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, alley, crosswalk or for other public or semipublic purposes.
Roadway: See Cartway.
Rowhouse: See Townhouse.
Semi-Detached Building: See Building, Semi-Detached.
Sanitary Sewage Disposal, Off-Site: A sanitary sewage collection system in
which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of pipes to a central
treatment and disposal plant.
Section: A geographical area or tract which is part of a proposed planned
residential development which will be developed according to a timetable for
development over a period of years included by the applicant in the
development plan.
AL7425
Sight Distance: The required length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic. Within the sight distance measurement there shall be
made from a point 0.5' above the centerline of the road surface to a point 4.5'
above the centerline of road surface.
Sign: A visual display or image which is affixed to, painted or represented
directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, land or any surface and which
directs attention to an object, product, service, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business, regardless of whether such display or image is
permanent or temporary, but excluding displays or images which are decorative
only.
Sign, Advertising: A "sign" which directs attention to a business, service or
profession, conducted, sold or offered for sale elsewhere than upon the premises
upon where the sign is displayed.
Sign, Business: A "sign" which directs attention to a business, service or
profession conducted on the premises or to products sold, upon the same
premises upon which it is displayed. Signs offering premises for sale, rent or
development, or advertising the services of professionals or building trades
during construction or alteration shall be deemed a "business sign."
Stage: A section or sections of which an applicant proposes to develop at
the same time, as part of a timetable for development of a planned residential
development over a period of years.
Story (and Half-Story): That portion of a building, included between the
surface of any floor and the ceiling next above it, having a vertical distance of not
less than seven feet (7') shall be considered a full story. Any such portion of a
building having a vertical distance of less than seven feet (7') shall be considered
a half-story. Basements shall be considered full stories while cellars shall not be
considered as being stories or half-stories.
Street: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means
of access to abutting property and contains a right-of-way area (in addition to the
cartway), including avenue, place, way, parkway, lane, boulevard, highway,
road and any other thoroughfare except an alley, access drive or driveway. The
Official Street Classification Map in this Chapter shall be used to define each
street by its function.
(1) Expressway: A high-speed street with access available only
using ramps at interchanges.
)0a - 19
AL7425
(2) Arterial Street: Streets designed primarily to carry medium
to heavy volumes of traffic at moderately high speeds, and generally
should not provide access to land which would interfere with their
primary traffic functions.
(3) Collector Street: Streets designed to carry a moderate
volume of traffic between Local Streets and Arterials at moderate speeds
and provide only limited vehicular access to the abutting properties.
(4) Local Street: Streets designed to provide direct access from
abutting properties to Collector and Arterial Streets.
(5) Internal Street: A local street used for circulation and access
within a development project involving Multi-residence or commercial
use.
(6) Service Street: A minor public right-of-way providing
secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties.
Structure: Any man-made object having an ascertainable, stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land . The term
structure shall include: buildings, signs, fences, walls, towers, swimming pools,
porches, garages and similar structures. "Structure" shall be interpreted as
including the words "or part thereof."
Use: The specific purpose for which land, sign, structure or building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it may be occupied or maintained, or
any activity, occupation, business or operation which may be carried on thereon
or therein. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a structure (or a group of
structures) which lies between the structure (or a group of structures) and a lot
line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except
as herein permitted.
(1) Yard, Front: A yard extending the full width of the lot
between a structure and the front lot line or side street lot line. On lots
abutting more than one (1) public street other than an alley, the front yard
requirement shall apply fronting each public street.
AL7425
(2) Yard, Rear: A yard extending the full width of the lot
between a structure and a rear lot line.
(3) Yard, Side: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between a structure and the nearest side lot line.
Zoning Administrative Officer or Zoning Officer: See "Municipal Zoning
Officer."
Zoning Map: The Township of Spring Zoning Map.
Zoning Ordinance: The Spring Township Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter )00(1I).
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 201.4)
AL7425
Part 3
Submission and Review Procedures
Section 301. General. Hereafter all applications for a Planned Residential
Development within the corporate limits of the Municipality shall be reviewed by the
Municipal Planning Commission and other Municipal, State or County officials as
deemed necessary and shall be approved or disapproved by the Governing Body in
accordance with procedures specified in this Chapter.
The applicant shall have the right to the uses permitted in this Chapter and to uses
permitted by right, by condition and by special exception in accordance with the design
requirements and regulations prescribed for those uses in the zoning district within
which the applicant is submitting an application for a PRD. (Ordinance No. 194, April
27, 1987, Section 3013)
Section 302. Pre-Application Conference. Before submitting an application for a
planned residential development the applicant shall confer with the Governing Body to
obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments or
incurring substantial expense. At this conference, the following information will be
provided by the Municipality:
(A) The Governing Body will apprise the potential applicant of all
ordinances, rules, procedures and regulations pertaining to the development of a
Planned Residential Development in the Municipality.
(B) The Governing Body will explain the following sequence of events:
submittal of the Tentative Development Plan, the execution of a public hearing
and the review of the Final Development Plan and either granting approval,
modifying or disapproving the application for Planned Residential
Development.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 302)
Section 303. Submission of Plans and Pre-Application Information.
(A) Submission of Information to the Municipality. Copies of all
information for the proposed Planned Residential Development and all required
supporting data shall be submitted to the Municipal Secretary by the developer
or his representative authorized in writing to submit the plan.
(B) Number of Copies. Four (4) legible black-line or blue-line paper
prints of all plans and supporting data shall be required.
XXI - 22
AL7425
(C) Distribution of Information. The Municipal Secretary (or his
representative) shall refer the plans and supporting data to the following:
(1) One (1) copy to the Municipal Planning Commission.
(2) One (1) copy to the Governing Body.
(3) One (1) copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(4) One (1) copy to the Municipal Sewer Authority.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 303)
Section 304. Review of Plans and Information.
(A) The pre-application submission shall be considered as a submission
for informal discussion between the developer and the Municipality. This
submission shall not constitute official submission of a plan to the Municipality.
(B) Review by the Municipal Planning Commission.
(1) A pre-application shall be reviewed by the Municipal
Planning Commission within sixty (60) days from the date the
pre-application was forwarded to the Municipal Planning Commission.
Written notification shall be given to the applicant as to the date of review.
(2) Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the meeting at
which the pre-application is reviewed by the Municipal Planning
Commission, the Planning Commission's Secretary shall send written
notice of the Commission's recommendation including changes or
modifications, if any, required or recommended that it deems necessary or
advisable, to the following:
(a) The Governing Body
(b) The Developer or his Agent
(c) The Municipal Engineer
(d) The Municipal Solicitor
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 304)
X>a - 23
Section 305. Application for Tentative Approval.
(A) Submission of Information to the Municipality. Copies of the Tentative
Plan and all required supporting data shall be officially submitted to the
Municipal Secretary by the developer or his representative authorized in writing
to submit the plan.
(B) Number of Copies.
(1) Three (3) completed copies of an Application for Tentative
Approval.
(2) Six (6) legible black-line or blue-line paper prints of the
Preliminary Plan which shall fully comply with the requirements of this
Chapter. Seven (7) copies of the pan shall be required if a State road abuts
or traverses the Planned Residential Development. Whenever a planned
residential development is located in or adjacent to another municipality,
one (1) additional print shall be required.
(3) Six (6) copies of all other required information.
(C) Filing Fee. The Municipal Secretary (or his representative) shall
collect a filing fee as established by the Governing Body for all planned
residential developments. Fees shall be charged in order to cover the costs of
examining plans and other incidental expenses. The developer shall pay the fee
at the time of application for tentative approval.
(D) Distribution of Tentative Plan. The Municipal Secretary (or his
representative) shall refer the Tentative Plan, after all required fees have been
collected, to the following:
(1) One (1) copy to the Municipal Planning Commission,
including one (1) copy of the application form.
(2) Two (2) copies of the plan to the County Planning
Commission and one (1) copy of all required supporting documents.
(3) One (1) copy to the Governing Body including one (1) copy
of the application form.
(4) One (1) copy to the Municipal Engineer.
AL7425
(5) One (1) copy to the Municipal Sewer Authority.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27,1987, Section 305)
Section 306. Review of Tentative Plan.
(A) Review by the Municipal Engineer. The Municipal Engineer shall
review the Tentative Plan to determine its conformance with this Chapter. The
Engineer may recommend changes, alterations or modifications, as he may deem
necessary. The report of the Engineer shall be in writing and shall be submitted
to the Municipal Planning Commission prior to the regularly scheduled or
special meeting at which the Tentative Plan is to be considered by the Planning
Commission.
(B) Review by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. If a
proposed planned residential development abuts or it is traversed by a state
road, the Municipal Secretary shall transmit one (1) copy of the Tentative Plan to
the district office of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for its
review and comments.
(C) Review by the Municipal Planning Commission.
(1) When a Tentative Plan has been officially submitted, such
plan shall be reviewed by the Municipal Planning Commission at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, or at the discretion of the Planning
Commission, at a special meeting which may be held prior thereto.
(2) During review of the Tentative Plan, the Municipal Planning
Commission shall consider the written reports of the Municipal Engineer,
County Planning Commission, Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, if applicable provided, however, that if these reports are
not received within forty-five (45) days after transmittal to these agencies,
the Planning Commission may officially act without having received and
considered such reports.
(3) If review by the Municipal Planning Commission is
favorable, or unfavorable because the requirements of this Chapter have
not been met, or the Planning Commission deems changes or
modifications of the plan submitted are advisable or necessary, such
decision and the reasons therefore shall be given in written form by the
Secretary of the Planning Commission no less than five (5) days before the
public hearing at which the Tentative Plan is to be reviewed to the
following:
)0G - 25
AL7425
(a) The Governing Body
(b) The County Planning Commission
(c) The Developer or his Agent
(d) The Municipal Engineer
(d) The Municipal Solicitor
In addition, the Municipal Planning Commission shall forward to the
Governing Body copies of all reports received from County Planning
Commission, Department of Transportation and Municipal Engineer.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 306)
Section 307. Public Hearings.
(A) Within sixty (60) days after the filing of a complete application for
tentative approval of a Planned Residential Development pursuant to the
requirements of this Chapter, a public hearing pursuant to public notice on said
application shall be held by the Governing Body in a manner prescribed by law.
(B) The Governing Body may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witness. All testimony by witnesses at a hearing shall be subject to
cross-examination. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the hearing to any other municipality (or municipalities)
wherein the subject Planned Residential Development is located, and to any
other municipality adjoining the Planned Residential Development.
(C) General procedures and order of business shall be in the following
sequence:
(1) Identification of counsel and parties in interest and
certification of compliance with all legal requirements of filing for
hearings and adequacy of notice required.
(2) Identification of counsel in support or opposition thereto.
(3) Identification of others wishing to be heard and their status.
(4) The applicant shall present evidence as to the
development's:
(a) General character and substance.
(b) Objectives and purposes to be served.
(c) Adequacy and completeness of standards.
(d) Satisfactory application of standards in specific details
of design and organization of elements and plans.
(e) Scale, scope and impact of the Planned Residential
Development in the Municipality.
(f)
(g)
(h)
Economic feasibility.
Time factors and sequential development standards.
Conformity to Comprehensive Plans.
(5) The Municipal Planning Commission and County Planning
Commission reviews and recommendations shall be read.
(6) After the presentation, the following information will be
solicited:
(a) Statements and relevant opinions, including
documentation in opposition or modification in the same order.
(b) Questions by the Governing Body.
(c) Summation of statements and conclusions by
opponents, supporters, interested parties and the developer.
(7) The foregoing may be modified by the Governing Body in
the interests of obtaining all of the relevant material evidence in an
orderly fashion.
(D) A verbatim record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the
Governing Body whenever such records are requested by any party to the
proceedings; but the cost of making and transcribing such record shall be borne
by the party requesting it and the expense of copies of such record shall be borne
)0C1 - 27
AL7425
by those who wish to obtain such copies. All exhibits accepted in evidence shall
be duly preserved or, if not accepted in evidence, shall be properly identified and
the reason for the exclusion clearly noted in the record.
(E) The Governing Body may Continue the hearing from time to time,
and may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for a report,
however, that in any event, the public hearing or hearings shall be concluded
within sixty (60) days after the date of the first public hearing.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 307)
Section 308. The Findings.
(A) The Governing Body within thirty (30) days following the
conclusion of the public hearing provided for in this Chapter, shall, by official
written communication to the landowner, either:
(1) Grant tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted;
(2) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
(3) Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of tentative
approval of the development plan as submitted. In the event, however, that
tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within
thirty (30) days after receiving a copy of the official written communication of the
Governing Body, notify such agency of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in
which case, the Governing Body shall be deemed to have denied tentative
approval of the development plan. In the event the landowner does not notify
the Governing Body within said period, tentative approval of the development
plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
(B) The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written communication
shall include not only conclusions but also findings of fact related to
the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for the grant, with or without
conditions, or for the denial, and said communication shall set forth with
particularity in what respects the development plan would or would not be in
the public interest including, but not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions
on the following:
(1) In those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
Municipality.
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from
zoning and subdivision requirements otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to, density, bulk and use and the
reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public
interest.
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open
space in the planned residential development, the reliability of the proposals
for maintenance and conservation of the common open space and
other public services and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and
purpose of the common open space as related to the proposed density and
type of residential development.
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the
manner in which said design does or does not make adequate provision
for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic and,
further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
planned residential development to the neighborhood in which it is
proposed to be established.
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes
development over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of the
residents of the planned residential development in the integrity of the
development plan.
(7) The validity of information pertaining to the developer's
statement of ownership, financial ability, experience and liens upon the
proposed site will be appraised.
(8) The validity of the legal instrument or the developer's
program for managing, maintaining and repairing public facilities and
community services will be appraised.
(C) In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the Governing Body may set forth in the official written
communication the time within which an application for final approval of the
)0G - 29
AL7425
development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a development plan which
provides for development over a period of years, the periods of time within
which applications for final approval of each part thereof shall be filed. Except
upon the consent of the landowner, the time so established between grant of
tentative approval and on application for final approval shall not be less than
three (3) months, nor more than eighteen (18) months. However, an extension of
time may be granted by the Governing Body upon written request.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 308)
Section 309. Status of Plan After Tentative Approval.
(A) The official written communication provided for in Section 308 of
this Chapter shall be certified by the Secretary of the Municipality and shall be
filed in his office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner. Where
tentative approval has been granted, the same shall be noted on the Zoning Map.
(B) Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of
the Planned Residential Development for recording nor authorize development
or in the issuance of any building permits. A development plan which has been
given tentative approval as submitted, or which has been given tentative
approval with conditions which have been accepted by the landowner (and
provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of the conditions
of the tentative approval), shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise
impaired by action of the Municipality pending an application or applications for
final approval, without the consent of the landowner, provided an application
for final approval is filed or, in the case of development over a period of years,
within the time periods specified in the official written communication granting
tentative approval.
(C) In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval
and thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to abandon
said development plan and shall not notify the Municipality in writing, or in the
event the landowner shall fail to file application or applications for final approval
within the required period of time or times as the cases may be, the tentative
approval shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included
in the development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be
subject to those local ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as may be
amended from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the Zoning Map and
in the records of the Secretary of the Municipality.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 309)
AL7425
Section 310. Application for Final Approval (Final Development Plan). An
application for final approval may be for all the land included in a development plan or,
to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, a section thereof. Said application shall
be made to the Municipality and within the time or times specified by the official
written communication granting tentative approval. If application for final approval is
in accordance with the tentatively approved development plan, a public hearing need
not be required.
The Final Plan shall conform in all important respects to the Tentative Plan as
previously reviewed by the Municipal Planning Commission and the Governing Body
and shall incorporate all modifications required by the Municipality in its review of the
Tentative Plan.
(A) Submission of Information to the Municipality. Copies of the Final
Plan and all required supporting data shall be officially submitted to the
Municipal Secretary by the subdivider or his representative authorized in
writing to submit the plan.
(B) Number of Copies.
(1) Three (3) completed copies of the Application for Final
Approval.
(2) Six (6) legible black-line or blue-line paper prints of the Final
Plan which shall fully comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
(3) Six (6) copies of all other required information.
(4) One (1) copy of approvals from Soil Conservation Service,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Municipal Authorities and local utilities.
(C) Filing Fees. The developer shall pay any additional fees, if required.
There shall be no refund or credit of any portion of the fee should the developer
fail to apply for final approval within the required period of time or if the Final
Plan covers only a section of the development for which tentative approval has
been obtained.
(D) Distribution of Final Plan. The Final Plan shall be distributed in
accordance with the requirements of Section 305(D) for Tentative Plan.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27,1987, Section 310)
AL7425
Section 311. Review of Final Plan.
(A) Review by the Municipal Engineer. The Final Plan shall be
reviewed and a written report submitted as required under Section 306(A) for
Tentative Plans. The report shall include a review of the estimate of the cost of
construction of all improvements required by this Chapter by stages of proposed
developments as submitted by the developer.
(B) Review by the Municipal Planning Commission. The Final Plan
shall be reviewed at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Commission, or at the discretion of the Planning Commission, at a special
meeting which may be held prior thereto.
(C) Review by the Governing Body.
(1) In the event the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in support
thereof, and as required by the Chapter and the official written
communication of tentative approval, the Governing Body shall, within
forty-five (45) days of such filing, grant such development plan final
approval.
(2) In the event the development plan as submitted contains
variations from the development plan given tentative approval, the
Governing Body may refuse to grant final approval and shall, within
forty-five (45) days from the filing of the application for final approval, so
advise the landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice
the reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest. In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(a) Refile his application for final approval without the
variations objected to, or;
(b) File a written request with the Governing Body that it
hold a public hearing on his application for final approval. If the
developer wishes to take either such alternate action, he may do so
at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final
approval, or within forty-five (45) additional days if the time for
applying for final approval shall have already passed at the time
when the developer was advised that the development plan was
riot in substantial compliance. In the event the developer shall fail
to take either of these alternate actions within said time, he shall be
deemed to have abandoned the development plan. Any such public
)0CE - 32
hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice within forty-five
(45) days after request for the hearing is made by the developer,
and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this
Chapter for public hearings on applications for tentative approval.
Within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
Governing Body shall, by official written Communication, either
grant final approval to the development plan or deny final
approval. The grant or denial of final approval of the development
plan shall, in cases arising under this Section, be in the form and
contain the findings required for an application for tentative
approval set forth in this Chapter.
(3) A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been
given final approval shall be so certified without delay by the Governing
Body and shall be filed of record forthwith in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Berks County before any development shall take place in
accordance therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development plan,
zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land
included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion
within a reasonable time of said Planned Residential Development or of
that part thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no
modification of the provisions of said development plan, or part thereof,
as finally approved, shall be made except with the consent of the
developer and the Governing Body.
(4) In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, is
given final approval and thereafter the developer shall abandon such plan
or the section thereof that has been finally approved, and shall so notify
the Governing Body in writing; or, in the event the developer shall fail to
commence and carry out the Planned Residential Development within
such reasonable period of time as may be fixed by this Chapter after final
approval has been granted, no development or further development shall
take place on the property included in the development plan until after
said property is resubdivided and is reclassified by enactment of an
amendment to the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter )00C11) and at such time,
the provisions of the Municipality's Zoning Ordinance (Chapter )00CII)
and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter >ONII) shall
become enforceable upon said development.
(D) Distribution of Record Plans. After completion of Final Plan
approval, the developer shall submit:
(1) One (1) paper print to the Recorder of Deeds
XXE - 33
AL7425
(2) One (1) linen print to the Municipal Secretary
(3) Two (2) paper prints to the County Planning Commission
(4) One (1) microfilm aperture card to the Municipal Engineer
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 311)
Section 312. Development in Stages. A developer may construct a Planned Residential
Development in stages if the following criteria are met:
(A) The application for tentative approval covers the entire Planned
Residential Development and shows the location and approximate time of
construction for each stage, in addition to other information required by this
Chapter.
(B) The second and subsequent stages are completed and consistent
with the tentatively approved plan and are of such size and location that they
constitute economically sound units of development. In no event shall such
stages contain less than twenty percent (20%) of the dwelling units receiving
tentative approval.
(C) A schedule for residential, commercial and public facility construction
will be submitted for approval by the Governing Body.
(D) The landscaping for each approved stage, as well as succeeding
approved stages, will be eighty percent (80%) complete before proceeding to the
next stage. No more than two (2) stages may be incomplete at any time.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 312)
Section 313. Performance Guarantee. Prior to final approval of the Final Plan,
the developer shall guarantee the installation of all required improvements.
(A) The developer must post a performance guarantee in the amount of
one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of all improvements required by
this Chapter and as estimated by the Municipal Engineer for that portion of the
development which the developer has submitted to the Municipality for Final
Plan approval. The performance guarantee may be either a performance bond
with corporate surety, or other security acceptable to the Governing Body.
Performance guarantees shall be submitted in a form and with a surety approved
by the Municipal Solicitor guaranteeing the construction and installation of all
)0U - 34
AL7425
improvements within a stated period which shall not be longer than three (3)
years from the date of final approval.
Upon written application signed by both the obligor and surety of a
performance guarantee, in a form approved by the Municipal Solicitor, the
Governing Body may, at their discretion, extend said period by not more than
three (3) additional years.
The amount of the performance guarantee may be reduced by the
Governing Body, by resolution, as and when portions of the required
improvements have been installed. In the event of default, the obligor and surety
shall be liable thereon to the Municipality for the cost of the improvements or
parts thereof not installed. Upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the Municipality
shall install the improvements. If cost of the improvements exceeds the amount
of the performance guarantee, then the developer shall be liable for the amount
in excess which the Municipality has actually expended for such improvements.
In case the amount of the performance guarantee exceeds the actual cost of
improvements made, the Municipality shall return the unused sum to the surety
or the person who has paid or deposited the performance guarantee.
Performance guarantees shall not be released except by written permission from
the Governing Body, and in accordance with the procedures of Section 314.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 313)
Section 314. Release of Performance Guarantee. When the developer has
completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements, the developer shall
notify the Governing Body, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion
of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer.
The Governing Body shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, direct and
authorize the Municipal Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The
Municipal Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Governing Body,
and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered
mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Municipal Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Governing Body, said
report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements,
either in whole or in part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the Municipal Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such non-approval or rejection.
The Governing Body shall notify the developer, in writing, by certified or
registered mail of their action.
)0G - 35
AL7425
If the Governing Body or the Municipal Engineer fail to comply with the time
limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been
approved and the developer shall be released from all liability pursuant to his
performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected
by the Governing Body, the developer shall proceed to complete the same and, upon
completion, the same procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 314)
Section 315. Dedication and Maintenance Guarantee. All streets, parks or other
improvements shown on the Final Plan, recorded or otherwise, shall be deemed to be
private until such time as the same has been offered for dedication to the Municipality
and accepted by resolution of Governing Body.
Before acceptance of any street, park or other improvements, the Governing
Body shall require the developer to file a maintenance guarantee in an amount of not
less than ten percent (10%) of the Municipal Engineer's estimate of the cost of all
improvements required by this Chapter. Such maintenance guarantee shall be in a form
and with a surety approved by the Municipal Solicitor, guaranteeing that the developer
shall maintain all improvements in good condition for a period of two (2) years after
completion of construction or installation of all improvements.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 315)
Part 4
Plan Requirements
Section 401. Pre-Application.
(A) A Sketch Plan of the proposed Planned Residential Development
shall be submitted, clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch (1") equals
one hundred feet (100') or less.
(B) Sketch Plan and all submitted prints thereof shall be made on
sheets either:
(1) Eighteen inches (18") by twenty-four inches (24"), or
(2) Twenty-four inches (24") by thirty-six inches (36"), or
(3) Thirty-six inches (36") by forty-eight inches (48").
(C) If the Sketch Plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram
showing relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet.
(D) The Sketch Plan shall contain at least the following information, but
not necessarily showing precise dimensions:
(1) Tract boundaries accurately labeled.
(2) Name of the municipalities in which the development is
located.
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
North point, scale (written and graphic) and date.
Name of proposed development or other identifying title.
Significant topographical and physical features.
Proposed general street and lot layout.
(7) A location map with sufficient information to enable the
location of property.
AL7425
(8) The approximate number and location of dwelling units and
commercial establishments as well as the location of common open space
and recreation facilities shall be submitted.
(E) The Sketch Plan shall be accompanied by the following supporting
data:
(1) The developer shall submit written evidence that he has a
proprietary interest in the site which shall consist of a fee simple title; or
an option to acquire a fee simple title within a specified time period; or a
leasehold interest in excess of forty (40) years; or a substantial interest in a
joint venture agreement, real estate investment trust or other real estate
syndication which has or can obtain a fee simple title; or a marketable title
subject to certain restraints which will not subsequently restrict its
development within a reasonable time.
(2) All mortgages, easements, restricting land use, liens and all
judgments which may affect the site shall be identified. In addition, the
developer shall submit proof of financial responsibility. The developer
shall propose a method of notifying where necessary, all parties affected
of his intentions to submit a Tentative Development Plan for a Planned
Residential Development.
(3) The developer shall submit information pertaining to his
personal experience in real estate development to include all corporations
now or formally in existence in which the developer exercised substantial
control. No developer shall be qualified to undertake a Planned
Residential Development unless he has had past successful experience in
real estate in projects involving housing construction comparable to that
proposed or can prove an existing relationship through contract,
partnership, joint venture or other form of real estate syndication with a
person possessing such qualifications.
(4) The developer shall submit evidence of his present financial
position to include existing or proposed credit sources for land acquisition
and construction. No developers shall be approved unless it can be
shown that he possesses or has the ability to acquire sufficient funds for
the development of the site.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 401)
AL7425
Section 402. Tentative Plan.
(A) The intent of the Tentative Plan submission requirements is to
provide the schematic design and planning information specifically required by
Section 707(4) of Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
without mandating detailed site engineering, architecture or landscape
architecture which shall be required in the Final Plan submission.
The tentative plan shall include all information as required under Section
401 in this Chapter and shall be drawn to a scale of one (P) inch equals fifty feet
(50') and presented on the same sheet sizes as required for the sketch plan except
for sites in excess of 100 acres which may be at a scale of 1"=100' and sites in
excess of 400 acres which may be at a scale of 1"=200'.
(1) Date, including the month, day and year that the Tentative
Plan was completed and the month, day and year that the Tentative Plan
was revised, for each revision.
(2) Name of recorded owner and developer.
(3) Name, address, license number and seal of the registered
engineer responsible for the plan.
(4) Names of all owners of all abutting unplatted land and the
names of all abutting subdivisions, if any, with the book and page number
where recorded.
(5) A key map for the purpose of locating the property being
developed drawn at a scale not less than one inch (1") equals eight
hundred feet (800') and showing the relation of the property,
differentiated by tone or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets,
roads, municipal boundaries, zoning districts, watercourses and any areas
subject to flooding, and recorded subdivision plans existing within one
thousand feet (1,000') of any part of the property.
(6) Total tract boundaries of the property being developed
showing bearings and distances and a statement of total acreage of the
property.
(7) Zoning data including all of the following if applicable:
(a) Existing Municipal regulations, including district
designations, requirements for lot sizes and front yards and any
)0C[ - 39
AL7425
zoning district boundary lines traversing the proposed
development.
(b) Any changes in the existing PRD regulations to be
requested by the developer.
(c) Any Municipal regulations other than PRD
regulations.
(8) Contour lines at vertical intervals of at least two feet (2') for
land with average natural slope of four percent (4%) or less, and at
intervals of at least five feet (5') for land with average natural slope
exceeding four percent (4%) prepared from actual field survey.
(9) Locations and elevation of the U.S.G.S. datum to which
contour elevations refer. Where practicable, a known, established bench
mark shall be used. Wherever other than U.S.G.S. datum is used, a
conversion factor to U.S.G.S. shall be given.
(10) All existing sewer lines, water lines, fire hydrants, electric
and telephone utility lines, culverts, bridges, railroads, quarries, strip
mines, watercourses, floodplain areas, based on a 100-year storm
frequency, unless otherwise specified by the Municipal Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter )00U1), and other significant man-made or natural features
within the proposed development and one hundred feet (100') beyond the
boundaries of the proposed development.
(11) All existing buildings or other structures and the
approximate location of all existing tree masses, and all other trees over
four inches (4") in diameter, rock out-crops, watercourses within the
proposed development or ocher significant features.
(12) All existing streets on the Official Plan or Plans of the Municipality
(including unpaved streets), including streets of record (recorded
but not constructed), easements and rights-of-way, including names,
rights-of-way widths, cartway (pavement) widths and approximate
grades within and adjoining the planned residential development.
(13) The full plan of proposed development, including the
following schematic information:
AL7425
(a) Location and width of all streets, easements and
rights-of-way, with a statement of any conditions governing their
use, and suggested types i.e. collector, major, minor, etc.
(b) Suggested street names and utility easement
locations.
(c) Approximate lot lines.
(d) Lot numbers and statement of approximate number
of lots and parcels.
(e) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential
lots and parcels.
(f) Water supply, sanitary and/or storm sewers (and
other drainage facilities) and any proposed connections with
existing facilities.
(g) Parks, playgrounds and other areas proposed to be
dedicated or reserved for public use with any conditions governing
such use.
(h) Net residential density of each land use within the
planned residential development and the gross residential density
of the planned residential development.
(i) The use and the approximate height, bulk and
location of buildings and other structures, other uses of land and
common open space.
(14) The distance of the site to fire stations, police stations,
schools, shopping centers and major transportation routes shall be shown.
(B) The Tentative Plan shall be accompanied by the following
supplementary data as applicable:
(1) Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed
streets.
(2) A plan for the preliminary location of surface and subsurface
drainage (swales, inlets, storm sewer systems) of the tract shall be shown.
AL7425
(3) Preliminary locations of any bridges or culverts shall be
shown.
(4) Where a Tentative Plan shows the proposed Planned
Residential Development of only a part of the developer's total property, a
sketch shall be required showing the prospective street system in the
remainder of the property so that the street system in the submitted
portion shall be considered in relation to future connections with the
un-submitted portion. To prevent undue hardship in the case of extremely
large properties, the Municipal Planning Commission may, based on
existing natural or manmade features, delimit the area for which a
prospective street system shall be sketched.
(5) A report indicating the function, size, ownership and
manner of maintenance of the common open space.
(6) A draft of covenents, grants of easements or other
restrictions to be imposed upon the use of land, building and structures,
including proposed grants and/or easements for public utilities.
(7) A written statement by the developer setting forth the
reasons why, in his opinion, the Planned Residential Development would
be in the public interest and would be consistent with the Municipality's
Comprehensive Plan.
(8) In the case of Planned Residential Development plans that
call for development in stages, a schedule showing the time within which
applications for final approval of all parts of the Planned Residential
Development are intended to be filed, and this schedule shall be updated
annually by the anniversary of final approval.
(9) A draft of a legal instrument that indicates the manner and
extent that the developer intends to manage, maintain and repair the
public facilities and community services as required in this Chapter.
(10) A draft of a legal instrument that indicates the manner in
which the developer intends to locate and manage common open space
and recreation facilities.
(11) A report that evaluates the effect of the Planned Residential
Development on municipal services (such as police, fire, recreation) public
facilities, utilities, budget, storm water drainage and transportation
system. Additionally, the report will describe the impact on the local
)CCE - 42
AL7425
school district budget and present any future school building
requirements. A numerical comparison of the planned residential
development and development under conventional zoning shall be
included.
(12) A statement, insofar as possible, to indicate compliance with
the provisions set forth in this Chapter governing the requirements for
approval.
(13) A statement by the developer that building materials and the
building regulations as promulgated in the Municipality's Building Code
and other codes relating to construction will be the standards for the
Planned Residential Development. Moreover, that all building and
construction will meet the standards of the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry and the Federal Housing Administration, if
applicable.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 402)
Section 403. Final Plan.
(A) The Final Plan shall be of a size drawn to scale, and show all
information as required for Tentative Plans under Section 402 in this Chapter.
Furthermore, anything submitted in final form for the Final Plan. The Final Plan
shall show the following:
(1) Name of the recorded owner (and developer) of the tract,
and the source(s) of title to the land being developed, as shown by the
records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
(2) The total tract boundary lines of the area being developed
with accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and bearings to
one-quarter (1/4) of a minute. These boundaries shall be determined by
accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and close with an
error of closure not to exceed one foot (1') in ten-thousand feet (10,000');
provided, however, that the boundary (s) adjoining additional un-platted
land (for example, between separately submitted Final Plan sections) are
not required to be based upon field survey, and may be calculated. The
location and elevation of all boundary line (perimeter) monuments shall
be indicated, along with a statement of the total area of the property being
developed. In addition, the engineer shall certify, to the accuracy of the
survey, the drawn plan, and the placement of the monuments.
(3) The name (or number) and cartway width and lines of all
existing public streets and the name and location of all other roads within
the property.
(4) The following data shall be shown for the cartway edges and
rights-of-way lines and, if required, the ultimate right-of-way, for all
existing, recorded, (except those to be vacated) and/or proposed streets
within or abutting the property to be developed: the length and width (in
feet to the nearest hundredth of a foot) of all straight lines and of the radii
and of the arc (or chord) of all curved lines. The length of all arcs (in feet
to the nearest hundredth of a foot) and the central angle in degrees,
minutes and seconds.
(5) All straight lot lines shall be dimensioned (in feet, to the
nearest hundredth of a foot) and all internal angles within lot lines shall be
designated (in degrees, minutes and seconds). Curved lot lines shall show
length of arc (in feet, to the nearest hundredth of a foot) and the central
angle (in degrees, minutes and seconds).
(6) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots,
with reference to restrictions of any type which exist or will exist as
covenants in the deed for the lots contained in the development, and if
covenants are recorded, including the book and page number.
(7) The proposed building reserve (setback) line for each lot, or
the proposed placement of each building.
(8) The location (and elevation, if established) of all existing and
proposed required street monuments.
(9) All easements or rights-of-way where provided for or
owned by public services and any limitations on such easements or
rights-of-way. Rights-of-way shall be shown and accurately identified on
the plan, and easements shall either be shown or specifically described on
the plan. Easements should be located in cooperation with the appropriate
public utilities.
(10) Plan for water supply and distribution; fire hydrants;
locations, size and invert elevations of all sanitary and/ or storm sewers
and location of all manholes, inlets and culverts (this data may be
submitted as a separate plan).
AL7425
(11) If the development proposes a new street intersection with a
State Legislative Route, a letter from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation approving the proposed intersections shall be submitted
with the final plan.
(12) A clear sight triangle shall be clearly shown for all street
intersections.
(13) A Certification of Ownership, Acknowledgement of Plan
and Offer of Dedication shall be lettered on the plan, and shall be duly
acknowledged and signed by the owner(s) of the property, and notarized.
(14) As required under Title 25, Chapter 102 Rules and
Regulations, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, the
proposed erosion and sediment plan shall be shown on the final plan or
submitted as a separate plan. If a separate plan, three (3) copies will be
required. The plan must be prepared by a professional engineer.
Additional easements or land acquired for drainage systems extending to
off-site watercourses will be shown.
(15) A plan for the final location of surface and subsurface
drainage of the tract shall be shown. This plan shall include storm water
runoff calculations for the entire property being developed (keyed to the
plan submitted) as well as anticipated runoff from areas at a higher
elevation in the same watershed and shall show the proposed method of
accommodating the anticipated runoff and shall be subject to approval by
the Municipal Engineer and the Department of Environmental Resources.
(16) The final designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required shall be shown. These designs shall meet all applicable
requirements of the Water and Power Resources Board, Division of Dams
and Encroachments or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
Calculations for water-way opening shall be included. All designs shall be
subject to approval by the Municipality.
(17) A certificate for approval of the Plan by the Governing Body
and by the Municipal Planning Commission shall be lettered on the plan.
(18) The total number of lots, dwelling units, square feet of nonresidential
uses, gross and net residential density, gross and net
residential density in each section, total acres of common open space and
number of off-street parking space provided.
AL7425
(19) Building coverage information and location of all types of
dwelling units, and nonresidential structures, giving dimensions of the
structures, distances between the structures, distances to street
rights-of-way and parking areas, with distances accurate to the nearest
hundredth of a foot.
(20) Accurate dimensions of common open space areas
specifically indicating those areas to be preserved in their natural state
and those areas to be developed for active recreation. Where common
open space areas are to be developed, the exact location of the structures
in common open space areas will be illustrated
(21) Locations and dimensions of parking areas and pedestrian
walkways.
(22) Location and dimensions of easements for utilities and any
limitations on such easements.
(23) Certification with seal, by a registered engineer to the effect
that the survey and plans are correct to the accuracy required by this
Chapter.
(24) A blank space measuring three inches (3") square shall be
left along the lower edge of the sheet, in order that the Recorder of Deeds
may acknowledge receipt of the Plan when it is presented.
(B) A copy of the approved erosion and sediment plan shall
accompany Final Plan submission as required under Title 25, Chapter 102, Rules
and Regulations, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. Permits
shall be submitted with the Plan of Record.
(C) The Final Plan shall be accompanied by such applicable
supplementary data as is required in Section 402(B) in addition to:
(1) Profile sheets for all proposed streets within the tract. Such
profiles shall show at least the following information, properly labeled:
(a) Existing (natural) profiles along the centerline of each
street and if slope within cartway area exceeds five percent (5%),
along both cartway edges.
(b) Profiles along the top of cartway (pavement) edge or
along the top of curb for both sides of each proposed street shall be
)0G - 46
shown. Such profiles shall show existing and proposed grades at
one of the following sets of scales:
i) One inch (1") equals ten feet (10') horizontal,
and one inch (1") equals one foot (1') vertical.
ii) One inch (1") equals twenty feet (20')
horizontal, and one inch (1") equals two feet (2') vertical.
iii) One inch (1") equals forty feet (40') horizontal,
and one inch (1") equals four feet (4') vertical.
iv) One inch (1") equals fifty feet (50') horizontal,
and one inch (1") equals five feet (5') vertical.
(c) Proposed finished grade of the centerline, and
proposed finished grade at the top of both curbs, or proposed
finished grade at both cartway pavement edges.
(d) The length of all vertical curves and the function of
such curves.
(e) Existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and
manholes, storm sewer mains, inlets, manholes and culverts and
existing or proposed water mains and fire hydrants.
(2) All offers of dedication and covenants governing the
reservation and maintenance of dedicated or undedicated common open
space which shall bear the certificate of approval of the Municipal Solicitor
as to their legal sufficiency.
(3) Such private deed restrictions, including building reserve
lines as may be imposed upon the property as a condition of sale together
with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may affect
the title to the land being developed.
(4) Whenever a developer proposes to establish a street which is
not offered for dedication to public use, the Municipal Planning
Commission or Governing Body may require the developer to submit, and
also to record with the plan, a copy of an agreement made with the
Municipality on behalf of his heirs, successors and assigns and approved
by the Municipal Solicitor and which shall establish the conditions under
AL7425
which the street may later be offered for dedication and shall stipulate,
among other things, the following:
(a) The street shall conform to Municipal specifications.
(b) An offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for
the street as a whole.
(c) The method of assessing repair costs be stipulated.
(d) Agreement by the owners of sixty percent (60%) of
the front footage thereon shall be binding on the owners of the
remaining lots.
(5) Approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources for the water supply or sanitary sewage
disposal system(s) for a proposed planned residential development, and
the Municipal Planning Commission shall require that two (2) copies of
such certification of approval shall be submitted with the Final Plan.
(6) Architectural drawings illustrating exterior and interior
designs of typical residential buildings of each type and nonresidential
structures to be constructed and building plans at scales and details
required for issuance of building permits under the Municipality's
Building Code are required.
(7) Statements and illustrations of the materials to be used in
construction and their compatibility with the Municipality Building Code
and other codes relating to construction are required.
(8) A completed storm water drainage system, showing
culverts, ditches and curbs and gutters are required; all inlets, manholes
and pipes for storm drainage shall be shown; this shall be accompanied by
computations prepared by a registered professional engineer, to the
satisfaction of the Governing Body, that the storm water drainage system
will be adequate for the planned residential development.
(9) The final drafts of all documents required for tentative
approval by this Chapter are required.
(10) The developer shall comply with all other conditions of the
written notice and communication concerning the approval of the
tentative development plan.
)0C1 - 48
AL7425
(11) Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds of lots shown on the final plan shall be
submitted.
(12) Such certificates of approval by authorities as have been
required in this Chapter, including certificates approving the water
supply system and the sanitary sewer system shall be submitted.
(13) In the case of a Planned Residential Development proposed
to be developed over a period of years, Final Plan requirements as listed
in this section will apply only to the section for which final approval is
being sought. However, the Final Plan presented for the section to be
developed must be considered as it relates to information regarding
densities and types of dwelling units, location of common open space,
sanitary sewer and water distribution systems and street systems
presented for the entire development in the application for tentative
approval.
(14) Whenever revisions to the Municipality's official sewage
facilities plan, under Title 25, Chapter 71 Rules and Regulations,
Department of Environmental Resources, is required, a copy of the
Municipal resolution amending the official plan and a copy of PennDER's
letter approving the plan revision shall accompany the Final Plan.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 403)
AL7425
Part 5
Development Standards
Section 501. Eligibility. No application for tentative approval of Planned
Residential Development shall be considered or approved unless the following
conditions are met:
(A) The Planned Residential Development shall consist of a minimum
contiguous area within each of the following Zoning Districts:
Zoning District Minimum Contiguous Area
RC 75 Acres
RS 50 Acres
LDS 40 Acres
MDS 40 Acres
SS 25 Acres
POB 100 Acres
PBR 50 Acres
The area shall not include any portion of the tract located within existing
rights-of-way nor any area previously developed. A tract shall be considered
contiguous even though divided by an existing street not exceeding sixty feet
(60') in ultimate right-of-way width.
(B) The development will be served by public water supply and public
sewage disposal systems.
(C) The proposed development is found to be generally consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan for the Municipality.
(D) At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross area of the Planned
Residential Development shall be in common open areas and recreation. This
twenty-five percent (25%) shall include any requirements contained in the
Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII). No
less than one-half (1/2) of the common open space must be adequate for the
development of active recreation facilities. These facilities may include, but are
not limited to: playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis courts, ball diamonds,
recreation centers and basketball courts. The number and dimensions of such
facilities will be in accordance with the standards published by the American
Recreation Association and approved by the Governing Body.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 501)
COQ -50
AL7425
Section 502. Permitted Uses.
(A) Single-family detached dwellings;
(B) Single -family semi-detached dwellings;
(C) Two-family detached dwellings;
(D) Single -family attached dwellings (townhouses);
(E) Quadraplexes;
(F) Garden apartments;
(G) Retail stores, shops or service establishments for the conducting of
any retail business or service serving only the planned residential development;
(H) Professional or business offices;
(I) Schools, nursery schools and day care centers, churches,
community activity centers, nursing homes and retirement homes;
(J) Banks, savings and loan associations.
NOTE: The inclusion and location of nonresidential uses shall require the
approval of the Governing Body. No commercial development in excess of the amount
demonstrated by a market analysis shall be permitted, but under no conditions will
commercial uses exceed five (5%) percent of the gross area of the planned residential
development. All commercial uses shall front on a collector street.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 502)
Section 503. Permitted Accessory Uses.
(A) Off-street parking pursuant to Section 610;
(B) Signs pursuant to Section 614;
(C) Rental office and temporary construction offices;
AL7425
(D) Coin-operated washing and drying machines, vending machines
for food, beverages, newspapers and cigarettes provided such are for tenant's use
only;
(E) Storage facilities for landscape and building maintenance
equipment;
(F) One sample dwelling unit for display purposes for each type of
construction;
(G) Recreation facilities.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 503)
Section 504. Permitted Density. The maximum allowable gross residential
density shall be four (4) dwelling units per acre.
(A) In no event shall net residential density exceed, for designated
areas, the following:
Dwelling Type
Single-Family Detached or
Semi-Detached
Townhouse or Quadraplex
Garden Apartments
Maximum Permitted Design Density
4 dwelling units per acre
10 dwelling units per acre
16 dwelling units per acre
(B) Of the total number of units within the Planned Residential
Development, the proportions for each dwelling type shall be as follows:
Dwelling Type
Single-Family Detached
or Semi-Detached*
Townhouse or Quadraplex**
Garden Apartments
% of Total Units
minimum of 20%
maximum of 60%
maximum of 50%
*Of the total number of "single-family dwelling units," a maximum
twenty-five percent (25%) may be semi-detached dwellings.
)0G - 52
of
AL7425
**Of the total number of "townhouse dwelling units," a maximum of
fifteen percent (15) may be quadraplex dwellings.
Areas designated for specific use, as permitted by this Chapter shall not overlap nor
shall they include required common open space and recreational uses. (Ordinance
No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 504)
AL7425
Part 6
Design Standards
Section 601. Design, Bulk and Location Requirements.
(A) Site Design.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be designed with due
regard to the topography and natural features of the site. The effects of
prevailing winds, seasonal temperatures and hours of sunlight on the
physical layout and form of the proposed buildings shall be taken into
account.
(2) All buildings and structures shall be sited so as to enhance
privacy and insure natural light for all principal rooms.
(3) Variations in setbacks shall be provided when necessary to
create a more pleasing layout.
(4) Buildings, structures and other facilities near the periphery
of the planned residential development shall be designed so as to be
harmonious with neighboring areas.
(5) Planting strip shall be provided along all property lines at
the periphery of the development where necessary to protect the privacy
of neighboring residents.
(6) The natural features of the Planned Residential
Development site shall be a major factor in determining the siting of all
buildings and structures and the results of the "Natural Features and
Open Space Analysis" shall be considered.
(7) Conventional siting practices such as building setbacks from
streets and minimum distances between buildings should be varied in
order to produce attractive and interesting arrangement of buildings.
(8) Buildings and structures shall be located and sited so as to
promote pedestrian and visual access to common open space wherever
possible.
(9) Buildings and structures shall be located and arranged so as
to promote privacy for residents within the Planned Residential
)0G - 54
AL7425
Development and maintain privacy for residents adjacent to the Planned
Residential Development. Higher buildings shall be so located within the
development so as to have no adverse impact, (e.g., excluding natural
light or invasion of privacy) on adjacent lower buildings.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 601)
Section 602. Area and Bulk Regulations.
(A) The Municipal Planning Commission shall have the right to waive
or modify the following area and bulk regulations when an applicant can show
that such modifications will improve the overall design quality of the project and
therefore is in the best interests of the community.
Garden
Apartments
Minimum lot area per
dwelling unit
Minimum lot width
Minimum side yard 50 feet
Minimum rear yard 75 feet
Minimum front yard 75 feet
Distance between
buildings See 602(B)(2)
Parking area set back from
lot line or street 30 feet
ultimate right-of-way
Maximum height 3 stories or
35 feet
Commercial,
Townhouses or
Quadraplexes
22 feet
30 feet*
30 feet
30 feet
See 602(B)(2)
20 feet**
3 stories or
35 feet
Single-Family
Detached or
Semi-Detached
8,000 sq. ft.
75 feet per
dwelling unit
20 feet
30 feet
50 feet
See 602(B)(2)
20 feet**
3 stories or
35 feet
NOTE: *Applies to end buildings only.
"Applies only to parking lots and joint parking areas, not to on-lot
parking areas.
(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of the above requirements, the
following shall also apply:
(1) The developer should vary architectural treatments within
the development, individual apartments and between dwelling units.
Variation may include those of exterior elevation, building setbacks,
XXI - 55
AL7425
provision of balconies, architectural details, pitch of roof, exterior
materials or use of color.
Variety and flexibility in design layout and arrangement, of
buildings, parking areas, services, recreation areas, common open space
and planting that fully considers the particular physical characteristics of
the site and natural amenities is highly desired.
(2) The horizontal distance between groups of townhouses,
quadraplexes or garden apartments shall be:
(a) Two (2) times the average height of the two groups of
townhouses and garden apartments for front or rear walls facing
front or rear walls;
(b) One and one-half (1-1/2) times the average height for
front or rear walls facing side walls; and
(c) Equal to the height of the highest building for side
walls facing side walls.
(3) Access and service shall be provided in the front of each
dwelling. Parking may be provided on the lot, as carports, as an integral
part of the dwelling or a joint parking facility for a group of dwellings
with such deed restrictions as are necessary to determine ownership and
maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of assigning
charges for maintaining snow removal and repairs.
(4) Garden apartment buildings shall not exceed one hundred
sixty feet (160') in length.
(5) The plan submitted shall indicate an area designation for
each permitted use and all of the requirements of this Chapter for each
area so designated shall be met.
(6) The minimum width of any side yard abutting a driveway
or parking area shall be not less than thirty feet (30').
(7) Party walls and end walls on all townhouses may be
continued past the rear wall of the building in the form of a "privacy
fence" at a height not to exceed seven feet (7'), for a sufficient distance to
provide for a private patio area for each dwelling unit. No more than
AL7425
three (3) continuous townhouses shall have the same front setback and the
variations on front setbacks will be at least four feet (4').
(8) No intensive recreational use (e.g., baseball, basketball,
tennis, etc.) shall be permitted in common space within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of any adjacent residential zoning district.
(9) The provision of appropriate sites for schools, playgrounds,
parks, places of worship and similar public uses must be proportionate to
the scale and character of the Planned Residential Development.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 602)
Section 603. Tree Conservation and Erosion Control.
(A) Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible. The
preservation and the protection of trees of four-inch caliper or over shall be a
factor in determining the location of open space, buildings, underground
services, walks, paved areas, playgrounds, parking areas and finished grade
levels.
(B) The development shall be designed and programmed so as to
minimize earthmoving, erosion, tree clearance and the destruction of natural
amenities.
(C) Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize
topsoil on steep slopes.
(D) Erosion control measures such as minimizing the area of exposed
soil, mulching, building silt catchment basins and planting temporary
groundcover shall be instituted as necessary. An erosion control plan that will
fulfill the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources is required.
(E) Where extensive natural tree cover and vegetation does not exist or
cannot be preserved on the planned residential development site, landscaping
shall be undertaken in order to enhance the appearance of the planned
residential development and screen streets and parking areas and enhance
privacy of private dwellings.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 603)
AL7425
Section 604. Streets.
(A) General Standards.
(1) The street system shall be designed so as to relate
harmoniously with land uses and adjacent streets, and to minimize
through traffic in residential areas.
(2) The street system shall create a separation for automobile
and pedestrian traffic through the coordinated design of streets, building
locations, common open space areas and pedestrian walkways.
(3) The street system shall create efficient and safe connections
with the existing road system in order to insure proper ingress and egress
to and from the Planned Residential Development.
(4) New local or internal streets shall be so designed as to discourage
through traffic, but the developer shall give adequate
consideration to provisions for the extension and continuation of arterial
and collector streets into and from adjoining properties.
(5) Where a development abuts or contains an existing street of
improper width or alignment, the Municipal Planning Commission may
require the dedication of land sufficient to widen the street or correct the
alignment.
(B) Street Widths. The following street rights-of-way and pavement
widths shall be used as the strongly preferred street design standards. The
Municipal Planning Commission shall have the right to waive or modify these
standards when an applicant can show that such modifications will improve the
overall design quality of the development and therefore is in the best interest of
the community.
Street Type Required Widths (in feet)
Local Street
Right-of-way 53
Cartway 33
Collector Street
Right-of-way 60(a)
Cartway 40(a)
Arterial Street
XXI - 58
Right-of-way
Cartway
Permanent Cul-de-Sac Street
Right-of-way
Cartway
Marginal Access Street (a)
Right-of-way
Cartway
Service Street (a)
Right-of-way
Cartway
See Note (b)
See Note (b)
See Paragraph 604(I)
See Paragraph 604(I)
See Note (c)
30
33
22
NOTES: (a) No on-street parking permitted.
(b) As specified in the "Official Plans," or as determined
after consulting with the Township, the County Planning
Commission and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(c) Variable, depending on the width of the adjacent
right-of-way, but not less than thirty-six feet (36').
Additional right-of-way and pavement widths may be required by the Municipal
Planning Commission or Governing Body for the purpose of promoting the
public safety and convenience or to provide parking in commercial areas and in
areas of high density residential development.
(C) Restriction of Access.
(1) Whenever a development abuts or contains an existing or
proposed street with an ultimate right-of-way of sixty feet (60') or more,
the Municipal Planning Commission or the Governing Body may require
restriction of access to said street by:
(a) Provision of reverse frontage lots.
(b) Provision of service streets along the rear of the
abutting lots, together with prohibition of private driveways
intersecting the arterial streets.
(c) Provision of marginal access streets, provided that the
reserve strips establishing such marginal access streets shall be
definitely placed within the jurisdiction of the Municipality under
an agreement meeting the approval of the Municipality.
AL7425
(2) Except as specified under Paragraph (c) above, reserve strips
shall be prohibited.
(D) Street Grades.
(1) There shall be a minimum centerline grade of one-half
percent (1/2%).
(2) Centerline grades shall not exceed the following:
(a) Local Street - ten percent (10%).
(b) Collector Street - six percent (6%).
(c) Arterial Street - five percent (5%).
(d) Street Intersection - five percent (5%).
(E) Horizontal Curves.
(1) Whenever street lines are deflected, connection shall be
made by horizontal curves.
(2) To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum centerline radii
for horizontal curves shall be as follows:
(a) Local Streets - one hundred fifty feet (150').
(b) Collector Streets - three hundred feet (300').
(c) Arterial streets - five hundred feet (500').
(3) A tangent of at least one hundred feet (100') shall be
introduced between all horizontal curves on collector and arterial streets.
(4) To the greatest extent possible, combinations of the
minimum radius and maximum grade shall be avoided.
(F) Vertical Curves. At all changes of street grades where the algebraic
difference exceeds one percent (1%), the following vertical curves shall be
provided:
(1) Local Streets - two hundred feet (200').
XXI - 60
(2) Collector Streets - three hundred feet (300').
(3) Arterial Streets - four hundred feet (400').
(G) Intersections.
(1) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles,
and no street shall intersect another at an angle of less than sixty degrees
(60°) or more than one hundred twenty degrees (120°).
(2) No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
(3) Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect
directly opposite to each other or shall be separated by at least one
hundred fifty feet (150') between centerlines measured along the
centerline of the street being intersected.
(4) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight
leveling area, the grade of which shall not exceed five (5%) percent within
fifty (50') feet of the intersection of the nearest right-of-way lines.
(5) Intersections with arterial and collector streets shall be
located not less than one thousand feet (1,000') apart measured from
centerline to centerline along the centerline of the arterial and collector
street.
(6) Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc
with a minimum radius of:
(a) Twenty feet (20') for intersections involving only local
streets.
(b) Thirty feet (30') for all intersections involving a
collector street.
(c) Forty feet (40') for all intersections involving an
arterial street.
(d) Ten feet (10') for all intersections involving only
service stations.
(7) Street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to (concentric with)
curb arcs at intersections.
(8) Copy of State Highway Permit or letter of approval is
required when proposed street intersects with a State Legislative route.
Highway permit number shall be shown on the Final Plan.
(H) Sight Distances at Intersections.
(1) Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street
intersections. Within such triangles, no vision-obstructing object other
than utility poles, street lights, street signs or traffic signs shall be
permitted which obscures vision above the height of two feet (2') and
below ten feet (10') measured from the centerline grade of intersecting
streets. Such triangles shall be established from a distance of:
(a) Seventy-five feet (75') from the point of intersection of
the centerlines, except that:
(b) Clear sight triangles of one hundred feet (100') shall
be provided for all intersections with Collector Streets and one
hundred and fifty feet (150') with Arterial Streets.
(2) Wherever a portion of the line of such, triangles occurs
behind (i.e., from the street) the building reserve (setback) line, such
portion shall be shown on the Final Plan of the subdivision and shall be
considered a building setback (reserve) line.
(I) Cul-de-Sac Streets.
(1) Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as
cul-de-sac streets or designed for future access to adjoining properties.
(2) Any temporarily dead ended street shall be provided with a
temporary all-weather turnaround, within the subdivision and the use of
such turnaround shall be guaranteed to the public until such time as the
street is extended.
(3) Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, should
typically not exceed five hundred feet (500') in length. If exceeded, the
applicant must show that a longer cul-de-sac will improve the overall
design quality of the development and therefore is in the best interest of
the community.
)0G - 62
AL7425
(4) Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable,
the turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract boundary
with sufficient additional width provided along the boundary line to
permit extension of the street at full width.
(5) All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily
designed as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a center
landscaped island turnaround. The minimum radius to the pavement
edge or curb line shall be sixty feet (60') and the minimum radius of the
right-of-way line shall be seventy feet (70'). Such landscaped island
turnaround shall be considered "common open space" within the
meaning of this Chapter, and the same shall be maintained in accordance
with the provisions of Part 8 of this Chapter.
(6) Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be towards the
open end. If drainage is toward the closed end it shall be conducted away
in an underground storm sewer.
(7) The centerline grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed
ten percent (10%), and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround shall
not exceed five percent (5%).
(J) Street Names.
(1) Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with
others already existing and named, shall bear the names of the existing
streets.
(2) In no case shall the name of a proposed street be the same as
or similar to an existing street name in the Municipality and in the same
postal district, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, road, avenue,
boulevard, driveway, place, court, lane, etc.
(K) Service Streets.
(1) Service streets may be permitted, provided that the
developer produces evidence satisfactory to the Municipal Planning
Commission or Governing Body of the need for such service streets.
(2) No part of any dwelling, garage or other structure shall be
located within five feet (5') of the right-of-way of a service streets.
AL7425
(3) Dead-end service streets shall be avoided, but where this
proves impossible, dead-end service streets shall terminate with a paved
circular turnaround with a minimum radius to the outer pavement edge
(curb line) of fifty feet (50').
(4) Service street intersections and sharp changes in alignment
shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be rounded as
required in Section 604.7F. and deflections in alignment shall be made by
horizontal curves.
(L) Driveway.
(1) Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least
forty feet (40') from the point of intersection of the nearest street
right-of-way lines.
(2) In order to provide a safe convenient means of access, grades
on private driveways shall not exceed ten percent (10%) between the street
right-of-way and the buildings line. Entrances should be rounded at a
minimum radius of five feet (5'), or should have a flare construction that is
equivalent to this radius at the point of intersection with the cartway edge
(curb line).
(M) Crosswalks and Sidewalks.
(1) Crosswalks shall be required wherever necessary to facilitate
pedestrian circulation and to give access to community facilities.
(2) Such crosswalks shall have an easement of not less than ten
feet (10') and a paved walk of not less than four feet (4').
(3) Arterial or collector streets shall not require sidewalks unless
special conditions dictate. All other streets shall have sidewalks when
deemed necessary.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 604)
Section 605. Sanitary Sewage Disposal.
(A) Sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed in strict
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
standards and Municipal standards. PennDER permits shall be submitted with
the Final Plan.
XXE - 64
AL7425
(B) All buildings shall be connected to a public sewage disposal system
in operation at the time construction of a principal building is started.
(C) The proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal shall be in
accordance with the Municipality's officially adopted Act 537 Sewage Facilities
Plan.
(D) When in accord with Title 25, Chapter 71, Section 71.16, Rules and
Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
determines the necessity for an Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan Revision or
Supplement, the procedure set forth in Sections 71.15 - 71.17 of those Rules and
Regulations shall be followed. The Developer shall cause to be made at his sole
cost and expense any and all documents and shall further pay any and all fees
pertaining to this material.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 605)
Section 606. Water Supply.
(A) Whenever an existing public or approved community water system
is geographically and economically accessible to a proposed development, a
distribution system shall be designed to furnish an adequate supply of water to
each lot, with adequate main sizes and fire hydrants located to meet the
specifications of the Municipality. Approval of such system by the appropriate
public service or utility company shall be submitted with the Final Plan. Suitable
agreements shall also be established for the design, specifications, construction,
ownership and maintenance of such distribution system.
(B) Where such systems are not accessible, a community water supply
system shall be required. A community water supply system shall be approved
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, and appropriate
measures shall be provided to insure adequate maintenance. Suitable agreements
shall also be established for the construction, ownership and maintenance of
such a distribution system.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27,1987, Section 606)
Section 607. Storm Drainage.
(A) A storm runoff and drainage system shall be installed by the
developer in accordance with Municipal Resolution so as to adequately drain the
project site, to adequately dispose of all runoff and drainage away from the
)0G - 65
project site, and so as not to permit excess flow of water across streets or
adjoining properties. Plans for such drainage system shall be submitted and shall
be subject to approval by the Engineer in accordance with Municipal storm
drainage regulations. Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be
provided, as necessary, to:
(1) Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
(2) Insure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of
streets.
(3) Intercept storm water runoff along streets at intervals related
to the extent and grade of the area drained.
(B) Storm sewers and related installations shall be required only when,
the runoff of storm water cannot be satisfactorily handled within the street
cartway and shall be installed by the developer as required pursuant to the terms
of Section 702(E) hereof.
(C) Where existing storm sewers are reasonably accessible, proposed
developments shall be required, if necessary, to connect therewith.
(D) In the design of storm drainage facilities, special consideration shall
be given to avoidance of problems which may arise from the concentration of
storm water runoff onto adjacent developed or undeveloped properties.
(E) Storm drainage facilities should be designed not only to handle the
anticipated peak discharge from the property being developed, but also the
anticipated increase in runoff that will occur when all the property at a higher
elevation in the same watershed is fully developed.
(F) Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream
and of such width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural
drainage, or for the purpose of widening, depending, relocating, improving or
protecting such drainage facilities. Any changes in the existing drainage way
shall be subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, Water & Power Resources Board, Division of Dams
and Encroachments.
(G) All streets shall be so designed as to provide for the discharge of
surface water from their rights-of-way.
XXI - 66
AL7425
(H) The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall be not less than
1/8 of an inch per foot and not more than 1/3 of an inch per foot.
(I) Adequate facilities shall be provided at low points along streets
and where necessary to intercept runoff.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 607)
Section 608. Utility Easements.
(A) On July 8, 1970, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission issued
an order requiring all electric distribution lines to be installed underground in
residential developments of five (5) or more family units. In compliance with
these regulations and with the cooperation of local utility companies, the
following procedure will be followed:
(1) Upon filing of a Tentative Plan the developer will forward a
copy of all plans to the appropriate utility company. This would apprise
the utility company of the proposed project status and indicate that the
developer would be contacting them in the near future.
(2) Upon receipt and review of tentative plans, the developer is
directed to contact the appropriate utility company and secure an
approval of plans for the underground electric system. Receipt of a letter
from the appropriate utility company indicating receipt of plans will be
required prior to Municipal endorsement of any plan for recording. The
responsibility for securing this approval and coordinating the plan with
the utility company shall be the developer's or his representatives.
(B) Easements with a minimum width of twenty feet (20') shall be
provided for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and
heat mains and/or other utility lines intended to service the abutting lots. No
structures or trees shall be placed within such easements.
(C) Easements shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
(D) There shall be a minimum distance of twenty-five feet (25'),
measured in the shortest distance, between any proposed dwelling unit and any
petroleum, petroleum products or gas transmission right-of-way line which
traverses the development.
AL7425
(E) Developers are urged to avail themselves of the services provided
by the various public utility companies in determining the proper locations for
utility line easements.
(F) Petroleum products or gas transmission lines shall be located in a
fifty foot (50') minimum right-of-way, such line to be installed in the center of the
right-of-way. The developer shall provide fifty foot (50') right-of-way for all
existing transmission lines within the development.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 608)
Section 609. Erosion and Sediment Controls and Guidelines.
(A) Erosion and Sediment Control Measures where required under
Title 25, Chapter 102 Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, shall meet the standards and specifications of the
County Conservation District.
(B) The following guidelines shall be applied as needed in establishing
easements as part of erosion and sediment controls:
(1) Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put
within the area of an easement. The area shall be kept as lawn.
(2) Where a Planned Residential Development is traversed by a
watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such
width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage but not less than
twenty feet (20' ) or as may be required or directed by the Department of
Environmental Resources. The developer shall properly grade and seed
slopes and fence any open ditches when it is deemed necessary by the
Governing Body.
(3) Where storm water or surface water will be gathered within
the development and discharged or drained in volume over lands within
or beyond the boundaries of the development, the developer shall reserve
or obtain easements over all lands affected thereby, which easements shall
be adequate for such discharge of drainage and for the carrying off of such
water and for the maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the same,
including the right of passage over and upon the same by vehicles,
machinery and other equipment for such purposes, and which shall be of
sufficient width for such passage and work. The developer shall convey,
free of charge, or cost, such easements to the Municipality upon demand.
XXI -68
AL7425
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 609)
Section 610. Parking and Truck Loading Requirements.
(A) Off-Street Parking.
(1) Minimum Parking Requirements. Any building or other
structure used (including any existing building or structure within the
planned residential development) shall be provided with the following
minimum off-street parking (either garage or on-lot) spaces, each of which
shall measure ten feet (10') by twenty feet (20') exclusive of driveways,
passageways and maneuvering areas unless the applicant can show that
modifying the number and size of off-street parking spaces will improve
the overall design quality of the development and is therefore in the best
interest of the community, in which case the Municipal Planning
Commission shall have the right to waive this section's requirements
regarding the number and size of off-street parking spaces.
(a) Dwellings: Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling
unit.
(b) Eating Establishments: One (1) parking space for
every four (4) seats, or for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor
area used by the eating establishment, whichever shall require
more spaces.
(c) Retail Stores: One (1) parking space for each one
hundred (100) square feet of gross retailing floor area.
(d) Church, Public Auditorium, Theaters: One (1) parking
space for every five (5) seats provided.
(e) Offices: One (1) space for each four hundred (400)
square feet of net rentable floor area.
(f) Other Uses Not Specified: The same requirement as
for the most similar use listed.
(2) Share Parking. One or more parking lots may be designed
to service a multiple number of commercial or recreational uses so long as
the total requirements shall be equal to the sum of the requirements of the
component uses computed separately.
(3) Fractional Space. When required parking computations
result in fractions, any fraction below 1/2 may be disregarded and any
fraction over 1/2 shall be construed to require a full space.
(4) Location. Required parking shall be provided as follows:
(a) All access drives and parking lots shall be at least
fifteen (15') feet from any building on the lot.
(b) Parking areas shall not be designed or located so as to
require or encourage cars to back into a public or private street in
order to leave the lot.
(c) Entrance and exit ways shall have a minimum width
of twelve feet (12') for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the
site but shall at no time exceed thirty feet (30') in width at the street
line.
(d) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to
provide sufficient back-up area for the end stalls of the parking
area.
(e) Evergreen plantings shall be provided of sufficient
height and density to screen off-street parking from public street
view and from adjoining residential districts. A planting plan
specifying type, size and location of existing and proposed planting
material shall be submitted with the application for approval.
Entrance and exit ways and interior accessways shall
be designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or
leaving the site.
(g) No more than fifteen (15) contiguous spaces shall be
permitted in any continuous row without interruption by landscaping.
(h) No more than sixty (60) parking space shall be
accommodated in any single parking area.
AL7425
(i) No more than two (2) interconnected parking areas
shall be permitted without having direct access to a public street or
a private street meeting Municipal street standards.
(j) In the case of townhouses, the required front yard
shall not be permitted to be used for parking.
(5) Paving. All required parking areas and all access drives shall
have a macadam or concrete surface.
(6) Parking Within Front Yard. Required parking shall be
permitted within required front or side yards not withstanding other
requirements of this Chapter.
(7) Services. No repair to or maintenance of vehicles of any kind
except emergency repairs, shall be permitted in any parking facility.
(B) Off-Street Truck Loading. The Municipal Planning Commission
shall have the right to waive or modify the following off-street truck loading
standards when an applicant can show that such modifications will improve the
overall standard quality of the development and therefore is in the best interest
of the community.
(1) Required Loading Spaces. Every building or structure used
for commercial purposes shall provide one (1) off-street truck loading
space for the first 10,000 square feet or less of gross floor area, plus a
minimum of one (1) additional off-street truck loading area for each
additional 40,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Size of Truck Loading Space. An off-street truck loading
space shall have a minimum of twelve feet (12') in width, a minimum of
fifty feet (50') in length and a minimum clear height of fourteen feet (14').
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 610)
Section 611. Lighting. Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas shall
be so arranged as not to be directed toward public streets or cause any annoyance to
building occupants or surrounding property owners or residents. (Ordinance No. 194,
April 27, 1987, Section 611)
Section 612. Storage of Trash and Rubbish. Exterior storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall be in accordance with Municipal Standards and ordinances. (Ordinance
No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 612)
XXI - 71
AL7425
Section 613. Access and Traffic Controls. All means of ingress or egress from a
Planned Residential Development to any public street or State highway shall be located
at an intersection or at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any other intersecting street
or streets and shall be designed to conduct traffic in a safe manner, except where
existing conditions make this requirement impractical and where the applicant can
demonstrate that a deviation from this standard is safe. The developer shall be
responsible for the purchase and erection of any necessary traffic control devices and
the construction of additional acceleration or deceleration lanes as may be required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or by the Municipality. (Ordinance
No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 613)
Section 614. Sign Regulations.
(A) Area of Sign. The area of a sign shall be construed to include all
lettering, wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not
including any supporting framework and bracing which is incidental to the
display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted on a surface, the area shall be considered to be the smallest rectangle
which can be drawn to encompass all of the letters and symbols.
(B) Permitted Signs. The maximum permitted size of signs and type of
signs shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Official traffic or directional signs and other official Federal,
State, County or local government signs.
(2) Signs offering the sale or rental of the premises upon which
the sign is erected, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
fifty (50) square feet and not more than one (1) such sign shall be placed
on the development unless such lot fronts on more than one (1) street, in
which case one (1) sign may be erected on each street frontage. No sign
shall be erected so as to stand higher than one of the buildings it
advertises. No sign shall advertise such real estate for sale or rent for more
than twelve (12) months after building construction is completed.
Thereafter signs offering the sale or rental of the premises shall be limited
to six (6) square feet.
(3) Temporary signs of contractors, developers, architects,
engineers, buildings and artisans, erected and maintained on the premises
where the work is being performed, provided that the area of each such
sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet, and provided that such sign
shall be removed upon completion of the work.
(4) Trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a
road, driveway or premises, signs controlling fishing or hunting on the
premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed four (4)
square feet.
(5) Sign, bulletin, announcement board or identification sign for
schools, churches, clubs or other principal uses and buildings other than
dwellings on the same lot therewith for the purpose of displaying the
name of the institution and its activities or services, provided that the area
of any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet and not more
than one (1) such sign be erected on any one street frontage.
(6) Directional signs, not to exceed two (2) square feet each,
erected within the development itself to direct persons to a rental office or
sample apartment.
(7) Permanent identifying signs for the purpose of indicating
the name of the development and for the purpose of identifying the
individual buildings within the development. Not more than one (1) sign
for each entrance to the project from a public street to identify the name of
the project shall be permitted and no such sign shall exceed ten (10)
square feet in size. Signs to identify the individual buildings within the
project shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size.
(C) Supplemental Sign Regulations.
(1) Projection. No sign shall project more than twelve inches
(12") from the building facade to which it is attached. No freestanding sign
may project beyond the lot line or beyond a street right-of-way.
(2) Height. No sign that is a part of or is supported by a
building shall be erected upon the roof of such building, nor shall such
sign extend above the height of the building. Freestanding signs shall be
subject to the height requirements of this Chapter.
(3) Clearance. No sign structure erected directly upon the
ground shall have less than three feet (3') of clear space between such sign
and the ground; however, necessary supports may extend through such
open space.
AL7425
(4) Illumination. Signs may be lighted with nonglaring lights, or
may be illuminated by shielded floodlights provided, however, that no
red, green or amber lights shall be permitted and provided that lighting is
screened from adjacent properties. No lights of intermittent, flashing,
animated or rotating types shall be permitted.
(5) Placement. No signs shall be permitted which are posted,
stapled or otherwise permanently attached to public utility poles or trees
within a street right-of-way. No portion of any freestanding sign shall be
located within five feet (5) of any side lot line.
(6) Construction. All signs, except temporary signs, shall be
constructed of durable material and kept in good condition and repair.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27,1987, Section 614)
Section 615. Natural Features and Open Space Analysis. In order to determine
which specific areas of the total Planned Residential Development site are best suited
for high density development, which areas are best suited for lower density
development, and which areas should be preserved in their natural state as open space
areas, a thorough analysis of the natural features of the site will be required. The
following subject categories must be included in this analysis:
(A) Hydrology. Analysis of natural drainage patterns and water
swales, ponds or lakes, wetlands, floodplain areas, permanent high water table
areas and seasonal high water table areas throughout the site.
(B) Geology. Analysis of characteristics of rock formation underlying
the site including defining aquifers (particularly those locally subject to
pollution), shallow bedrock areas, areas in which rock formations are unstable
and sinkholes.
(C) Soils. Analysis of types of soils present in the site area including
delineation of aquifer recharge soil areas, unstable soils, soils most susceptible to
erosion and soils unsuitable for urban development. The analysis of soils will be
based on the County Soil Survey of the U.S. Soil Conservation Service and where
necessary on-site exploration of the soils will be required.
(D) Topography. Analysis of terrain of site including mapping of
elevation and delineation of slope areas over twenty percent (20%), between ten
percent (10%) and twenty percent (20%), and under ten percent (10%).
AL7425
(E) Micro-Climate. Analysis of seasonal temperatures, seasonal
precipitation, seasonal prevailing winds and daily hours of sunlight in specific
areas of the planned residential development site.
The location, shape, size and character of the common open space shall be
provided in a manner consistent with the conservation of natural resources and
the creative use of land to obtain a living environment of stable character, with
natural feature constraints determined through the Natural Features Analysis
outlined above.
The uses authorized for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale
and character of the planned development, considering its natural features, size,
land use intensity, potential population and the number and types of dwelling
units to be developed. Whenever possible, common open space shall be designed
as a contiguous area interspersed with residential areas with pedestrian and
visual access available to all residents of the Planned Residential Development.
Significant natural features such as woodland areas, large trees, natural
watercourses and bodies of water, rock outcroppings and scenic views shall be
incorporated into common open space areas whenever possible. However,
development of the Planned Residential Development must be planned so as to
coordinate the establishment of common open space areas, active recreation
facilities and the construction of buildings and structures.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 615)
Section 616. Supplementary Regulations.
(A) Fences, Walls, Hedges and Trees. Except as required by other
provisions of this Chapter, fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any
yard provided that no fence, wall or hedge within a required front yard shall be
over thirty-six inches (36") in height, however, ornamental fences exceeding
thirty-six inches (36") shall be permitted provided that said fence contains an
open area of not less than seventy-five percent (75%).
(B) Exceptions to Height Regulations. The height limitations contained
herein do not apply to spires, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators,
chimneys, television or radio towers or other similar appurtenances usually
required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human
occupancy.
AL7425
(C) Corner Lot Restriction. On-corner lots there shall be provided on
each side thereof adjacent to a street a yard equal in depth to the required front
yard.
(D) Projections Into Yards. The following projections shall be permitted
into required yards and shall not be considered in the determination of yard size
or lot coverage.
(1) Terraces or Patios, provided that such terraces or patios are
unroofed or otherwise enclosed and are not closer than five feet (5') to any
adjacent lot line.
(2) Projecting Architectural Features. Bay windows, cornices,
eaves, fireplaces, chimneys, window sills or other architectural features,
provided that any single feature does not exceed five (5) square feet in
external area.
(3) Uncovered stairs and landings, provided such stairs or
landings do not exceed three feet six inches (3'-6") in height.
(4) Open balconies provided such balconies are not supported
on the ground and do not project more than five feet (5') into any yard nor
closer than three feet (3') to any adjacent lot line.
(5) Window or central air conditioning units, barbecue grills,
fireplaces or unroofed recreational facilities.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 617)
AL7425
Part 7
Improvement Specifications
Section 701. General Requirements. Physical improvements to the property
being developed shall be provided, constructed and installed as shown on the Final
Plan in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter or other applicable Municipal
ordinances or Regulations.
(A) As a condition to the review of a Final Plan by the Municipal
Planning Commission and Governing Body, the developer shall agree with the
Municipality as to the installation of all improvements required by this Chapter
or other applicable Municipal Ordinances or Regulations. Before the Final Plan is
endorsed by the Governing Body, the developer shall submit a completed
original copy of the improvements Agreement.
(B) All improvements installed by the developer shall be constructed in
accordance with the design specifications of the Municipality including any
promulgated by a Municipal Authority. Where there are no applicable Municipal
specifications, improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications furnished by the Municipal Engineer, Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources,
Pennsylvania Department of Forests and Waters or such other State agency as
applicable. If there are no applicable Municipal or State regulations, the
Governing Body may authorize that specifications be prepared by the Municipal
Engineer or an Engineering Consultant.
(C) Supervision of the installation of the required improvements shall,
in all cases, be the responsibility of the Municipality, Municipal Authority or of
the appropriate state regulatory agency.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 701)
Section 702. Required Improvements. The following improvements shall be provided
by the developer:
(A) Street Grading. All streets shall be graded to the full right-of-way
width.
(B) Cartway Paving. All streets shall be paved to full cartway width (as
shown on the Final Plan) and as required by this Chapter, in accordance with
Municipal specifications.
(C) Curbs. Curbs and curb cuts, where required by the Governing
Body, shall be installed along both sides of all streets, except along service streets
in accordance with Municipal Ordinances.
(D) Sidewalks.
(1) Where required by the Governing Body, sidewalks with a
minimum width of four feet (4) shall be installed on both sides of all
streets except that no sidewalks shall be required along service streets,
and where required, sidewalks shall be installed on only one (1) side of
marginal access streets.
(2) All sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be installed in
accordance with these regulations and with Municipal curb, gutter and
sidewalk Ordinances or specifications.
(E) Sewers.
(1) Storm Sewers. Storm sewers and related facilities shall be
installed consistent with the design principles and requirements contained
in this Chapter and Municipal standards.
(2) Sanitary Sewage Disposal System(s).
(a) Sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be provided
consistent with the design standards and requirements of this
Chapter.
(b) The developer shall provide a complete public
sanitary sewage disposal system. The design and installation of
such public system shall be subject to the approval of the Municipal
Engineer and/or the Municipal Authority.
(F) Water Supply.
(1) Water supply system(s) shall be installed consistent with
design principles and requirements of this Chapter.
(2) The development shall be provided with a complete public
or community water distribution system. The design and installation of
such public system shall be subject to the approval of the Municipal
Engineer; the design and installation of such community distribution
system shall be subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
XXI - 78
Environmental Resources and such system shall be further subject to
satisfactory provision for the maintenance thereof.
(G) Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants suitable for the coupling of equipment
serving the Municipality shall be installed within six hundred feet (600') of all
existing and proposed structures, measured along center line of streets. Locations
of hydrants shall be approved by the Fire Company officials serving the
Municipality and by the Engineer of the Municipality.
(H) Monuments.
(1) Monuments shall be accurately placed in accord with
U.S.G.S. datum at the intersection of all lines forming angles and at
changes in directions of lines in the boundary (perimeter) of the property
being developed. The developer, or his representative, shall notify the
Municipal Engineer in order that he may inspect the placement of the
monuments before they are covered.
(2) All monuments shall be placed by a registered professional
Engineer or surveyor so that the scored (by an indented cross or drill hole
of not more than one quarter inch (1/4") diameter in the top of the
monument) point shall coincide exactly with point of intersection of the
lines being monumented.
(3) Monuments shall be set with their top level with the finished
grade of the surrounding ground.
(4) All streets shall be monumented at range line, within the
right-of-way lines of the street and five feet (5') distant therefrom and at
the following locations:
(a) At least one monument at each intersection.
(b) At changes in direction of street lines, excluding curb
arcs at intersections.
(c) At each end of each curbed street line, excluding curb
arcs at intersections.
(d) At such places where topographical or other
conditions make it impossible to sight between two otherwise
required monuments, intermediate monuments shall be placed.
AL7425
(e) At such other places along the line of streets as may
be determined by the Municipal Engineer to be necessary so that
any street may be readily defined in the future.
(5) A reference diagram shall be filed with the Township
Engineer of all monuments with three (3) reference points per monument.
(I) Street Signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street
intersections. The design and placement of such signs shall be by the
Municipality, the cost of which shall be borne by the developer.
(J) Street Lights. In accordance with the conditions to be agreed upon
by the developer, the Municipality and the appropriate public utility, street lights
shall be installed. However, whether or not street lights are initially installed, the
developer shall be responsible for providing utility easements for future street
lighting installation upon consultation with the public service utility company
involved.
(K) Shade Trees. Reasonable efforts should be made by the developer
to preserve existing shade trees and, in addition, deciduous hardwood trees with
a minimum caliper of four inches (4") shall be provided in accordance with
conditions to be agreed upon by the Municipality, and if necessary, the
appropriate public utility. Such trees should be planted between the street
right-of-way and the building reserve (setback) line at least ten feet (10') from the
public street right-of-way. No trees or shrubs shall be planted between the
sidewalk and the right-of-way line.
(1) A landscaping plan shall be furnished for approval by the
Municipality as to kind, size and location of trees and other plantings,
both existing and proposed.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 702)
AL7425
Part 8
Standards for Location and Management of Common Open Space,
Recreation Facilities and Required Open Space
Section 801. Common Open Space and Recreation Facilities. The common open
space, which includes the center landscaped island turnarounds on cul-de-sac streets,
shall be located so as to be consistent with the objectives set forth in the application for
Planned Residential Development. Where possible, the common open space, other than
the aforementioned turnarounds, shall be designed as a contiguous area easily
accessible to the residents and preserving natural features.
(A) There shall be provisions which insure that the common open space
land shall continue as such and be properly maintained. These provisions shall
be in a form acceptable to the Municipality's Solicitor. The developer shall either
(a) dedicate such land to public use of the Municipality; (b) retain ownership and
responsibility for maintenance of such common open space land; or (c) provide
for and establish one or more organizations for the ownership and maintenance
of all common open space. In the case of (c) above, each organization shall be a
nonprofit homeowners association, unless the developer demonstrates that a
community open space trust is a more appropriate form of organization. Upon
failure or bankruptcy of the organization, common open space shall revert free
and clear of all encumbrances to the Municipality for public open space, if
acceptable to the Municipality.
(B) If a homeowners' association or open space trust is formed, it shall
be governed according to the following regulations:
(1) The organization is organized by the developer and
operating with financial subsidization by the developer, if necessary,
before the sale of any lots within the development.
(2) Membership in the organization is mandatory, including
leaseholds and renters.
(3) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance,
insurance, taxes and other assessments on common open space and
recreation facilities.
(4) The members of the organization shall share equitably the
costs of maintaining and developing common open space and recreation
facilities, in accordance with procedures established by them.
(5) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to
administer recreation facilities and maintain the common open space.
(6) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain a common open space and recreation facilities or any successor
organization, shall at any time after establishment of the planned
residential development fail to maintain the common open space in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development plan,
the Municipality may serve written notice under such organization or
upon the residents and owners of the Planned Residential Development
setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain
the common open space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall
include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within
thirty (30) days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing
thereon which shall be held within fourteen (14) days of the notice. At
such a hearing, the Municipality may modify the terms of the original
notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of time within
which they shall be corrected. If the deficiencies set forth in the original
notice or in the modifications thereof shall not be corrected within said
thirty (30) days or any extension thereof, the Municipality, in order to
preserve the taxable values of the properties within the Planned
Residential Development and to prevent the common open space from
becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open space
and maintain the same for a period of one (1) year. Said maintenance by
the Municipality shall not constitute a taking of said common open space,
nor vest in the public any rights to use the same. Before the expiration of
said year, the Municipality shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of
the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the
common open space call a public hearing upon notice to such
organization, or to the residents and owners of the Planned Residential
Development to be held by the Governing Body or its designated agency,
at which hearing such organization or the residents and owners of the
Planned Residential Development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the Municipality shall not, at the option of the
Municipality, continue for a succeeding year. If the Governing Body, or its
designated agency, shall determine that such organization is ready and
able to maintain said common open space in reasonable condition, the
Municipality shall cease to maintain said common open space at the end
of said year. If the Governing Body or its designated agency shall
determine such organization is not ready and able to maintain said
common open space in a reasonable condition, the Municipality may, at
its discretion, continue to maintain said common open space during the
next succeeding year and subject to a similar hearing and determination in
)0(1 - 82
AL7425
each year thereafter. The decision of the Governing Body or its designated
agency shall be subject to appeal to court in the same manner and subject
to the same limitation, as is provided by zoning appeals by this act.
The cost of such maintenance by the Municipality shall be assessed ratably
against the properties within the planned residential development that
have a right of enjoyment of the common open space, and shall become a
lien on said properties. The Municipality at the time of entering upon said
common open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of
lien in the office of the Prothonotary upon the properties affected by the
lien within the Planned Residential Development.
(7) In accordance with Article IV of Act 247, as amended, the
provisions of the development plan relating to (a) the use, bulk and
location of buildings and structures, (b) the quantity and location of
common open space, and (c) the intensity of use or the density of
residential units, shall run in favor of the Municipality and shall be
enforceable in law or in equity by the Municipality, without limitation on
any powers of regulation otherwise granted the municipality by law. The
development plan shall specify those of its provisions which shall run in
favor of , and be enforceable by residents of the planned residential
development, and in addition, the manner in which such residents may
modify or release such rights.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 801)
Section 802. Required Open Space. Required open space, as required by this
Chapter to satisfy the net residential density and all yard requirements shall be
maintained by one of the following:
(A) The individual owner in the case of singles, townhouses or
quadraplexes when said open space is deeded to the owner as part of the lot.
(B) In all other cases the owner of the property. Such ownership may
include condominiums, trusts, homeowner associations or any other form
acceptable to the Municipality.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 802)
AL7425
Part 9
Management, Maintenance and Repair of Public Facilities
and Community Services
Section 901. Responsibility. The developer shall assume responsibility for the
management, maintenance, repair and operation of the following facilities: roads,
gutters, sidewalks, curbs, drainage system, water distribution system, sewerage system,
public lighting system, public signs, recreation facility and any other public facility not
listed, if not dedicated to the Municipality or a Municipal Authority.
The developer shall assume responsibility for the provision of the following
community services: refuse collection, snow removal, leaf removal, street cleaning, tree
trimming and the operation of community buildings.
The developer may divest himself of any or all management, repair and
operational responsibility by dedicating of such facilities to the Municipality or a
Municipal Authority, if acceptable to these bodies or by creating an organization
acceptable to the Governing Body by:
(A) Increasing the scope of the common open space organization mandated
in Part 8 to include the responsibilities required in this section.
(B) Creating of a separate homeowner's association to assume the
responsibilities listed in this section.
(C) Creating a trust association or other legally appropriate
arrangements which will also be eligible to assume the responsibilities required
by this Part.
The Governing Body will require a legally acceptable instrument (organization)
for the management, repair and maintenance of public facilities and community
services of the Planned Residential Development before the submittal of a Tentative
Development Plan. This legal instrument shall describe, to the satisfaction of the
Governing Body and the Municipal Solicitor, how and in what manner the
requirements of this section will be implemented. Additionally, the aforesaid legal
instrument will describe the financial arrangements of administering the requirements
described in this section.
If the requirements of this Section are not executed, the Governing Body will
institute the proper proceedings (as promulgated in Section 705 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended) to correct such deficiencies of maintenance,
AL7425
repair and management of public facilities and community services. (Ordinance
No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 901)
AL7425
Part 10
Administration and Review
Section 1001. Permits.
(A) Issuance of permits and all matters pertaining to administration of
the plan as finally approved shall be the responsibility of the Zoning officer as
designated in the Municipality's Zoning Ordinance (Chapter XXXII).
(B) Upon application of the developer showing compliance with the
requirements of final approval, the Zoning Officer shall issue permits for
construction pursuant to the plan or any section thereof.
(C) The provisions of the Administration Part of the Municipal Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter XXXII) shall be fully applicable to the plan as finally
approved insofar as the provisions thereof are consistent with the provisions of
this Part and the conditions of final approval. The Zoning officer shall review the
progress and status and construction of the plan and render reports thereon to
the Governing Body in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this
Part and the conditions of final approval.
(D) No building will be occupied unless a Certificate of Occupancy has
been issued by the Zoning Officer.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 1001)
Section 1002. Post Completion Regulations.
(A) The Governing Body shall issue a Certificate certifying the
completion of the Planned Residential Development upon recommendation of
the Zoning Officer, and the Planning Commission. The Secretary of the
Municipality shall note the issuance of the certificate on the approved
Development Plan.
(B) After the certificate of completion has been issued, the uses of land
and construction, modification or alterations of any buildings or structure within
the Planned Residential Development will be governed by the approved
Development Plan.
AL7425
(C) After the certificate of completion has been issued, no changes may
be made in the approved development plan except upon application to the
Governing Body under the procedure provided below:
(1) Any extensions, alterations or modifications of existing
buildings or structures shall conform to requirements of Section 502 and
Section 602 of this Chapter applicable at the time the Development Plan
was approved.
(2) A building or structure that is totally or partially destroyed
may be reconstructed only in compliance with the approved Development
Plan unless an amendment to the approved Development Plan is
approved.
(3) All other changes in the approved Development Plan must
be approved by the Governing Body, under the procedure authorized by
this Chapter for approval of a Final Development Plan. No changes may
be made in the approved Development Plan unless they are required by
changes in conditions that have occurred since the Final Plan was
approved or by changes in the development policy of the Municipality.
(4) No changes in the approved Development Plan which are
approved under this section are to be considered as a waiver of the
covenants limiting the use of land, buildings, structures and
improvements within development plan area, and all rights to enforce
these covenants against any changes permitted by this section are
expressly reserved.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 1002)
Section 1003. Revisions and Amendment. The Governing Body may, from time
to time on their own motion, revise, modify or amend this Chapter in order to increase
its effectiveness or to expedite the approval of plans.
Any revisions, modifications or amendments to this Chapter shall be made in
accordance with the procedures established by law in accordance with the provision of
Act 247, as amended.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 1003)
Section 1004. Modifications. The provisions of this Chapter are intended as
minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents and inhabitants of the Municipality. The Municipality reserves the right, in
)0Ct - 87
AL7425
unusual situations, to modify or to extend them conditionally in individual cases as
may be necessary in the public interest, provided, however, that such variation shall not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Chapter. The list of such
modifications and the reasons for them shall be entered in the minutes of the Municipal
Planning Commission or Governing Body, and a copy of this entry shall be transmitted
to the Municipal Secretary. Modifications shall be clearly defined and entered on the
Record Plan and signed by the Governing Body. (Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987,
Section 1004)
Section 1005. Appeals and Challenges. All appeals and challenges shall conform
to the requirements and procedures as outlined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended. (Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 1005)
Section 1006. Fees.
(A) The Governing Body shall establish, by resolution, a collection
procedure and Schedule of Fees to be paid by the developer at the time of filing a
Tentative Plan.
(B) The Schedule of Fees shall be posted in the Municipal Office or in
such other place as the Governing Body may designate, and be available upon
request.
(C) In the event the developer is required to pay additional fees at the
filing of the Final Plan, such fees shall be collected by the Municipal Secretary
prior to distributing the Final Plan. There shall be no refund or credit of any
portion of the fee should the developer fail to apply for final approval within the
required period of time or if the Final Plan covers only a section of the
development for which Tentative Approval has been obtained.
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 1006)
Section 1007. Keeping of Records. The Municipal Planning Commission and the
Governing Body shall keep a record of their findings, decisions and recommendations
relative to all planned residential development filed for review. Such records shall be
made available to the public for review. (Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section
1007)
Section 1008. Responsibility. The developer shall be responsible for observing
the procedures established in this Chapter and for submitting all plans and documents
as may be required. (Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 1008)
AL7425
Section 1009. Severability. Should any part, section, subsection, paragraph,
clause, phrase or provision of this Chapter be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a
whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Section 1009)
AL7425
Part 11
Appendix
Section 1101. Certification of Accuracy. The following certification in the
wording shown, must be labeled and completed on the Final Plan:
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon, as well as all
drawings bearing my seal, are true and correct to the accuracy. required by the Planned
Residential Development Chapter (Chapter )0U), and were prepared by me or under
my direction and for which I accept full responsibility. The perimeter monuments have
been accurately placed as required by this Chapter.
(2)
, 20 (1)
(1) Signature of the Registered Engineer, Registered Surveyors, Registered Architect
or Registered Landscape Architect responsible for the preparation of the plan.
(2) Apply seal of the registered engineer, surveyor, architect or landscape architect.
AL7425
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Appendices)
AL7425
Section 1102. Certification of Ownership, Acknowledgement of Plan and Offer of
Dedication. The following certification, in the wording shown, must be labeled and
completed on the Final Plan:
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
SS:
County of
On this, the day of 20-, before me, the
undersigned officer, personally appeared who
being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that he is the
(1) of the property shown on this plan, that
the planned residential development plan thereof was made at his/its direction, that he
acknowledges the same to be his/ its act and plan (2)
and that all streets (3) shown and not heretofore
dedicated are hereby dedicated to the public use (4)
(5) (6)
(7)
(8)
My commission
Expires , 20
(9)
(1) Insert either: Owner
Equitable owner
President of the (name of corporation) which is the owner
(2) Whenever applicable, insert: and desires the same to be recorded as such according
to law
(3) Whenever applicable, insert: and open spaces contained in lots number
(4) If necessary, insert: except those labeled "not for dedication" (and any other
restrictions or reservations)
(5) Where necessary, signature of secretary of corporation
(6) Signature of individual, of partners, or of president of corporation
(7) If necessary, corporate seal
(8) Signature
(9) Seal of notary public or other officer
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Appendices)
XXI - 92
AL7425
Section 1103. Certificate of Municipal Approval. The approval of the Final Plan
by the Governing Body and the Planning Commission must be indicated on the Final
Plan in substantially the following form:
At a meeting held on 20 the (5)
of the Township of Spring by (1) duly
enacted, approved the development plan of the property of
(2) , as shown hereon.
(3)
(1) Insert either a Resolution, Ordinance # , or Motion
(2) Insert name of property owner
(3) Signatures of Governing Body or Planning Commission
(4) Municipal Seal
(5) Planning Commission or Governing Body
(Ordinance No. 194, April 27, 1987, Appendices)
(4)
CHAPTER XXII
PLUMBING
(See Code Enforcement, Chapter VI)
(Reserved for Future Use)
AP8313
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204.
Section 205.
Section 206.
Section 207.
Section 208.
Section 209.
Section 210.
Section 211.
Section 212.
Section 213.
Section 214.
CHAPTER XXIII
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Part 1
Use of Public Sewers Required
Definitions
Use of Public Sewers Required
Building Sewers and Connections
Rules and Regulations Governing Building Sewers and
Connections to Sewers
Enforcement
Severability
Declaration of Purpose
Part 2
Tapping Fees
Amount of Tapping Fees
Summary of Calculations
Total Fees
Time of Payment
Modifications to Subpart
Existing Agreements
Existing Fees and Charges
Charges per EDU
Additional Uses
Additional Charges
Payment of Fees
Enforcement
Amendments
Severability
AP8313
Part 3
Sewer Rentals and Charges
Subpart A. Definitions and Abbreviations
Section 301. Definitions
Section 302. Abbreviations
Subpart B. Sewer Rentals, User Charges and Surcharges
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Section 308.
Section 309.
Section 310.
Section 311.
Section 312.
Section 313.
Section 314.
Section 315.
Section 316.
User Charge Imposed
User Charges Payable
User Charge Calculations
Multiple Use Properties
Excess Usage
Additional Charges for Strong Wastes
Additional Charges
Application for Permit
Special Circumstances
Quarterly Charges
Billing Dates
Correct Mailing Address
Reduction of Charges
Liability for User Charges
Subpart C. Liens for Sewer Rentals; Filing and Collection of Liens
Section 317. Lien Upon Property
Section 318. Statement of Collection Policies and Procedures
Section 319. Water Shut Off
Subpart D. Prohibited Wastes and Accidental Discharges
Section 320.
Section 321.
Section 322.
Section 323.
Section 324.
Section 325.
Section 326.
Section 327.
Prohibited Wastes
Prohibited Discharges
Written Permission Necessary
Authorization Subject to Continuing Approval, Inspection and
Review of Township
Special Agreements Allowed
Right to Inspect
Dilution of Wastewater
Accidental Discharges
XXIII -2
AP8313
Subpart E. Sampling
Section 328.
Section 329.
Section 330.
Section 331.
Section 332.
Section 333.
Periodic Sampling
Obtaining Samples
Split Results by Request
Sample Invoice
Resampling
Billing
Subpart F. Hauled Wastewater
Section 334.
Section 335.
Section 336.
Section 337.
Section 338.
No Septic Tanks in POTW
Haulers to Obtain Discharge Permits
Discharge Locations to be Designated by Township
Waste-Tracking Form
Tank Truck Requirements
Subpart G. Industrial Waste and Pretreatment Standards
Section 339.
Section 340.
Section 341.
Section 342.
Section 343.
Section 344.
Section 345.
Section 346.
Section 347.
Section 348.
Section 349.
Section 350.
Section 351.
Section 352.
Section 353.
Section 354.
Section 355.
Section 356.
Section 357.
Section 358.
Section 359.
Section 360.
Prior Application and Permit Required for Discharge of Industrial
Wastes
Industrial Questionnaire Required
Quality and Quantity Reports
Testing Requirements
Notice of Change
Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors Required
Mechanical Garbage Grinders
Regulation of Waste Flows
Construction of Manhole
Pretreatment Facilities
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
Plans and Specification
Maintenance of Pretreatment Facilities
Notification to Township
Township's Right of Refusal
Baseline Monitoring Reports
Self-Monitoring Reports
Notice of Violation/ Repeat Sampling and Reporting
Certification Requirement
Signatory Requirement
Recordkeeping Requirements
XXIII -3
AP8313
Section 361. Notification of Discharge of Listed or Characteristic Wastes
Section 362. Access and Confidential Information
Subpart H. Industrial Waste Discharge Permit, Modification and Appeal
Section 363.
Section 364.
Section 365.
Section 366.
Section 367.
Section 368.
Section 369.
Section 370.
Section 371.
Section 372.
Industrial Waste Discharge Permit Required
Application Forms
Survey Required
Issuance of Permit
Permit Subject to Certain Provisions
Time Limit of Permits
Modification of Permit by Township
Permits are Not Transferable
Appeals
Judicial Review
Subpart I. Measuring Devices, Meter Readings and Access
Section 373.
Section 374.
Section 375.
Section 376.
Installation of Meters and Measuring Devices
No Modification Which Affects Measurement
Township Responsible for Reading Meters
Township Shall Have Right of Access
Subpart J. Agreements; Additions to and Changes of Sewer Rentals or Charges;
Adoption of Additional Rules and Regulations
Section 377. Conflict of Ordinances
Section 378. Modifications to Sewer Rentals
Section 379. Adoption of Additional Rules and Regulations
Subpart K. Penalties and Enforcement
Section 380.
Section 381.
Section 382.
Section 383.
Section 384.
Section 385.
Section 386.
Section 387.
Section 388.
Section 389.
Section 390.
Penalty for Violation
Refusal of Inspection
Violations
Notice of Violation
Injunctive Relief
Cease and Desist Order
Significant Noncompliance
Major Violations
Notice to Public of Noncompliance
Other Enforcement
Suspension of Discharge
XXIII -4
AP8313
Section 391. Elimination of Discharge
Section 392. Written Statement of Harmful Contribution
Section 393. Remedies Not Exclusive
Subpart L. Miscellaneous
Section 394. Township Right of Access
Section 395. Owner Liable for Tenants
Section 401.
Section 402.
Section 403.
Section 404.
Section 405.
Section 406.
Section 407.
Section 408.
Section 409.
Section 410.
Section 411.
Section 412.
Section 413.
Section 414.
Section 415.
Section 416.
Section 501.
Section 502.
Section 503.
Section 504.
Section 505.
Section 506.
Section 507.
Section 508.
Section 509.
Part 4
On-Lot Disposal Systems (OLDS)
Title, Introduction; Purpose
Terms and Definitions
Applicability
Sewage Permit Requirements
Ground Markers
Replacement Areas
Inspections
Operation
Maintenance
System Rehabilitation
Liens
Disposal of Septage
Administration
Appeals
Penalties
Septic Tank Pumper's Report
Part 5
Holding Tanks
Purpose
Definitions
Rights and Privileges Granted
Rules and Regulations
Rules and Regulations to be in Conformity with Applicable Law
Rates and Charges
Exclusiveness of Rights and Privileges
Duties of Improved Property Owner
Violations
VCR -5
AP8313
Section 510. Abatement of Nuisances
Section 511. Severability
Part 6
City of Reading Sewer Use
Subpart A. General Provisions
Section 601. Purpose and Policy
Section 602. Administration
Section 603. Abbreviations and Acronyms
Section 604. Definitions
Subpart B. General Sewer Use Requirements
Section 605.
Section 606.
Section 607.
Section 608.
Section 609.
Section 610.
Section 611.
Section 612.
Prohibited Discharge Standards
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
Local Limits
State Requirements
Right of Revision
Dilution
Remedies
Accidental Discharges
Subpart C. Pretreatment of Wastewater
Section 613. Pretreatment Facilities
Section 614. Additional Pretreatment Measures
Section 615. Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans
Section 616. Installation of Zero Discharge Pretreatment System
Subpart D. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
Section 617.
Section 618.
Section 619.
Section 620.
Section 621.
Section 622.
Wastewater Discharges
Wastewater Analysis
Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements
Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Conditions
Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
XXIII -6
AP8313
Section 623. Application Signatories and Certification
Section 624. Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
Subpart E. Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
Section 625.
Section 626.
Section 627.
Section 628.
Section 629.
Section 630.
Section 631.
Section 632.
Section 633.
Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
Wastewater Discharge Permit Reconsiderations
Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
Reinstatement of Permit
Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions
Subpart F. Wastewater Monitoring and Reporting Requirements
Section 634.
Section 635.
Section 636.
Section 637.
Section 638.
Section 639.
Section 640.
Section 641.
Section 642.
Section 643.
Section 644.
Section 645.
Section 646.
Section 647.
Section 648.
Baseline Monitoring Reports
Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline
Monitoring and Periodic Self-Monitoring Compliance Reports
Reports of Changed Conditions
Reports of Potential Problems/ Notifications of Accidental Spills
Reports from Unpermitted Users
Notice of Violation/ Repeat Sampling and Reporting
Analytical Requirements
Sample Collection
Timing
Recordkeeping
Selling, Closing or Moving a Business
Temporary Business Closings
Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste
Subpart G. Inspection Powers and Compliance Monitoring
Section 649. Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling
Section 650. Search Warrants
Section 651. User Documentation
Subpart H. Confidential Information
Section 652. EPA Regulations
>00:II -7
AP8313
Section 653. Public Information
Subpart I. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
Section 654. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
Subpart J. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
Section 655.
Section 656.
Section 657.
Section 658.
Section 659.
Section 660.
Section 661.
Section 662.
Notification of Violation
Consent Orders
Show Cause Hearing
Compliance Orders
Cease and Desist Orders
Administrative Civil Penalties
Emergency Suspensions
Termination of Discharge
Subpart K. Judicial Enforcement Remedies
Section 663.
Section 664.
Section 665.
Section 666.
Injunctive Relief
Civil Penalties
Criminal Prosecution
Remedies Nonexclusive
Subpart L. Supplemental Enforcement Action
Section 667.
Section 668.
Section 669.
Section 670.
Section 671.
Section 672.
Section 673.
Section 674.
Section 675.
Section 676.
Section 677.
Performance Bonds
Liability Insurance
Public Nuisances
Falsifying Information
Contractor Listing
Assessment of Civil Penalties
Administrative Hearings/ Appeals
Petitions for Declaratory Rulings
Costs
Denial of Access
Inspection of Connections
Subpart M. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
Section 678. Upset
Section 679. Prohibited Discharge Standards
Section 680. Bypass
XXIII -8
AP8313
Subpart N. Wastewater Treatment Rates
Section 681. Surcharge Rate
Section 682. Septage Rates
Subpart 0. Fees
Section 683.
Section 684.
Section 685.
Section 686.
Section 687.
Section 688.
Section 689.
Section 690.
Section 691.
Purpose
Charges and Fees
Application/ Sampling/ Analysis
Fee Collection
Septage Permitting System
Septage/ Waste Disposal
Septage Prohibitions
Septage Records
Compliance Required
Subpart P. Miscellaneous
Section 692. Interference with City Property
Section 693. Severability
Subpart A. Es
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Part 7
Spring-Lawn Sewer District
tablishment of Spring-Lawn Sewer District
701. Merger of Spring-Lawn Sewer District
702. Provisions of West Lawn Ordinances
703. Adoption of Ordinances by Reference and Establishment of the
Spring-Lawn Sewer District
704. Amendments to Adopted Ordinances
705. Initial Sewer Charges
706. Construction
707. Provisions to be Continuations of Existing Regulations
708. Repealer
709. Severability
710. (Reserved for Future Use)
AP8313
Subpart B. Mandatory Connection
Section 711. Definitions
Section 712. Notice of Completion
Section 713. Mandatory Connection
Section 714. Discharge only into the Spring-Lawn Sewer System
Section 715. Use of Septic Tank is Nuisance
Section 716. Connections must be in Compliance
Section 717. Failure to Connect
Section 718. Plumbing Permit
Section 719. Competent Plumber
Section 720. Refusal to Obtain Permit
Section 721. Violations
Section 722. Easements
Section 723. Severability
Section 724 -730. (Reserved for Future Use)
Subpart C. Borough of West Lawn Sewer Rentals
Section 731. Definitions
Section 732. Imposition of Sewer Rent or Charge
Section 733. Charges for Domestic Sewage
Section 734. Measuring Volume Domestic Sewage
Section 735. Industrial Waste
Section 736. Time and Management of Payment
Section 737. Liens, Delinquent Sewer Rentals and Penalties
Section 738. Segregation of Sewer Revenues
Section 739. Rules and Regulations
Section 740. Construction and Severability
Section 741 - 750. (Reserved for Future Use)
Subpart D. West Wyomissing Sewer Rentals
Section 751.
Section 752.
Section 753.
Section 754.
Section 755.
Section 756.
Section 757.
Section 758.
Section 759.
Section 760.
Definitions
Imposition of Sewer Rent or Charge
Collection Charge for Domestic Sewage
Measuring Volume of Domestic Sewage
Industrial Waste
Time and Method of Payment
Liens, Delinquent Sewer Rentals and Penalties
Segregation of Sewer Revenues
Effective Date
Severability
XXIII -10
AP8313
Subpart E. Wyomissing Hills Sewer Rental
Section 761.
Section 762.
Section 763.
Section 764.
Section 765.
Section 766.
Section 767.
Section 768.
Section 769.
Section 770.
Section 801.
Section 802.
Section 803.
Section 804.
Section 805.
Section 806.
Section 807.
Section 808.
Section 809.
Section 810.
Section 811.
Section 812.
Section 813.
Section 814.
Section 815.
Section 816.
Section 817.
Section 818.
Section 819.
Section 820.
Section 821.
Section 822.
Section 823.
Section 824.
Section 825.
Definitions
Imposition of Sewer Rent or Charge
Collection Charge for Domestic Sewage
Measuring Volume of Domestic Sewage
Industrial Waste
Time and Method of Payment
Liens, Delinquent Sewer Rentals and Penalties
Segregation of Sewer Revenues
Effective Date
Severability
Part 8
Adamstown Borough Sewer Use
Agreement between Adamstown Borough and Township of Spring
Definitions
Bulk Customer
Service Area
Construction of Conveyance System
Notice of Construction
Permits
Planning Module
Individual Connections and Tapping Fees
Continuing Notice of Connections
Sewer Rental Rates
Operation and Maintenance of Spring Conveyance System
Flow Monitoring
Pretreatment
Billing of Customers
Calculations
Billing of Township
Quarterly Invoices
Township Responsibility
Indemnification
Township Reimbursement
Good Faith
Interpretation
Enforcement
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act
XXIII -11
AP8313
Section 826.
Section 827.
Section 828.
Section 829.
Section 830.
Remedies
Severability
Perpetual Agreement
Old Lancaster Pike Sewage Service Area Properties to be Served
Calculation of Borough Conveyance System Charge
AP8313
Part 1
Use of Public Sewers Required
Section 101. Definitions. Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates
otherwise, the meaning of terms and phrases used in this Part shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY - Municipal Authority of the Township of Spring,
Berks County, a municipality authority incorporated pursuant to
provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented, of the Commonwealth.
(The Municipal Authority of the Township of Spring was created by
Ordinance No. 38, May 19, 1958, amended by Ordinance No. 202, June 26,
1989, and was dissolved by Resolution No. 2004-61, December 13, 2004
and Ordinance No. 315, December 27, 2004, and all reference thereto have
been amended to be the Township)
BUILDING SEWER - the extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
COMMONWEALTH - the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
IMPROVED PROPERTY - any property within this Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary
sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT - any improved property located within
this Township and used or intended for use, wholly or in part, for the
manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling of any product,
commodity or article, or any other improved property located within this
Township, from which wastes, in addition to or other than sanitary sewage, shall
be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES - any and all wastes discharged from any
industrial establishment, other than sanitary sewage.
LATERAL - that part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curb line or, if there shall be no curb line, to the property line, or if no such lateral
shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of, or place in, a sewer
which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
XXIII -13
AP8313
OWNER - any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON - any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
trust, corporation, municipality, municipality authority or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE - normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any Improved Property.
SEWER - any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM - all facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transmitting, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Township and owned or to be
owned by the Township (Authority), and to be leased to this Township for
maintenance, operation and use.
STREET - includes any street, road, lane, court, cul-de-sac, alley or public
way or public square.
TOWNSHIP - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, a
Township of the Second Class of the Commonwealth, acting by and through its
Board of Supervisors or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
(Ordinance 206, July 10, 1989, Article I)
Section 102. Use of Public Sewers Required.
(A) The owner of any improved property accessible to and whose
principal building is within one hundred fifty (150) feet from the sewer system
shall connect such improved property with and shall use such sewer system, in
such manner as this Township may require, within sixty (60) days after notice to
such owner from this Township to make such connection, for the purpose of
discharge of all sanitary sewer and industrial wastes from such improved
property; subject however, to such limitations and restrictions as shall be
established herein or otherwise shall be established by this Township from time
to time.
(B) All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved
property, after connection of such improved property with a sewer shall be
required under Section 102(A), shall be conducted into a sewer; subject, however,
)0(III -14
AP8313
to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise
shall be established by this Township from time to time.
(C) No person shall place, shall deposit or shall permit to be placed or
to be deposited upon public or private property within this Township any
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of Section 102(A).
No person shall discharge or shall permit to be discharged to any natural
outlet within this Township any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation
of Section 102(A), except where suitable treatment has been provided which is
satisfactory to this Township.
(D) No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used or shall be maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under
Section 102(A) to be connected to a sewer.
Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of this
Township, shall be cleansed and shall be filled, at the expense of the owner of
such improved property, under the direction and supervision of this Township;
and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not
so abandoned and, if required by this Township, not cleansed and filled, shall
constitute a nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated, as provided by law, at
the expense of the owner of such improved property.
(E) No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
at any time shall be connected with a sewer.
(F) The notice by this Township to make a connection to a sewer,
referred to in Section 102(A), shall consist of a copy of this Part, including any
amendments and/or supplements at the time in effect, or a summary of each
Section hereof, and a written or printed document requiring the connection in
accordance with the provisions of this Part and specifying that such connection
shall be made within sixty (60) days after the date such notice is given or served.
Such notice may be given or served at any time after a sewer is in place which
can receive and can convey sanitary sewage and industrial wastes for treatment
and disposal from the particular improved property. Such notice shall be given
or served upon the owner in accordance with law.
(Ordinance 206, July 10, 1989, Article II)
AP8313
Section 103. Building Sewers and Connections.
(A) No person shall uncover, shall connect with, shall make any
opening into or shall use, shall alter or shall disturb, in any manner, any sewer or
any part of the sewer system without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from
this Township.
(B) Application for a permit required under Section 103(A) shall be
made by the owner of the improved property served or to be served or by the
duly authorized agent of such owner.
(C) No person shall make or shall cause to be made a connection of any
improved property with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled each of the
following conditions:
(1) Such person shall have notified the Secretary of this Township
of the desire and intention to connect such improved property to a sewer.
(2) Such person shall have applied for and shall have obtained a
permit as required by Section 103(A).
(3) Such person shall have given the Secretary of this Township
at least twenty-four (24) hours notice of the time when such connection
will be made so that this Township may supervise and inspect or may
cause to be supervised and inspected the work of connection and
necessary testing.
(4) If applicable, such person shall have furnished satisfactory
evidence to the Secretary of this Township that any tapping (or
connection) fee which may be charged and imposed by the Township
(Authority) against the owner of each improved property who connects
such improved property to a sewer has been paid.
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this Section 103(D), each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer through
a building sewer. Grouping of more than one (1) improved property on one (1)
building sewer shall not be permitted, except under special circumstances and
for good sanitary reasons or other good cause shown, but then only after special
permission of this Township, in writing, shall have been secured and only
subject to such rules, regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by this
Township.
AP8313
(E) All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all
costs and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer shall be borne by
the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such owner shall
indemnify and shall save harmless this Township from all loss or damage that
may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of construction of a building
sewer or of connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
(F) A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place
designated by this Township and where, if applicable, the lateral is provided.
The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the
same or a higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint
shall be made and the connection of a building sewer to the lateral shall be made
secure and watertight.
(G) If the owner of any improved property located within this
Township and accessible to and whose principal building is within one hundred
fifty feet (150') from the sewer system, after sixty (60) days notice from this
Township, in accordance with Section 102(A), shall fail to connect such improved
property, as required, this Township may enter upon such improved property
and construct such connection and may collect from such owner the costs and
expenses thereof in the manner permitted by law.
(Ordinance 206, July 10, 1989, Article III)
Section 104. Rules and Regulations Governing Buildings Sewers and Connections
to Sewers.
(A) Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is
required, shall be served by its own sewage disposal system or sewage disposal
device, the existing house sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of such
sewage disposal system or sewage disposal device and attachment shall be
made, with proper fittings, to continue such house sewer line as a building
sewer.
(B) No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by this Township. If any part of a building sewer is covered before so
being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection, at the cost
and expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer.
(C) Every building sewer of any improved property shall be
maintained in a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such
improved property.
)0(111 -17
AP8313
(D) Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately
with barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury. Any
street, sidewalk and other public property disturbed in the course of installation
of the building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and expense of the owner of
the improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to this
Township.
(E) If any person shall fail or shall refuse, upon receipt of a notice from
this Township, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with respect to
a building sewer within sixty (60) days of receipt of such notice, this Township
may refuse to permit such person to discharge sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes into the sewer system until such unsatisfactory condition shall have been
remedied to the satisfaction of this Township.
(F) This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time,
additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and with the sewer system, which additional rules and
regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed as part of
this Part.
(Ordinance 206, July 10, 1989, Article no
Section 105. Enforcement.
(A) Any person who shall violate this Part shall be liable, upon
summary conviction for a first offense and upon summary conviction for each
subsequent offense, to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), together with costs of prosecution in
each case. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
(B) Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this Part shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner and at the time provided by
applicable law.
(Ordinance 206, July 10, 1989, Article V)
Section 106. Severability. In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or
part of this Part shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any
remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Part, it being the intent of
this Township that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ordinance No. 206, July 10, 1989, Article VII)
XXIII -18
AP8313
Section 107. Declaration of Purpose. It is declared that enactment of this Part is
necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare
of inhabitants of this Township. (Ordinance 206, July 10, 1989, Article VIII)
AP8313
Part 2
Tapping Fees
Section 201. Amount of Tapping Fees. The Township hereby imposes a
"tapping fee" in the amount as set forth below and as calculated as set forth below,
against the owner of any improved property in the respective Sewer Service Districts of
the Township Sewer System, which improve property is required to be connected to the
Township Sewer System pursuant to the terms and provisions of ordinances or other
provisions then in effect requiring such connection to the Sewer System:
(A) Spring Wastewater Treatment Plant Basin
(1) Capacity Part - $4,021.34 per EDU
(2) Distribution or Collection Part - $444.86 per EDU
(3) Special Purposes Part - N/ A
(4) Reimbursement Part - To be established by written
agreement, from time to time, between the Township and such person at
whose expense certain specific facilities were constructed.
(B) Reading-Tulpehocken Basin
(1) Capacity Part - $227.45 per EDU
(2) Distribution or Collection Part - $0.00 per EDU
(3) Special Purposes Part - N/A
(4) Reimbursement Part - To be established by written
agreement, from time to time, between the Township and such person at
whose expense certain specific facilities were constructed.
(C) Reading-Wyomissing Basin
(1) Capacity Part - $1,550.19 per EDU
(2) Distribution or Collection Part - $3,268.33 per EDU
(3) Special Purposes Part - N/A
(4) Reimbursement Part - To be established by written
agreement, from time to time, between the Township and such person at
whose expense certain specific facilities were constructed.
(D) Commercial Developments - Tapping Fees for all commercial
developments shall be imposed and calculated in accordance with the per
gallonage basis as established in Section 405 (a) and (b), No. 5. Present Value
Unit Cost Calculation hereof.
XXIII -20
AP8313
(Ordinance No. 314, Section 1, December 27, 2004; as amended by Ordinance No. 344,
July 23, 2007, Section 2; as further amended by Ordinance No. 349, November 26, 2007,
Section 1; as further amended by Resolution No. 2011-20, September 12, 2011)
Section 202. Summary of Calculations. The tables below (not included herein)
summarize the calculations upon which the tapping fee amounts are based. The tables
are part of a Capital Charges Study dated December 2004, which may be reviewed in its
entirety at the Engineering Office of the Township of Spring, and which study,
including any supplements, revisions or additions thereto, is incorporated in its entirety
and made a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth at length and made part hereof.
(Ordinance No. 314, Section 1, December 27, 2004; as amended by Ordinance No. 344,
July 23, 2007, Section 3)
Section 203. Total Fees. With respect to such fees as set forth above, the total fees
in each respective sewage service district shall be multiplied times the number of
"Equivalent Dwelling Units (EDUs)" as has been determined or shall be determined by
resolution or ordinance of the Township. (Ordinance No. 314, Section 1, December 27,
2004)
Section 204. Time of Payment. The tapping fees shall be due and payable at the
time application is made to the Township to make any such connection to the Township
Sewer System or, if applicable, the date when the Township causes the connection at
any such improved property to the Township Sewer System, at the cost and expense of
the owner, pursuant to the provisions of the connection ordinance or other provisions
whereby an owner is required to connect to the Township Sewer System. No capacity
shall be guaranteed for a property owner until such time as the Tapping Fees shall have
been paid in full, except as may otherwise be provided by written agreement by and
between the Township and owner. (Ordinance No. 314, Section 1, December 27, 2004)
Section 205. Modifications to Subpart. The Township may from time to time,
adopt modifications of, supplements to or amendments of this Part. (Ordinance
No. 314, Section 1, December 27, 2004)
Section 206. Existing Agreements. This Part shall not affect any existing
agreements which relate to the subject matter of Act 203 of 1990. (Ordinance No. 314,
Section 1, December 27, 2004)
Section 207. Existing Fees and Charges. It is the intent of the Township that any
and all sewer charges, including tapping fees, as may had been previously established,
paid to, or owed to the Township (Authority) shall remain payable to the Township
(Authority), except to the extent that such payments shall be required to be made to the
AP8313
Township upon the termination and dissolution of the Authority. (Ordinance No. 314,
Section 1, December 27, 2004)
Section 208. Charges per EDU. Each EDU shall be charged separately even
though two or more domestic units are or will be connected to either new or old
collection lines through a single connection (a wye or a manhole). For non-residential
owners (commercial and industrial) the number of EDU's to be assigned to each owner
shall be determined from the nature of the establishment and estimated and actual
loads which may be or are discharged into said collection lines. Whenever actual loads
exceed estimates, an additional tapping fee shall be charged. (Ordinance No. 314,
Section 1, December 27, 2004)
Section 209. Additional Uses. Where any property connected to said collection
line shall be converted, enlarged or remodeled or additional buildings shall be
constructed on a property and connected indirectly to said collection line through an
existing lateral, so as to create or establish an additional classified use or uses, an
additional tapping fee determined in accordance with Section 202 of this Part for each
such additional use shall be payable to the Township by the owner of said property.
(Ordinance No. 314, Section 1, December 27, 2004)
Section 210. Additional Charges. The tapping fee imposed hereunder shall be in
addition to:
(A) Any connection fee, inspection charge or administrative fee
imposed by the Township;
(B) Any customer facilities fee imposed by the Township; and
(C) Any rental or other charges fixed, charged or imposed by the
Township by reason of the use or availability of use, of the Sewer System by such
property.
(Ordinance No. 314, Section 1, December 27, 2004)
Section 211. Payment of Fees. All tapping fees shall be payable to the Treasurer
of the Township or to such other officer or representative of the Township as shall be
authorized, from time to time, to accept payment thereof. (Ordinance No. 314, Section
1, December 27, 2004)
Section 212. Enforcement. Payment of tapping fees charged by the Township
pursuant to this Part shall be enforced by the Township in any manner appropriate
under laws at the time in effect. (Ordinance No. 314, Section 1, December 27, 2004)
AP8313
Section 213. Amendments. The Township reserves the right, from time to time,
to adopt modifications of, supplements to, or amendments of this Part, and to reverse
and substitute, from time to time, Sections 201 and 202 of this Part, which shall be
available for public inspection, to reflect appropriate amendments to the cost
components, design capacity, Sewer Service District, or other elements of the required
calculations of the tapping fee. (Ordinance No. 314, Section 1, December 27, 2004)
Section 214. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Part is
for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the
Board of Supervisors of Spring Township that this Part would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been
included herein. (Ordinance No. 314, Section 1, December 27, 2004)
AP8313
Part 3
Sewer Rentals and Charges
Subpart A. Definitions and Abbreviations.
Section 301. Definitions. Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates
otherwise, the meaning of terms and phrases used in this Part shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT - the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, Public Law 92-500, as amended, 33 U.S.C.
§1251, et seq.
AGENCY (REGULATORY AGENCY) - any local, municipal, authority,
Commonwealth, regional or Federal entity with jurisdiction over wastewater
disposal or environmental matters in the authority's service area.
AMMONIA NITROGEN AS N - ammonia nitrogen as determined
pursuant to the procedure set forth in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater," jointly published by the American
Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and Water
Pollution Control Federation.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY - the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
AUTHORITY - the Municipal Authority of the Township of Spring, Berks
County, a Pennsylvania municipality. (the Municipal Authority of the Township
of Spring was created by Ordinance No. 38, May 19, 1958, amended by
Ordinance No. 202, June 26, 1989, and was dissolved by Resolution No. 2004-61,
December 13, 2004 and Ordinance No. 315, December 27, 2004, and all reference
thereto have been amended to be the Township)
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER -
(1) In the case of a corporation, a president, secretary, treasurer
or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business
function or any other person who performs similar policymaking or
decision-making functions for the corporation; or the manager of one (1)
or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities, if authority to
sign document has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
XXIII -24
AP8313
(2) In the case of a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general
partner or proprietor.
(3) A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if:
(a) The authorization specified either an individual or a
position having responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field
superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company.
.(b) The authorization is in writing.
(c) The written authorization is submitted to the
Township.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS - the group of elected and/or appointed
officials acting as the governing body of the Township of Spring.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) - the quantity of oxygen,
expressed in ppm by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure for five (5) days at twenty (20)
degrees Centigrade. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that found in
the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," jointly published by the American Public Health Association,
American Water Works Association and Water Pollution Control Federation.
BUILDING SEWER - the sewer extension from the sewage drainage
system of any improved property to the lateral serving such improved property.
BYPASS -
(1) With regard to the pretreatment program: the intentional
diversion of waste streams from any portion of the industrial user's
pretreatment facility.
(2) With regard to the metering of customers' water
consumption or volume of wastewater: intentional diversion of flows
prior to the water meter when such flows are or may be ultimately
discharged to the sewer system.
AP8313
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS - National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment Standard. A "categorical industrial user" shall mean
any industry which is regulated under Federal Categorical Standards.
CHAIN OF CUSTODY - written documentation such as receipts and
record book entries to show the history of possession, custody and/or control of
a sample from collection through analysis.
CHLORINE DEMAND - the quantity of chlorine absorbed in water,
sewage or other liquids, allowing a residual of one-tenth (0.1) mg/1, after fifteen
(15) minutes of contact.
COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) - the quantity of oxygen
expressed in mg/1, utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure.
COMMERCIAL - any room, group of rooms, buildings or enclosure used
or intended for use in the operation of one business enterprise for the sale and
distribution of any product, commodity, article or service or use or intended for
use for any social, amusement, religious, education, charitable or public purpose
and containing plumbing facilities for kitchens, toilets or washing facilities.
COMMONWEALTH - the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE - a sample prepared by combining discrete
samples collected from the waste streams either at periodic time intervals or in
proportion to the waste stream flow. The frequency of discrete sample collection
is a function of variability of types of pollutant(s) concentration(s) and/or
volume of waste stream flow.
CONNECTION ORDINANCE - the ordinance enacted by this Township,
inter alia, compelling all owners of certain improved property to connect to the
sewer system and use the same in such manner as this Township may ordain.
CONTROL AUTHORITY - the approval authority, defined hereinabove;
or the Township when the Township has an approved pretreatment program,
under the provisions of 40 CFR, §403.11.
CONVENTIONAL WASTEWATER POLLUTANTS - pollutants so
designated in accordance with §304(a)(4) of the Act as being effectively managed
by secondary treatment as defined by 40 CFR Part 133.
AP8313
COOLING WATER (NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER) - water used
for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product or finished product, to which the only
pollutant added is heat and which does not contain a level of contaminants
detectably higher than that of the source of the water.
DAILY MAXIMUM - the maximum allowable discharge of a pollutant
during a calendar day. Where maximum limitations are expressed in units of
mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day.
Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant derived
from all measurements taken that day.
DIRECT DISCHARGE - the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which may occur
through the Township's stormwater conduits.
DISSOLVED SOLIDS - the anhydrous residues of the dissolved
constituents in waste or wastewater.
DOMESTIC SANITARY SEWAGE or DOMESTIC SEWAGE - normal
water carried household and toilet wastes discharged from any improved
property.
DORMITORY - a residence hall providing rooms for individuals or for
groups with or without private baths.
DWELLING UNIT - any room, group of rooms, house trailer, apartment,
condominium, cooperative or other enclosure connected, directly or indirectly, to
the sewer system and occupied or intended for occupancy as living quarters by
an individual, a single family or other discrete group of persons, excluding
institutional dormitories.
EDUCATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT - any room, group of rooms,
building or other enclosure connected, directly or indirectly, to the sewer system
and used or intended for use, in whole or in part, for educational purposes,
including both public and private schools.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) - the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be
used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of
said agency.
AP8313
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT ("EDU)") - with regard to individual
owner is any group of room, house, trailer, mobile home, enclosure, etc.,
occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for a family or
other group of persons living together or by persons living alone. Wastewater
flow from residential customers is assumed to be 229 gallons per day ("gpd")
pursuant to the guidelines set forth in Act 57 for calculating residential flow
contributions.
FLASHPOINT - the temperature at which a liquid or volatile solid gives
off vapor sufficient to form an ignitable mixture with the air near the surface of
the liquid or within the test vessel. Flashpoint is determined by the test methods
set out in 40 CFR §261.21.
GARBAGE - solid waste resulting from the domestic, institutional and
commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from handling,
storage and sale or produce.
GRAB SAMPLE - an individual discrete sample collected from a
wastestream taken at neither set time nor set flow.
GROUND GARBAGE - garbage that has been shredded to such a degree
that all its particles will be carried freely under normal sewer flow conditions,
with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
HAZARDOUS POLLUTANTS - substances so defined pursuant to criteria
established within §311 of the Act.
HOLDING TANK WASTE - any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum-pump tank
trucks or trucked or hauled pollutants and/or sludge.
IMPROVED PROPERTY - any property upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by
human beings or animals and from which structure domestic sanitary sewage
and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged, which is located within
the sewered area and subject to the "Connection Ordinance" above.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE - introduction of pollutants into
the Township's (Authority's) wastewater treatment plant from any nondomestic
source regulated under §307(b)(c) or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL - any room, group of rooms, buildings or other enclosure
used or intended for use, in whole or in part, in the operation of one business
XXIII -28
AP8313
enterprise manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, laundering or
assembling from which any waste, as distinct from sanitary sewage, shall be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL USER - a source of indirect discharge to the sewer system.
An industrial establishment.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMIT - a permit issued to an industrial user by
the Township to deposit or discharge liquid industrial wastes into any sanitary
sewer operated by the Township.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES - any and all wastes discharged from an industrial
establishment other than domestic sanitary sewage.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT - any room, group of rooms,
building or other enclosure connected, directly or indirectly, to the sewer system,
including institutional dormitories in educational establishments, which do not
constitute a commercial establishment, a dwelling unit or an industrial
establishment.
INTERFERENCE - a discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, which:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the Township's (Authority's) wastewater
treatment plant, its treatment processes, operations or maintenance
activities, or its sludge and resultant ash processes, use, reuse, recycling or
disposal, and
(2) is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the
Township's operating permits (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use,
recycling or reuse or disposal in compliance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent Commonwealth or local statutes andjor regulations: §405 of the
Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (RCRA), and including any
applicable Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulations contained in any
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA);
the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substance Control Act and the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
LARGE CONSUMER- any commercial establishment, educational
establishment, institutional establishment or industrial establishment, regardless
AP8313
of water consumption or volume of domestic sanitary sewage or industrial
wastes discharge.
LATERAL - that part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curb line, or if there is no curb line, to the property line, or if no such extension is
provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of, or place in, a sewer that is
provided for connection of any building sewer.
MASS LOADING - the mass of pollutant(s) discharged from a user's
connection with respect to either time, or in cases of certain industrial users,
characteristic production units.
MG/L - milligrams per liter and is equivalent to parts per million (ppm)
by weight.
MONTHLY AVERAGE - the arithmetic mean of the values for effluent
samples collected over a calendar month.
MULTIPLE USE IMPROVED PROPERTY - any improved property upon
which there shall exist any combination of a dwelling unit, commercial
establishment, educational establishment, industrial establishment or
institutional establishment.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
(PRETREATMENT STANDARDS, CATEGORICAL STANDARDS) - any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with §307(b) and §307(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1341) which applies to
a specific category of industrial users and pretreatment standards as published in
40 CFR Parts 405-471.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT) - a permit issued to the Township (Authority)
pursuant to §402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARDS (PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARDS, GENERAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS) -
any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
under the authority of §307(b) of the Act as published in 40 CFR Parts 401-403.
NATIONAL STANDARDS (NATIONAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS, PRETREATMENT STANDARD, STANDARD) - the collective
system of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and National Prohibitive
Discharge Standards as published in 40 CFR Parts 401-407.
XXIII -30
AP8313
NATURAL OUTLET - any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
other body of surface or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE -
(1) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under §307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that Section,
provided that:
(a) The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site where no other source is located.
(b) The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source.
(c) Production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of subsections (1)(a), (1)(b) and (1)(c) of this definition but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this definition
has commenced if the owner or operator has:
(a) Begun, or caused to begin as a continuous onsite
construction program.
(b) Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment.
)001 -31
AP8313
(c) Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removals of existing buildings, structures or facilities
which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of
new source facilities or equipment.
(d) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do
not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.
NONDOMESTIC SOURCE - a source of wastewater which contains
pollutants other than sanitary wastewater.
NONDOMESTIC WASTE - any liquid or gaseous substance, whether or
not solids are contained therein, discharged from any nondomes tic user during
the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the
course of development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct
from normal domestic waste.
NORMAL STRENGTH WASTE - sewage which when analyzed by the
Township shows a daily average of not more than two hundred ten (210) mg/1 of
total suspended solids and/or not more than two hundred thirty (230)mg/1 of
BOD5
OBJECTIONABLE WASTE - any wastes that can, in the Township's
judgment, harm either the sewers or sewage treatment process or equipment; can
have an adverse effect upon the receiving stream; can otherwise endanger life,
health or property; or which constitutes a public nuisance.
OWNER - an individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, or other group or entity within the Township of Spring.
PASS THROUGH - a discharge which exits the sewer system into waters
or the atmosphere of the United States in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of violation of any requirement of the Township's (Authority's) NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or a
violation of any air emission standards set pursuant to the Clean Air Act.
XXIII -32
AP8313
PERSON - any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
PH - the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions,
expressed in grams per liter of solution, indicating the degree of acidity or
alkalinity of a substance.
PLACE OF WORSHIP - any improved property, the purpose of which is
for the gathering of people for public worship. For the purposes of this Part,
places of worship shall be classified as dwellings.
POLLUTANT - any liquid, solid or gaseous material including, but not
limited to, any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal, nondomestic sewage waste and agricultural waste
discharged into water including conventional wastewater pollutants.
POLLUTION - the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and/ or radiological integrity of water.
PPM - parts per million parts of water.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT - the reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of the
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a treating publicly owned treatment works
(POTW). The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, process changes or other means except as prohibited by 40
CFR §403.6(d). Pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as
equalization tanks or facilities, or protection against surges or slug loadings that
might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the treating POTW.
However, where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an
equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from
another regulated process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet
an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with EPA regulations, 40
CFR §403.6(e).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS - any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment
Standard imposed on an industrial user.
AP8313
PROCESS WASTEWATER - any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use
of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste
product, either discharged continuously, intermittently or as a batch discharge.
REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE - a sample extracted from the waste stream
whose characteristics are completely indicative of overall waste stream quantity,
quality, variations in same and of the process generating the waste stream.
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER - any person owning or occupying a
residential property which is connected to or entitled to connect to the sanitary
sewer system of the Township of Spring and shall also include those Persons
developing property for residential dwellings that require multiple tapping fee
permits.
RESIDUALS (sludge, resultant ash) - the solid or semisolid by- product
remaining after the processing of raw wastewater within physical, chemical
and/ or biological treatment units of the treating POTW into a condition suitable
for release to the environment.
SANITARY WASTEWATER - the liquid or waterborne wastes from
residential, commercial or industrial establishments containing only waste of a
domestic nature; that is, waste products, excrement or other discharge from the
bodies of humans or animals in addition to wastes from residential or incidental
culinary and laundry activities.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE - any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SEWAGE - any human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT - the Township's wastewater treatment
plant or such other treating plant as may be treating sewage from the Township
which is an arrangement of devices, structures, and materials used for treating
and disposing of sanitary sewage and certain industrial wastes.
SEWER - any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWERED AREA - these areas of the Township served by the sewer
system as determined and designated, from time to time, by the Township and
the Township (Authority).
XXIII -34
AP8313
SEWER SYSTEM - all facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transmitting, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Township and owned by the
Township, and/or leased or to be leased to this Township for maintenance,
operation and use. "Sewer system" shall also include all facilities owned by such
other treating plant used for the collecting, pumping, transmitting, treating and
disposing of sanitary sewage and/ or industrial waste for the Township of
Spring.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER -
(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) below, this term means:
(a) All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 CFR §403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter
N.
(b) Any other industrial user that:
1) Discharges an average of fifteen thousand
(15,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to
Township's (Authority's) sewer system (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling water and boiler blowdown wastewater).
2) Contributes a process waste stream which
makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry
weather hydraulic organic capacity or inorganic capacity of
the sewage treatment plant.
3) Is designated as such by the Township on the
basis that the industrial user has a potential for adversely
affecting the operation of the Township's (Authority's) sewer
system or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(2) Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
subsection (1)(b) of this definition has no potential for adversely affecting
the Sewer System operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Township may at any time, in its sole discretion in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(0(6) and §308 herein, determine that such
industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
XXIII -35
AP8313
SLUG - any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more then five (5) times the
average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flow during normal operation.
SPLIT SAMPLE - a technique whereby a sample is divided into multiple
parts for multiple analytical investigations.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) - a classification
Pursuant to the latest edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
issued by the United States Government Publications Office (U.S.G.P.O.)
STORMWATER - any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
STREET - any street, road, lane, court, cul-de-sac, alley, public way or
public square, including such streets as are dedicated to public use, and such
streets as are owned by private persons.
STRONG WASTE - any nondomestic waste having a BOD5 hundred thirty
(230) mg/1 and a total suspended solids greater than two hundred ten (210)
mg/l.
STRONG WASTE SURCHARGE - a charge levied on nondomestic users
of the treatment works for the additional cost of treating their abnormal strength
wastes.
TOTAL PHOSPHOROUS AS P - total phosphorus as determined
pursuant to the procedure set forth in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater," jointly published by the American
Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and Water
Pollution Control Federation.
TOTAL SOLIDS - solids determined by evaporating at one hundred four
(104) degrees Centigrade a mixed sample of wastewater as determined pursuant
to the procedure set forth in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," jointly published by the American
Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and Water
Pollution Control Federation. Total solids include suspended solids, settleable
solids and dissolved solids, as defined below:
(1) DISSOLVED SOLIDS - solids that are dissolved in the waste
and cannot be settled, but can be determined by evaporation.
XXIII -36
AP8313
(2) SETTLEABLE SOLIDS - solids that settle in an irnhoff cone
from a standard sample of waste.
(3) SUSPENDED SOLIDS - solids determined by standard
laboratory procedure in the waste.
TOWNSHIP - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
TOXIC (PRIORITY) POLLUTANTS - any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which have been so declared in regulations promulgated pursuant to
§307(a) of the Act, or pursuant to Pennsylvania Statutes and Rules, or as
otherwise may be so discerned and classified by responsible agencies due to
toxic health effects to the general populace and surrounding environs.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE - any noxious and/or deleterious substance in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, which is
determined by the Township, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance
or to create any hazard in any sewer system or in the receiving stream of the
sewage treatment plant.
TREATING POTW - treatment works as defined in §212 of the Act, which
is owned by the Township (Authority) or such other treating plant as may be
used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or
industrial waste for the Township of Spring. This definition includes any and all
devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers,
pipes and other conveyance facilities only if they convey wastewater to the
sewage treatment plant. The term also means the Township as defined in
§1362(4) of the Act. For the purposes of these standards, rules and regulations,
"treating POTW" shall also include any sewers, pipes and other conveyances that
convey wastewaters to the sewer system.
TREATMENT WORKS - all facilities used to convey and treat wastewater,
including the sewage treatment plant and the sanitary sewer system to a treating
POTW.
UNPOLLUTED WATER - water which does not contain a level of
contaminants or pollutants detectably higher than that of the source of the water
such as precipitation, surface water, groundwater or other nonpolluted waters.
However, in no case shall leachate be considered unpolluted water.
AP8313
USER(S) - any person, municipality, municipal authority, industry or
other legal entity which contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the sewer system. User categories defined herein include
residential users, commercial users, industrial users, municipal authority users
and significant industrial users.
USER CHARGE - the sewer rental or charge imposed by this Township
hereunder, as amended from time to time, against the owner of each improved
property, for the use of the sewer system.
WASTEWATER - the liquid and waterborne waters from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to enter the treating
POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT - the
portion of the treating POTW which is designed to provide treatment of
municipal sewage and industrial wastewater.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH - all streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article A, Section 401.01; as amended by
Ordinance No. 304, January 5, 2004, Section 1; as further amended by Ordinance No.
314, December 27, 2004, Section 1)
Section 302. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD5 - Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
CERCLA - Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. §9601, et seq.
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand.
XXIII -38
AP8313
DEP - Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
EDTA - Ethylenediaminetetraacetic Acid.
EPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency.
L or 1 - Liter.
Mg or MG - Milligrams.
Mg/1 or MG/L - Milligrams per Liter.
NH3-N - Ammonia Nitrogen.
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NTA - Nitrilotriacetic Acid.
POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
ppm - parts per million.
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §6901, et seq.
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.
SIU - Significant Industrial Classification.
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §6901, et seq., as amended by
RCRA.
TSS - Total Suspended Solids.
U.S.C. - United States Code.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article A, Section 401.02; as amended and
restated by Ordinance No. 314, December 27, 2004, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart B. Sewer Rentals, User Charges and Surcharges.
Section 303. User Charge Imposed. A user charge is hereby imposed upon the
owner of each improved property which shall be connected to the sewer system, for use
of the sewer system, whether such use is direct or indirect, and for services rendered by
this Township in connection therewith, and shall be payable as provided herein.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.01)
Section 304. User Charges Payable. The user charge shall be payable by the
owner of each improved property commencing the earlier of: (1) the date of actual,
physical connection of an improved property to the sewer system, or (2) sixty (60) days
from the date indicated on the notice to connect described in the Connection Ordinance.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.02)
Section 305. User Charge Calculations. The User Charge applicable to any
Improved Property constituting a Dwelling Unit or Large Consumer shall be calculated,
imposed and collected on the basis of one or more of the methods provided in this
Section 305, in the sole discretion of this Township.
(A) Flat Rate Basis. Each Improved Property billed on a flat rate basis
shall be charged a User Charge as a specific amount per Equivalent Dwelling
Unit applicable to such Improved Property, as determined by this Township,
from time to time. The minimum number of Equivalent Dwelling Units
applicable to each Improved Property in determining a User Charge shall be as
follows:
Description of
Improved Property
Residential Dwelling Unit
(year-round or seasonal)
Retail store, professional
offices or other commercial
enterprise
Hotel, motel or boarding
house (not including
restaurant facilities)
Unit of Per Unit of
Measurement Measurement
Each Dwelling Unit 1
1 to 10 employees 1
Each additional 10 employees 1
or fraction thereof
1 to 4 rental rooms
Each additional 4 rooms
or fraction thereof
1 to 10 employees
Each additional 10 employees
Or fraction thereof
XXIII -40
1
1
1
1
AP8313
Restaurant, club, tavern
or other retail food or
drink establishment or
banquet facility
Automobile service station
or commercial vehicle
repair shop
Beauty parlor or barber
shop (attached to or part
of a Dwelling Unit)
Beauty parlor or barber
shop (not attached to or
part of a Dwelling Unit)
1 to 10 customer seats
Each additional 10 seats
or fraction thereof
1 to 10 employees
Each additional 10 employees
Or fraction thereof
1 or 2 bays
Each additional 2 bays or
fraction thereof
First chair
Each additional chair
First chair
Each additional chair
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
School Per each 20 pupils, faculty, 1
administrators and staff
Dormitory 1 to 2 rooms
Each additional 2 rooms
Or fraction thereof
Place of Worship Each
(Not including banquet or education facilities)
Fire Company Each
(Not including banquet facilities)
Community Hall Each
(Not including banquet facilities)
Funeral Home
Industrial/ Manufacturing
establishment
Each
1
1
1
1
1
1 to 10 employees 1
Each additional 10 employees 1
or fraction thereof
A P8313
The number of Equivalent Dwelling Units applicable to retail stores, professional
offices, industrial/manufacturing establishments and commercial enterprises
shall be computed on the basis of the average daily number of full-time and parttime
employees (including the owner(s) or employer(s)) for the three months
preceding the date of the quarterly billing. The Owners of such facilities shall be
responsible for advising this Township in writing of the number of employees
upon request of this Township. The number of Equivalent Dwelling Units
applicable to school facilities shall be computed on the highest monthly average
daily attendance of pupils plus faculty, administrators and staff for the twelve
months preceding the date of the quarterly billing. The Owners of such facilities
shall be responsible for advising this Township in writing of the number of
pupils, faculty, administrators and staff in attendance as an average daily figure
upon request of this Township.
If the use or classification of any Improved Property changes within a billing
period, the User Charge shall be prorated by this Township. The Owner of the
Improved Property shall be responsible for advising this Township in writing of
any such change affecting the User Charge payable hereunder. Upon verification
by the Township, the appropriate credit or additional charge shall appear on the
statement for the next succeeding billing period.
For all Residential Dwelling Units, the Flat Rate User Charge payable per
Equivalent Dwelling Unit shall be determined from time to time by Resolution of
the Board of Supervisors of the Township.
(B) Metered Rate Basis User Charges for any Improved Property, in
the discretion of this Township, may be determined on a metered rate basis
calculated according to:
(1) Metered volume of potable water usage by the Improved
Property, adjusted, if appropriate, by this Township, or
(2) Whenever a person purchasing his entire water supply from
a private or public water supply discharges only non-domestic waste into
the Sewer System, the volume of water purchased shall be used as a
measure of the quantity of non-domestic waste discharged; or
(3) Whenever a person purchasing his entire water supply from
a private or public source discharges combined domestic and nondomestic
waste into the sewer system, the total volume of water
purchased shall be used to determine that person's User Charge and/or
his strong waste surcharge; or
XXIII -42
AP8313
(4) Whenever a person purchasing his entire waste usage from a
private or public supply and discharging non-domestic waste into the
Sewer System also discharges unpolluted cooling water to either a storm
sewer or other outlet, an allowance for the amount of water so discharged
shall be made in computing the User Charge. The person discharging
cooling water shall, at his own expense, install a meter or meters, as
required, to indicate accurately the amount of water claimed as a credit; or
(5) Whenever a person using a private water supply discharges
non-domestic waste into the Sewer System, the charges for such discharge
shall be based upon a suitable meter or meters, installed by the User at his
expense, to measure the total volume of water used or based upon a meter
on the sewer line, installed by the User at his expense, leaving the plant so
as to measure the entire flow of waste discharged into the Sewer System;
or
(6) Actual metered volume of wastewater discharged by the
Improved Property into the Sewer System.
In either of the foregoing cases, such User Charges for all Users, shall be
computed in accordance with the following metered rates which rate shall be
determined from time to time by Resolution or Ordinance of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors:
METERED RATE SCHEDULE
Residential:
Minimum (low flow - up to 750 gal. per month or 100 CF) - $15.00
Minimum (up to 3,750 gal. per month or 500 CF) - $22.80
Over Allowance (per 750 gal. or 100 CF) - $4.5600
Commercial:
Minimum (up to 4,500 gal. per month or 600 CF) - $27.36
Over Allowance (up to 225,000 gal. or 30,000 CF) (per 750 gal or 100 CF) - $4.5600
Over 225,000 gal. or 30,000 CF (per 750 gal. or 100 CF) - $5.0886
(C) Estimated Rate Basis. User Charges may be based upon this
Township's estimate of potable water consumed by any Improved Property per
month or per quarter-annum and billed in accordance with the Metered Rate
Schedule provided herein.
XXIII -43
AP8313
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.03; as amended by
Ordinance No. 294, January 27, 2003, Section 1; as amended by Resolution 2004-42, June
28, 2004 (Metered Rate Schedule Only); as further amended by Ordinance No. 310,
September 27, 2004, Section 1; as further amended by Resolution 2007-32, November 26,
2007 (Metered Rate Schedule Only))
Section 306. Multiple Use Properties. In the case of a multiple use improved
property sharing a common connection to the sewer system or a common structure,
each such classification of improved property shall pay a separate user charge, as
though it was housed in a separate structure and had a direct and separate connection
to the sewer system, computed in accordance with Section 305 of this Part. (Ordinance
No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.04)
Section 307. Excess Usage. The owner of any improved property which shall
discharge domestic sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the sewer system in
excess of total flow of fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per day and/or peak flow rate in
excess of thirty thousand (30,000) gallons per day for any ten (10) minute period, as
determined or reasonably estimated by this Township, shall pay a volume surcharge.
The owner of any improved property which shall discharge domestic sanitary sewage
and/or industrial wastes to the sewer system having greater than two hundred thirty
(230) ppm, or a total suspended solids a BOD5 content greater than two hundred ten
(210) ppm, or a dissolved solids content greater than five hundred forty (540) ppm, or a
total solids content greater than seven hundred fifty (750) ppm, or a total phosphorus as
P content greater than ten (10) ppm or an ammonia nitrogen as N content greater than
twenty-five (25) ppm, shall pay a strength of waste surcharge, in addition to applicable
volume charges. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.05)
Section 308. Additional Charges for Strong Wastes. Additional charges for
strong wastes and surcharges may be calculated, imposed and collected on the basis of
the following at the sole discretion of the Township:
(A) There shall be additional charges for nondomestic wastes,
discharged to the sewer system from any industry, business or commercial
enterprises, and having total suspended solids, BOD5, ammonia nitrogen and/or
total phosphorus in excess of the average suspended solids, BOD5 and ammonia
nitrogen of normal domestic sewage. Normal domestic sewage shall be defined
as having the following concentrations:
(1) BOD5 - 230 mg/ 1.
(2) Total Suspended Solids - 210 mg/ 1.
(3) Ammonia-Nitrogen - 25 mg/ 1.
XXIII -44
AP8313
(4) Total Phosphorus -10 ppm.
There shall be no strong waste surcharges applied to residential domestic wastes.
(B) Surcharge Formula. In order to determine the additional charge for
nondomestic wastes with strength greater than that of normal domestic sewage,
the following formula shall be used:
SQ= 0.00834 QI [(BOD5- 230)TA + (SSI-210)TB + (NH3-N-25)TC]
Where:
SQ is the quarterly surcharge to be added to the quarterly sewer rental
charge.
0.00834 is a constant to convert waste strength express in mg/1 to
thousand pounds of waste.
Q1 is the quarterly volume of nondomestic wastewater flow expressed in
millions of gallons.
BOD5 is the five (5) day BOD of the nondomestic wastewater expressed in
mg/1.
SS1, is the total suspended solids in mg/1 of the nondomestic wastewater.
NH3- N is the ammonia-nitrogen in mg/1 of the nondomestic wastewater.
220, 210 and 25 are constants expressing wasteload strength of domestic
waste in mg/1 for the respective pollutant parameters.
TA represents the cost incurred by the Township in treating one and TB
represents the cost of thousand (1,000) pounds of BOD5 treating one
thousand (1,000) pounds of total suspended solids.
TA and TB vary each year as treatment plant operation and maintenance
costs change. Therefore, TA and TB shall be determined at the beginning
of each year by the Township based upon the prior year BOD5, TSS,
ammonia nitrogen and/or total phosphorus and the current year
budgeted operating costs plus capital contributions, and adopted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
AP8313
When a value of BOD5 and/or suspended solids of a nondomestic waste
is less than two hundred thirty (230) or two hundred ten (210) mg/1
respectively, the value of two hundred thirty (230) or two hundred ten
(210) shall be used in the calculation of the strong waste discharge in place
of the actual value which is less than two hundred thirty (230) and two
hundred ten (210) mg/l.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.06)
Section 309. Additional Charges. The Township may collect charges and fees
which may include:
(A) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
Township's pretreatment program.
(B) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(C) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(D) Fees for permit applications.
(E) Fees for filing appeals.
(F) Other fees as the Township may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part and are separate from all
other fees chargeable by the Township and shall be established, from time to time, by
resolution. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.07)
Section 310. Application for Permit. The owner of any improved property
discharging domestic sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the sewer system
shall furnish to this Township, including by way of the application for permit described
in the Connection Ordinance or herein, as applicable, all information deemed essential
or appropriate by this Township for the determination of all applicable user charges
and surcharges. The costs of obtaining such information shall be borne by such owner
of the improved property.
In the event of the failure of the owner of the improved property to provide adequate
information, this Township shall estimate the applicable user charge and surcharges
based upon available information, until such time as adequate information is received.
There shall be no rebate of past payments if such owner's refusal to provide such
XXIII -46
AP8313
information results in overpayment. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B,
Section 402.08)
Section 311. Special Circumstances. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed
to prohibit this Township from entering into separate or special agreements with
owners of improved property with respect to the user charge to be imposed in those
cases where, due to special or unusual circumstances, the user charge set forth herein
shall be deemed by this Township, in its sole discretion, to be inequitable, or where it is
in the best interests of this Township to do so. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002,
Article B, Section 402.09)
Section 312. Quarterly Charges. User charges and surcharges, as applicable,
shall be payable on a calendar quarterly basis, and shall be billed in January, April, July
and October of each year. Owners of improved property that shall be first connected to
the sewer system during any quarterly period shall pay a pro- rata user charge for
service for the balance of the quarterly period, plus any applicable surcharges.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.10)
Section 313. Billing Dates. Payments of user charges and any applicable
surcharges shall be due and payable upon the applicable billing date, determined from
time to time by this Township, at the office of the Treasurer of this Township, in the
appropriate amount, computed in accordance with this Part, which shall constitute the
net bill. If any user charge or any applicable surcharge is not paid within thirty (30)
calendar days after the applicable billing date, an additional sum of ten percent (10%)
shall be added to such net bill, which net bill, plus such additional sum, shall constitute
the gross bill. Any and all payments received on account of delinquent accounts shall
be applied first to the oldest outstanding gross bill, including any accumulated late fee.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.11)
Section 314. Correct Mailing Address. It shall be the responsibility of each
owner of an improved property to provide this Township with, and thereafter to keep
this Township continuously advised of, the correct mailing address of such owner.
Failure of any owner to receive a bill for charges due and payable shall not be
considered an excuse for nonpayment, nor shall such failure result in an extension of
the period of time during which the net bill shall be payable. (Ordinance No. 291,
October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.12)
Section 315. Reduction of Charges. No officer or employee of this Township is
authorized to reduce, vary or exempt charges imposed herein or other provisions of this
Part without official action by the Board of Supervisors of this Township. (Ordinance
No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.13)
XXIII -47
AP8313
Section 316. Liability for User Charges. Every owner of improved property shall
remain liable for the payment of user charges and surcharges until the later of: (1) the
receipt by this Township of written notice by such owner that the property has been
sold, containing the correct name and mailing address of the new owner, or (2) the date
on which title to the improved property is transferred to a new owner. Failure to
provide notice shall not excuse liability of an owner for any charges that may accrue
until such time as this Township has been properly notified of any change in ownership
as described above. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article B, Section 402.14)
AP8313
Subpart C. Liens for Sewer Rentals; Filing and Collection of Liens.
Section 317. Lien upon Property. Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this Part
shall be a lien upon the property connected to and served by the sewer system and any
such sewer rentals or charges which are not paid in accordance with this Part, at the
discretion of this Township, shall be filed as a lien against the property so connected to
and served by the sewer system, which lien shall be filed in the appropriate office of the
County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as provided by law, and shall be
collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collecting of municipal liens
and claims. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article C, Section 403.01)
Section 318. Statement of Collection Policies and Procedures. The Township of
Spring hereby approves the Statement of Collection Policies and Procedures for the
collection of delinquent unpaid taxes, user charges, utility charges and other charges
(the "account(s)") covered by the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims and Tax Lien Law, Act
of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153), amended December 19, 1990 (53 P.S. §7101, et seq.)
(The Municipal Claims Law), as further amended by Pennsylvania Act No. 1 of 1996,
(P.L.1, No. 1) (53 P.S. §7106) (the "Act"), or such other policies and administrative
statements as may be approved by the Board of Supervisors for the Township by
resolution or other formal enactment from time to time including the collection of
attorneys' fees for services rendered in connection with the enforcement of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article C, Section 403.02)
Section 319. Water Shut Off. The Township may require any water supplier to
shut off the water supply to any property with respect to which the user charge
imposed hereby is unpaid until all such charges, together with interest and penalties as
aforesaid, are paid. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article C, Section 403.03)
AP8313
Subpart D. Prohibited Wastes and Accidental Discharges.
Section 320. Prohibited Wastes. No person shall discharge or shall cause to be
discharged into the sewer system any stormwater, surface water, spring water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, building foundation drainage, cellar
drainage or drainage from roof leader connections.
All domestic wastes and authorized nondomestic waste, including authorized
industrial waste, may be discharged into the Township's sewer system except those
which are deemed harmful to the system or are specifically prohibited by this Part, or
are otherwise prohibited under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and /or
the United States, or prohibited by EPA and DEP regulations, or a statute, rule,
regulation or ordinance of any public agency having jurisdiction over the Township.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article D, Section 404.01)
Section 321. Prohibited Discharges. Except as otherwise provided, no person
shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system any matter or substance:
(A) Having a continuous temperature higher than one hundred four
(104) degrees F (forty (40) degrees C) or less than thirty-two (32) degrees F.
(B) Containing more than fifty (50) mg/1 of fat, oil or grease.
(C) Containing floatable oils, fats or grease from nondomestic users.
(D) Containing any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel, oil, paint
products, acids or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases.
(E) Containing pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the
treating POTW including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees F. (sixty (60) degrees C).
(F) Containing pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the treating POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(G) Containing trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Township.
(H) Containing more than twenty-five (25) mg/1 of petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oils or other products of mineral oil origin.
XXIII -50
AP8313
(I) Containing any solid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce, which
wastes commonly are known as garbage, which have not been ground y
household type garbage disposal units or other suitable garbage grinders.
(J) Containing any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized in
the discharge permit.
(K) Containing any significant ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, string,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, cotton, dental floss, wool or other fibers,
plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substances capable
of causing obstructions or other interferences with proper operation of the sewer
system.
(L) Having a pH lower than six (6.0) or higher than nine (9.0) or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures
or equipment of the sewer system or any sewer or to any person engaged in
operation and maintenance of the sewer system.
(M) Containing toxic or poisonous substances, noxious or malodorous
liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, are in sufficient quantity to injure or to interfere with any sewage
treatment process, to constitute hazards to humans or animals or to create any
hazards in waters which shall receive treated effluent from the sewer system.
(N) Containing dye from any source that will result in a treatment plant
effluent exceeding limits in compliance with applicable Commonwealth or
Federal regulations.
(0) Containing radioactive substances and/or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration that will result in a treating POTW effluent exceeding limits in
compliance with applicable Commonwealth or Federal regulations.
(P) Having a chlorine demand in excess of twelve (12) mg /1 at a
detention time of twenty (20) minutes.
(Q) Prohibited by any permit, regulation or standard issued by the
Commonwealth, EPA or other agency.
(R) Containing wastes which are not amenable to biological treatment
or reduction in existing treatment facilities, specifically, nonbiodegradable
complex carbon compounds.
AP8313
(S) Having a BOD5 content greater than one thousand (1,000) ppm.
(T) Having a suspended solids content greater than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) ppm.
(U) Having a total phosphorus as P content greater than fifty (50) ppm.
(V) Having an ammonia nitrogen as N content greater than one
hundred (100) ppm.
(W) Having a surge flow greater than five percent (5%) of the average
daily sewage flow at the sewer system treatment plants.
(X) Containing any detergents, surface-active agents or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the treating POTW.
(Y) Containing any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters or any effluent from any sump pump or any other type
of pump which pumps any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainge, basement drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters.
(Z) Having any waste containing toxic or poisonous substances in
excess of the following limits, measured at the point of discharge to the sewer
system:
Maximum Concentration
Substance ppm
Arsenic 0.05
Cadmium (as Cd) 0.01
Chromium (trivalent) 1.0
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.05
Copper (as Cu) 0.2
Cyanides 0.2
Lead 0.01
XXIII -52
AP8313
Mercury 0.1
Nickel (as Ni) 0.5
Phenol 0.009
Silver 0.05
Zinc (as Zn) 0.5
(AA) Containing any substance not mentioned in the foregoing list that
will pass through the treatment plants of the sewer system and exceed the
maximum permitted levels for such substance under the requirements of the
Commonwealth or other governmental agencies having jurisdiction:
(1) Any substance which may cause the wastewater treatment
plant effluent or any other product of the treatment plant thereof such as
residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or
to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the sewer system cause the wastewater treatment plant to
be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under §405 of the Clean Water Act, any criteria,
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act or Federal or Commonwealth criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used.
(2) Any substance which will cause the treatment plant to
violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards, causing
pass through or interference.
(3) Contain total solids of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the
sewage treatment plant, except as may be approved by the Township or as
otherwise provided herein.
(4) Quantities of flow or concentrations, or both, which
constitute a "slug" as defined in Section 201 of this Part.
(5) Any waters which are used for the purpose of diluting
wastes which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum
concentration limitations. The Township may impose mass limitations on
)0CEII -53
AP8313
users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations
are appropriate.
(BB) Any other substance prohibited by ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of this Township hereafter enacted or adopted from time to time.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article D, Section 404.02)
Section 322. Written Permission Necessary. Under no circumstances shall any
person discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system any of the substances
listed in Section 321 above, without first securing written permission to do so from this
Township, which permission shall be granted or denied at the Township's sole
discretion. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article D, Section 404.03)
Section 323. Authorization Subject to Continuing Approval, Inspection and
Review of Township. Whenever a person is authorized by this Township and the
appropriate governmental agencies to discharge any polluted water, domestic sanitary
sewage or industrial waste containing any of the substances or possessing any of the
characteristics referred to in Section 321, such discharge shall be subject to the
continuing approval, inspection and review of this Township. If, in the opinion of this
Township, such discharges are causing or will cause damage to the sewer system, this
Township shall: (i) order the person causing such discharge to cease doing so
forthwith, or to take other appropriate action, including exercising the remedies
provided in the Connection Ordinance, to eliminate the harmful discharge; and (ii)
order the person causing such damage to pay all costs and expenses arising from such
damage. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article D, Section 404.04)
Section 324. Special Agreements Allowed. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed as prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between this Township
and the owner of an improved property allowing industrial wastes of unusual strength
or character to be admitted into the sewer system. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14,
2002, Article D, Section 404.05)
Section 325. Right to Inspect.
(A) The Township hereby reserves the right to inspect any building
sewer, lateral or collecting sewer that discharges wastewater directly or
indirectly to the sewer system to determine compliance with this Part.
(B) The Township hereby reserves the right to inspect any improved
property to ensure the compliance with this Part regarding the use of sump
pumps and any other type of pump or pumps of any stormwater, surface water,
XXIII -54
AP8313
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, basement drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water and unpolluted industrial process waters.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article D, Section 404.06)
Section 326. Dilution of Wastewater. No user shall ever increase the use of
process water to dilute or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a wastewater discharge as
a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with this
Part. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article D, Section 404.07)
Section 327. Accidental Discharges. Any user who, in the opinion of the
Township, may accidentally discharge materials or substances which are prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this Part shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Part.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
Township for review and shall be approved by the Township (Authority) before
construction of the facility.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user
from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this Part. In the case of any discharge including, but noi: limited to,
accidental discharges; discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature; a noncustomary
batch discharge; or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the treating
POTW, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the
Township of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
Within five (5) days following said discharge, the user shall submit to the Township a
detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as
a result of damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of
any fines, civil and criminal penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this
Part or other applicable law.
(A) Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call
in the event of a dangerous or slug load discharge. Employers shall insure that
all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous or slug load discharge
to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
XXIII -55
AP8313
(B) Slug Control Plan. The Township shall evaluate, at least once every
two (2) years, whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control
slug discharges. For purposes of this subsection, a slug discharge is any
discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not limited to, an
accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge. If the Township decides that a
slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following
elements:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
batch discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Township of slug
discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition
under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow-up written notification
within five (5) days.
(4) If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations,
control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment
structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article D, Section 404.08)
AP8313
Subpart E. Sampling.
Section 328. Periodic Sampling. Nondomestic waste being discharged into the
sewer system shall be subject to periodic sampling and inspection by the Township to
be used as a basis for determining additional charges due to excessive concentrations
for BOD5 and/or total suspended solids, and substances prohibited in Section 321 of
this Part. Such sampling and inspection shall be the basis for computing strong waste
surcharges in accordance with this Part. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article
E, Section 405.01)
Section 329. Obtaining Samples. All sampling shall be a representative manner
and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12. The collection and analysis of samples obtained
shall be made in accordance with United States EPA methodology and procedures,
including 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article
E, Section 405.02)
Section 330. Split Results by Request. At the request of the industrial,
commercial, educational or institutional user, samples taken by the treating POTW
personnel can be split and the results of both analyses used in calculating the strong
waste surcharge. The industrial user must arrange for and pay for the pickup of the
split sample at the treating POTW by the industrial user's laboratory. All analysis
results shall be copied to the treating POTW and used in the calculation of the
surcharge bill. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article E, Section 405.03)
Section 331. Sample Invoicing. Commercial and industrial customers will be
sampled and invoiced on a quarterly basis. Customers who have a weak waste product
get sampled yearly. The sampling is done unannounced by POTW personnel. A
twenty-four (24) hour composite sample is taken with an automatic sampling device.
The samples are then taken to a professional industrial laboratory. Upon receipt of a
laboratory analysis, the Township will review the results. If those results are fifty
percent (50%) greater than the average of the four (4) preceding quarters' samples, the
Township will notify the customer of the unusually high result. (Ordinance No. 291,
October 14, 2002, Article E, Section 405.04)
Section 332. Resampling. Customers may opt to be resampled at their own
expense or they may accept the initial results. If a customer chooses to be resampled,
the sampling will occur unannounced within the next four (4) weeks. The lesser of the
samples will be used in calculating the surcharge for that quarter. In the absence of
additional samples (this would most likely occur, if at all, in the winter when cold
weather might prevent additional sampling), an estimated bill using the average results
of the four (4) previous quarters would be used in calculating the surcharge for that
quarter. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article E, Section 405.05)
XXIII -57
AP8313
Section 333. Billing. All costs of collecting and analyzing samples incurred by
the Township in connection with determining strong waste surcharges or with
monitoring nondomestic wastewaters to determine compliance with this Part shall be
billed by the Township directly to the nondomestic user whose wastewater was
sampled. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article E, Section 405.06)
;Call -58
AP8313
Subpart F. Hauled Wastewater.
Section 334. No Septic Tanks in POTW. Septic tank waste may not be
introduced to the treating POTW, unless specifically approved by the Township in
writing. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article F, Section 406.01)
Section 335. Haulers to Obtain Discharge Permits. The Township shall require
haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Township may
require generators of hauled septage and industrial waste to obtain wastewater
discharge permits. The Township also may prohibit the disposal of hauled septage and
industrial waste. The discharge of hauled septage and industrial waste is subject to all
other requirements of this Part. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article F, Section
406.02)
Section 336. Discharge Locations to be Designated by Township. Septage and
industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the
Township. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the Township. The
Township may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with
applicable standards. The Township may require the septage and industrial waste
hauler to provide waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. (Ordinance No. 291,
October 14, 2002, Article F, Section 406.03)
Section 337. Waste-Tracking Form. Septage and industrial waste haulers must
provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum,
the name and address of the septage and/or industrial waste hauler, permit number,
truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste and volume and
characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or
suspected waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article F, Section 406.04)
Section 338. Tank Truck Requirements. Any tank truck or any other equipment
used or intended to be used within the Township for the removal and/or transportation
of domestic waste and/or industrial waste shall conform to the following requirements:
(A) The container shall be watertight.
(B) Tanks, containers or other equipment shall be so constructed that
every portion of the interior and exterior can be easily cleaned and shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
(C) Piping, valves and permanent or flexible connections shall be
accessible and easily disconnected for cleaning purposes.
AP8313
(D) The inlet opening, or openings, to every container shall be so
constructed that the material will not spill out during filling, transfer or
transport.
(E) The outlet connections shall be so constructed that no material will
leak out or run out to other than the point of discharge, and shall be of a design
and type suitable for the material handled and capable of controlling the flow or
discharge without spillage, undue spray or flooding of immediate surroundings
while in use.
(F) No connections shall be made at any time between a tap or outlet
furnishing potable water on any premises and any container equipment holding
material by any means other than an open connection.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article F, Section 406.05)
XXIII -60
AP8313
Subpart G. Industrial Waste and Pretreatment Standards.
Section 339. Prior Application and Permit Required for Discharge of Industrial
Wastes. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system any
industrial wastes without prior application for and receipt of a written permit from this
Township, which approval of said permit may be approved or denied at the sole
discretion of the Township.
The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of wastes from domestic and
nondomestic users is recognized. However, not all types of nondomestic wastes can be
so treated. Hence it shall be the established policy of the Township to accept the
aforesaid types of wastes and quantities thereof that are not harmful or damaging to the
structures, processes or operation of the treating POTW or are not specifically
prohibited by this Part. It is also recognized that to provide this service, additional
expenditures are required. These expenditures must be borne by those persons
receiving the benefits. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.01)
Section 340. Industrial Questionnaire Required. Any person desiring to make or
use a connection through which industrial wastes shall be discharged into the sewer
system shall file with this Township a completed "Industrial Questionnaire," furnished
by this Township, which shall supply pertinent data, including estimated quantity of
flow, characteristics and constituents of the proposed discharge. The cost of obtaining
all such data shall be borne by the person desiring to make or use the connection to the
sewer system. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.02)
Section 341. Quality and Quantity Reports. Ten (10) days prior to the first (1st)
day of March, June, September and December of each year, each significant user of
industrial wastes shall file with this Township a report on the quality and quantity of
their discharge. The report forms shall be supplied by this Township and shall be
similar to EPA 7550-22, page IV-1. Significant users shall consist of those whose total
discharge exceeds fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per day and/or a peak flow rate in
excess of thirty thousand (30,000) gallons per day for any ten (10) minute period, as
determined or reasonably estimated by this Township, or have in their waste a toxic
pollutant or, in the judgment of this Township, would have a significant impact on the
sewer system or the quality of its effluent. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article
G, Section 407.03)
Section 342. Testing Requirements. All measurements, tests and analysis of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made herein shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for Examination
of Water and Wastewater," jointly published by the American Public Health
Association, American Water Works Association and Water Pollution Control
Federation and shall be determined by or under the direct supervision of a qualified
XXIII -61
AP8313
analyst at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out, at the
expense of the owner of the improved property, by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewer system and to determine the existence
of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples must be taken.) (Ordinance No. 291, October 14,
2002, Article G, Section 407.04)
Section 343. Notice of Change. Any industrial establishment discharging
domestic sanitary sewage and/ or industrial wastes into the sewer system and
contemplating a change in the method of operation which will alter the characteristics
and/or volume of such wastes being discharged shall notify this Township, in writing,
at least ten (10) days prior to institution of such charge. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14,
2002, Article G, Section 407.05)
Section 344. Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors Required. Grease, oil and sand
interceptors shall be provided by the owner of any industrial, commercial or
institutional establishment, at his or its sole cost, when required by this Township, for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing excessive grease, inflammable wastes,
sand or other harmful substances. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by this Township and constructed or installed at a satisfactory location in
accordance with plans approved by this Township prior to installation or
commencement of construction. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to properly
clean or have the same cleaned and maintain such interceptors. Users with the potential
to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an
approved combustible gas detection meter. The Township's objective in setting the
limits is to restrict industrial waste discharges of the above-described concentrations
which will not harm either the sewer system or the treatment plant, will not have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb or
public property or constitute a nuisance. The Township may set lower or higher
limitations in specific cases if, in the opinion of the Township, said actions will be
consistent with the above-stated objectives. In the setting of such lower or higher
limitations, the Township will give consideration to such factors as the volume of
wastewater flow in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, degrees of treatability
of the waste and other pertinent factors. The Township reserves the right to reevaluate
and revise the limitations as needed. The more stringent of EPA or Commonwealth
requirements and limitations shall apply in any case where either is more stringent than
those presently in force. An industrial user classified as a categorical industrial user
shall be required to meet the EPA Categorical Standards, if such standards are more
AP8313
stringent than the local discharge limitations. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002,
Article G, Section 407.06)
Section 345. Mechanical Garbage Grinders. The use of mechanical garbage
grinders in an industrial establishment or a commercial establishment shall not be
permitted without prior approval from this Township, which approval shall be granted
or denied at the Township's sole discretion. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002,
Article G, Section 407.07)
Section 346. Regulation of Waste Flows. This Township may require industrial
establishments having large variations in rates of waste discharge to install suitable
regulating devices for equalizing waste flows to the sewer system. (Ordinance No. 291,
October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.08)
Section 347. Construction of Manhole. Any person who shall discharge
industrial wastes into the sewer system, when required by the Township, shall
construct and thereafter shall properly maintain, at his own expense, a suitable control
manhole and other devices as may be approved by the Township to facilitate
observation, measurement and sampling by the Township of industrial wastes
discharged to the sewer system. Any such control manhole, when required by the
Township, shall be constructed at an accessible, safe, suitable and satisfactory location
in accordance with plans approved by this Township prior to commencement of
construction. There shall be ample room in the monitoring manhole to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner at his expense. The
Township and its duly authorized representatives shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties at all times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.09)
Section 348. Pretreatment Facilities. Whenever necessary, in the opinion of the
Township, the owner of an improved property shall provide, at his expense, such
facilities for pretreatment and handling of industrial wastes as may be necessary to:
(A) Reduce BOD5 to two hundred thirty (230) mg/1, suspended solids
to two hundred ten (210) mg/1, total phosphorus to ten (10) ppm and/or
ammonia nitrogen to twenty-five (25) ppm.
(B) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to come within
the maximum limits permitted in this Part.
(C) Control the quantities and rates of discharge over a twenty- four
(24) hour day and seven (7) days a week.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.10)
XXIII -63
AP8313
Section 349. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are
hereby incorporated.
(A) The categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater. The Township
may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(c).
(B) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Township shall
impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR
403.6(c)).
(C) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.
(D) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.11)
Section 350. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Upon the
promulgation of the Federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular
industrial subcategory, the Federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed
under this Part for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the
limitations imposed under this Part. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G,
Section 407.12)
Section 351. Plans and Specification. Plans, specifications and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed facilities for pretreatment and handling of
industrial wastes shall be submitted for approval to the Township and no construction
of any such facility shall be commenced until approval thereof first shall have been
obtained in writing, from the Township, and until approval thereof first shall have been
obtained from any governmental regulatory body having jurisdiction. Such approvals
shall not relieve the discharger from meeting any of the limitations of this Part, or
Commonwealth, Federal or agency regulations. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002,
Article G, Section 407.13)
AP8313
Section 352. Maintenance of Pretreatment Facilities. Whenever facilities for
pretreatment and handling of industrial wastes shall have been provided by the owner
of such improved property, such facilities shall be continuously maintained in
satisfactory operating condition at the expense of such owner, and the Township shall
have access to such facilities at all times for purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G,
Section 407.14)
Section 353. Notification to Township. All industrial users shall notify the
Township at least thirty (30) days in advance, in writing, of any substantial change in
the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted
initial notification under this Section and/or as required by 40 CFR 403.12(p).
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.15)
Section 354. Township's Right of Refusal. The Township reserves the right to
refuse permission to connect to the sewer system, to deny and revoke permits, to
compel discontinuance of use of the sewer system or to compel pretreatment of
industrial wastes in order to prevent discharges deemed harmful to or having a
deleterious effect upon any portion of the sewer system or receiving system.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.16)
Section 355. Baseline Monitoring Reports. Within ninety (90) days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, existing industrial users subject to
such categorical pretreatment standard shall submit a baseline monitoring report in
conformance with 40 CFR 403.12(b), compliance schedule progress reports in
conformance with 40 CFR §403.12(c) and the ninety (90) day compliance report in
conformance with 40 CFR §403.12(d). (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G,
Section 407.17)
Section 356. Self-Monitoring Reports. The Township reserves the right to
require any nonresidential user to periodically submit self -monitoring reports in
accordance with that user's permit. All significant industrial users must submit selfmonitoring
reports in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(e) or 40 CFR 403.12(h) and/or as
specified in the industrial waste permit. If a user monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the permit, using the procedures prescribed in the permit,
the results of this monitoring shall be included in the self-monitoring report.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.18)
Section 357. Notice of Violation/ Repeat Sampling and Reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Township within
twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat
the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Township
within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required
van -65
AP8313
to resample if the Township monitors at the user's facility at least once per month, or if
the Township samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives
the results of this sampling. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section
407.19)
Section 358. Certification Requirement.
(A) All reports submitted pursuant to this Part, including baseline
monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards, significant industrial user reports and periodic reports on continued
compliance, shall include the certification statement set forth in 40 CFR
403.6(a)(2)(ii).
(B) All significant industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards shall include in any report submitted pursuant to these standards,
rules and regulations, any applicable certifications as required in the categorical
pretreatment standards.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.20)
Section 359. Signatory Requirement. Baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards, significant industrial user reports
and periodic reports on continued compliance shall be signed as specified in 40 CFR
§403.12(1). (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.21)
Section 360. Recordkeeping Requirements.
(A) All users subject to the reporting requirement established herein or
in the national pretreatment standards shall maintain records of all information
resulting from any required monitoring activities. Such records shall include for
all samples:
(1) The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the
name(s) of the person(s) taking the samples.
(2) The dates analyses were performed.
(3)
the analysis.
The identity of a laboratory and/or persons who performed
(4) The analytical techniques/methods used.
(5) The results of such analyses.
XXIII -66
AP8313
(B) Records required to be maintained in this Section shall be retained
for a minimum of three (3) years. This period of retention shall be extended
during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the user or the
Township or when requested by the Township, the DEP or the EPA.
(C) Records required to be maintained by the user shall be made
available for inspection and copying by the Township, the DEP and the EPA.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.22)
Section 361. Notification of Discharge of Listed or Characteristic Wastes. In
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(p), all industrial users shall notify the Township, the
EPA Region III, Director of the Waste Management Division and the DEP, in writing, of
any discharge into the Township sewer system, of a substance, which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. (Ordinance No. 291,
October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.23)
Section 362. Access and Confidential Information.
(A) The Township shall have the right of access at all times to any part
of any improved property served by the sewer system and shall be required for
purposes of inspection, measurement, sampling and testing and for performance
of other functions relating to service rendered by the Township through the
sewer system.
(B) The Township shall have the right to set up on the user's property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in
force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into
their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security
guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the
Township will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
(C) Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspection shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically requests in writing at the time of the
application for permit and the user is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Township that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the
user.
XXIII -67
AP8313
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article G, Section 407.24)
AP8313
Subpart H. Industrial Waste Discharge Permit, Modification and Appeal.
Section 363. Industrial Waste Discharge Permit Required. Any industrial user
discharging into the sewer system an industrial waste having any one (1) or more of the
following characteristics shall obtain approval from the Township in the form of an
industrial waste discharge permit:
(A) BOD5 greater than two hundred thirty (230) mg/ 1.
(B) A total suspended solids content great than two hundred ten (210)
mg/l.
(C) A dissolved solids content greater than five hundred forty (540)
mg/1.
(D) Total phosphorus greater than ten (10) ppm.
(E) Total ammonia nitrogen greater than twenty-five (25) ppm.
(F) A COD greater than six hundred (600) mg/l.
(G) A chlorine demand greater than twelve (12) mg/ 1.
(H) An average daily flow greater than five percent (5%) of the average
daily sewage flow of the sewer system.
(I) Any quantity of substances possessing characteristics described in
Subpart D of this Part.
(J) Having been discharged by an industrial user from an industrial
establishment as this term is defined in Section 301 of this Part.
(K) Being classified as a significant industrial user as defined in Section
301 of this Part.
Industrial users existing at the time this Part is enacted will be screened by the
Township on the basis of information then available. The Township will notify in
writing existing industrial users within thirty (30) days of the enactment of this Part if a
new permit is required. Existing industrial users shall apply for a permit if so notified
within thirty (30) days of the notifications.
New industrial users may not discharge to the sewer system without first obtaining an
industrial waste discharge permit. New industrial users shall apply for a permit at least
XXIII -69
AP8313
sixty (60) days prior to discharging to the sewer system. (Ordinance No. 291, October
14, 2002, Article H, Section 408.01)
Section 364. Application Forms. All applications for permits shall be made on
industrial waste permit application forms furnished by the Township. In support of the
application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
(A) Name, address and location.
(B) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual.
(C) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those mentioned in this Part as determined by a reliable analytical
laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to §304(g) of the Act and contained
in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.
(D) Time and duration of contribution.
(E) Average daily and thirty (30) minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any.
(F) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation.
(G) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which will or could be discharged.
(H) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by any Township, Commonwealth or Federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement, which has been reviewed by an
authorized representative and certified by a professional, regarding whether or
not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/ or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
(I) If additional pretreatment and/ or O&M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide
such additional pretreatment shall be used. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
XXIII -70
AP8313
pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this compliance
schedule:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g.,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction, etc.).
(2) No increment shall exceed nine (9) months.
(3) Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the Township including, as a minimum, whether or not
it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if
not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to
return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more
than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the
Township.
(4) The compliance schedule shall not be a waiver of the user's
noncompliance nor shall it protect the user from enforcement action.
Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production.
(K) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(L) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
(M) Any and all other information as may be deemed by the Township
to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
The Township will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Failure to comply with any of the Township-approved time restraints
herein-contained shall be considered a violation of this Part. The industrial waste
permit application form shall be competently completed and returned to the Township
for review and approval, which approval shall be granted or denied at the Township's
sole discretion. Only upon approval of the Township will an industrial waste permit be
XXIII -71
AP8313
issued and the discharge to the sewer system allowed. No industrial user requiring an
industrial waste permit may discharge wastewater to the sewer system without a valid
industrial waste permit. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article H, Section
408.02)
Section 365. Survey Required. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Township,
the property owner shall provide, at his expense, a survey analysis and report by a
registered professional engineer acceptable to the Township. (Ordinance No. 291,
October 14, 2002, Article H, Section 408.031)
Section 366. Issuance of Permit. Upon review and approval of the industrial
waste permit application, the Township will issue to the applicant an industrial waste
permit should the applicant's waste be suitable for treatment in the sole judgment of the
Township. Said permit is not transferable without the prior written consent of the
Township, which consent shall be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the
Township. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article H, Section 408.04)
Section 367. Permit Subject to Certain Provisions. Industrial waste discharge
permit shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Part and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Township. Permits may contain,
but are not limited to, the following:
(A) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(B) Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(C) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
(D) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests
and reporting schedules.
(E) Compliance schedules.
(F) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
(G) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the Township, and affording the
Township access thereto.
XXIII -72
AP8313
(H) Requirements for notification of the Township of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents of any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater
treatment system.
(I) Requirements for notification of slug discharges and preparation
and implementation of slug control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated
or nonroutine discharges.
A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable Federal, Commonwealth or local law.
(K) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township to ensure
compliance with this Part.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article H, Section 408.05)
Section 368. Time Limit of Permits. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year
or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance
a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article H, Section 408.06)
Section 369. Modification of Permit by Township. The terms and conditions of
the permit may be subject to modification by the Township during the term of the
permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just causes exist. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance. Modifications to the permit may include, but not limited to, the following:
(A) To incorporate any new or revised Federal, Commonwealth, local
or agency pretreatment standards or requirements.
(B) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time the permit
was issued.
(C) A change in the treating POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
AP8313
(D) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the treating POTW, Township, Township personnel or the receiving waters.
(E) Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit.
(F) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the permit application or in any required reporting.
(G) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
To reflect a transfer of ownership or operator.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article H, Section 408.07)
Section 370. Permits are Not Transferable. Industrial waste discharge permits are
issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall
not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or
a new or changed operation without the approval of the Township. Any succeeding
owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article H, Section 408.08)
Section 371. Appeals. Any person, including the user, may petition the Township
to reconsider the terms of the approval or denial of a wastewater discharge permit
within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance.
(A) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(B) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
(C) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
(D) If the Township fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative
actions for the purposes of judicial review.
VOTII -74
AP8313
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article H, Section 408.09)
Section 372. Judicial Review. Parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint
with the Court of Common Pleas, County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article H, Section 408.10)
AP8313
Subpart I. Measuring Devices, Meter Readings and Access.
Section 373. Installation of Meters and Measuring Devices. Meters or other
measuring devices, which shall not be provided in connection with the operation of a
public water supply system, but which shall be required or permitted under provisions
of this Part, shall be furnished and installed by the owner of the improved property at
his expense, shall be under the control of this Township and may be tested, inspected or
repaired by this Township whenever necessary. Such owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance and safekeeping of such meter or other measuring device and all repairs
thereto shall be made at the expense of such owner, whether such repairs shall be made
necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes. Bills for such repairs, if made by
this Township, shall be due and payable immediately upon completion of such repairs
and shall be collected in the same manner as quarterly bills for sewer rentals or charges.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article I, Section 409.01)
Section 374. No Modification Which Affects Measurement. No user shall modify
plumbing which would alter or affect the measurement of water passing through a
meter prior to written notification and prior approval of the Township. The Township
shall inspect any such modifications to determine the effectiveness and suitability of the
modification and the effect on the measuring the consumption of water which would
flow into the sewer system. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article I, Section
409.02)
Section 375. Township Responsible for Reading Meters. This Township shall be
responsible for the reading of all meters or other measuring devices and the same shall
be available to employees and agents of this Township at all reasonable times.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article I, Section 409.03)
Section 376. Township Shall Have Right of Access. Representatives of this
Township shall have the right of access at reasonable times to any part of any property
served by the sewer system and any meters used for purposes of establishing or
determining volumes for purposes of this Part. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002,
Article I, Section 409.04)
XXIII -76
AP8313
Subpart J. Agreements; Additions to and Changes of Sewer Rentals or Charges;
Adoption of Additional Rules and Regulations.
Section 377. Conflict of Ordinances. In the event that any standard, classification
or provision of this Part shall conflict with a similar standard, classification or provision
of any agreement entered into between this Township, on the one hand, and another
municipality and/or municipality authority, on the other hand, relating to the
collection, transportation, treatment or other disposition of sewage delivered to or
emanating from the sewer system, this Part shall be construed so that the strictest
standard, classification or provision shall apply. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002,
Article J, Section 410.01)
Section 378. Modifications to Sewer Rentals. This Township reserves the right to
adopt and promulgate, from time to time, additional classifications and sewer rentals or
charges therefor, or modifications of the schedule of sewer rentals or charges as set forth
in this Part, which additional classifications and sewer rentals or charges, or
modifications, as the case may be, shall be construed as part of this Part. (Ordinance
No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article J, Section 410.02)
Section 379. Adoption of Additional Rules and Regulation. This Township
reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, such additional rules and regulations as it
shall deem necessary and proper in connection with use and operation of the sewer
system, which rules and regulations shall be, shall become and shall be construed as
part of this Part. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article. J, Section 410.03)
XXIII -77
AP8313
Subpart K. Penalties and Enforcement.
Section 380. Penalty for Violation. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Part or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required
to be maintained pursuant to this Part; or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Part shall be
enforced by a summary action brought before a district justice and if found guilty shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) per day for each
violation and shall pay the costs of prosecution, including attorney fees, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs such person shall be imprisoned for a term according
to applicable law. Each day of the continuation of a violation shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section 411.01)
Section 381. Refusal of Inspection. All owners of property connected or
connecting with the sewage system who refuse an inspection of their improved
property as provided for in Section 325 of this Part shall, at the discretion of the Board
of Supervisors of the Township, be subject to pay an additional quarterly penalty in an
amount equal to their quarterly sewer rental. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002,
Article K, Section 411.02)
Section 382. Violations. Any user who violates the following conditions of this
Part, or applicable Commonwealth, Federal or agency regulations, is subject to having
his permit revoked by the Township:
(A) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge.
(B) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(C) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose relevant facts in the
permit application.
(D) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(E) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(F) Failure to pay fines, sewer charges or surcharges.
(G) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(H) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
XXIII -78
AP8313
(I)
(I)
Failure to provide advance notice of transfer of ownership.
Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(K) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring.
(L) Violation of any condition of the permit or of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section 411.03)
Section 383. Notice of Violation. Whenever the Township finds that any user has
violated or is violating this Part, industrial waste permit or any prohibition, limitation
of requirements contained herein, the Township may serve upon such person a written
notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the
notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Township
by the user or the permit shall be revoked immediately. (Ordinance No. 291, October
14, 2002, Article K, Section 411.04)
Section 384. Injunctive Relief. The Township reserves the right to seek injunctive
relief from discharge of substances to the sewer system which it deems harmful and/or
to require compliance with the terms and conditions of this Part. (Ordinance No. 291,
October 14, 2002, Article K, Section 411.05)
Section 385. Cease and Desist Order. When the Township finds that an industrial
user has violated or continues to violate this Part or any permit or order issued
hereunder, the Township may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and
direct those persons in noncompliance to comply forthwith and/or to take such
appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and
terminating the discharge. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section
411.06)
Section 386. Significant Noncompliance. An industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if the violation meets one (1) or more of the following criteria:
(A) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum
limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
AP8313
(B) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements for any
pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC value. The TRC values are:
(1) TRC = 1.4 for BOD5, TSS, fats, oils and grease.
(2) TRC = 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH.
(C) Any other violation of the pretreatment effluent limit (daily,
maximum or longer-term average) that the Township determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of the Township personnel or the general
public)
(D) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment, or has resulted in
the Township's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge.
(E) Failure to meet, within thirty (30) days after the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a user permit, control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining
final compliance.
(F) Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date,
required reports including, but not limited to, baseline monitoring reports,
ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, significant
industrial user reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
(G) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(H) Any other violation or group of violations which the Township
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the
pretreatment program.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section 411.07)
Section 387. Major Violations. Any violation that meets the criteria of Section
386 above shall be considered a major violation. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002,
Article K, Section 411.08)
AP8313
Section 388. Notice to Public of Noncompliance. At least once a year, the
Township may publish in the largest daily newspaper published in Berks County, a
notice to the public of industrial users which were in significant noncompliance. This
notice shall include the name(s) and address(es) of the user and may also include
additional information such as the duration of the violation, nature of the violation,
compliance action taken (if any), whether the user is currently complying with the
compliance schedule and whether the user has returned to compliance. At the
discretion of the Township, the type of enforcement action undertaken may also be
reported. This provision does not prohibit the publication of this notice in more
frequent intervals. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section 411.09)
Section 389. Other Enforcement. The Township may also take such other
enforcement response actions it deems necessary to bring the user into compliance with
this Part. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section 411.10)
Section 390. Suspension of Discharge. The Township may immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present
or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.
The Township may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the treating
POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section 411.11)
Section 391. Elimination of Discharge. Any user notified of a suspension of its
discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Township
may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the treating POTW, its receiving stream
or endangerment to any individuals. The Township may allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township that
the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination of permit proceedings
are initiated against the user. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section
411.12)
Section 392. Written Statement of Harmful Contribution. A user that is
responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment
shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence prior to
recommencement of discharge. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section
411.13)
AP8313
Section 393. Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies provided for in this Part are
not exclusive. The Township may take any, all or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant user. However, the Township may take other action, including
civil and criminal prosecution, against any user when the circumstances warrant.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article K, Section 411.14)
AP8313
Subpart L. Miscellaneous.
Section 394. Township Right of Access. This Township shall have the right of
access, at all reasonable times, to any part of any improved property as necessary for
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing and for
performance of other functions relating to service rendered by this Township.
(Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article L, Section 412.01)
Section 395. Owner Liable for Tenants. The owner of any improved property
shall be held liable for all acts of tenants or other occupants of such improved property,
as may be permitted by law, insofar as such acts shall be governed by the provisions of
this Part. (Ordinance No. 291, October 14, 2002, Article L, Section 412.02)
AP8313
Part 4
On-Lot Disposal Systems (OLDS)
Section 401. Title; Introduction; Purpose.
(A) This Part may be cited as "OLDS (On lot Disposal System)
Management Program for the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania"
(herein called "Township.")
(B) As mandated by the municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law (35
P.S. §§691.1 to 691.1001), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of
January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. §750.1 et seq., known as Act 537),
municipalities have the power and the duty to provide for adequate sewage
treatment facilities and for the protection of the public health by preventing the
discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage. The Official Sewage
Facilities Plan for the Township indicates that it is necessary to formulate and
implement a sewage management program to effectively prevent and abate
water pollution and hazards to the public health caused by improper treatment
and disposal of sewage.
(C) The purpose of this Part is to provide for the inspection,
maintenance and rehabilitation of onlot sewage disposal systems; to further
permit the Township to intervene in situations which are public nuisances or
hazards to the public health; and to establish penalties and appeal procedures
necessary for the proper administration of a sewage management program.
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 301)
Section 402. Terms and Definitions.
(A) General Terms. In the interpretation of this Part, the singular shall
include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(B) Specific Terms. For the purpose of this Part, the terms used shall be
construed to have the following meanings:
ACT - the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24,
1966, P.L. (1965) 1535, No. 537, as amended, 335 P.S. §750.1 et seq.
ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM - a system for the disposal of domestic
waste waters not operating below ground level but located on or near the
site of the building or buildings being served (e.g. composting toilets, gray
)0(111 -84
AP8313
water recycling systems, incinerating toilets, spray irrigation and black
water recycling systems, etc.)
AUTHORIZED AGENT - a licensed sewage enforcement officer,
professional engineer or sanitarian, plumbing inspector, soils scientist or
other qualified or licensed person who is delegated to function within the
specified limits as the agent of the Board of Supervisors of the Township
to carry out the provisions of this Part.
BOARD - the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring,
Berks County, Pennsylvania.
CODES ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (hereinafter called C.E.O.) - an
individual employed by the Township of Spring to administer and enforce
this and other ordinances in the Township of Spring.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM - any system, whether publicly
or privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two (2) or more lots
or uses, or two (2) or more equivalent dwelling units, and the treatment
and/or disposal of the sewage on one (1) or more of the lots or at any
other site and which shall comply with all applicable regulations of the
DER.
DER - the Department of Environmental Resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any successor agency.
DEVELOPER - shall be defined as any person, partnership or
corporation which erects or contracts to erect a building on property
owned by it with the intent to sell the building to some other party upon
its full or partial completion, or upon the conveyance of property on
which the building is to be built.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) - for the purpose of
determining the number of lots in a subdivision or land development, that
part of a multiple family dwelling, commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment with sewage flows equal to four hundred (400) gallons per
day.
IMPROVED PROPERTY - any property within the Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sewage shall be or may be discharged.
AP8313
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM - any system of piping, tanks or
other facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage
in whole or in part into the soil or any waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by means of conveyance to another site for final disposal.
LAND DEVELOPMENT - a land development as defined in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805,
No. 247, as amended, 53 P.S. §10101 et seq.
LOT - a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a
plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
MALFUNCTION - the condition which occurs when an onlot
sewage disposal system causes pollution to the ground or surface waters,
contamination of private or public drinking water supplies, nuisance
problems or hazard to public health. Indications of malfunctioning
systems include, but are not limited to, foul odors, lush grass growing
over the system, backup of wastewater in the attached buildings, soggy
ground over the system, surfacing sewage effluent flowing over the
ground and occurring at any time of the year.
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM - the management program shall
encompass the entire area of the Township serviced by sewage facilities or
any other alternative system which discharges into the soils of the
Township. All systems shall be operated under the jurisdiction of the
Township Board of Supervisors regulating the subsurface disposal and/or
alternate systems and other applicable laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL PLAN - a comprehensive plan for the provision of
adequate sewage disposal systems adopted by the Township and
approved by the DER in accordance with the Act and with applicable DER
regulations.
ONLOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - any sewage system
disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or any waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by means of conveyance to another
site for final disposal, and which is located upon the lot which it serves.
OWNER - any person, corporation, partnership, etc., holding
deed/ title to lands within the Township.
XXIII -86
AP8313
PERSON - any individual, association, partnership, public or
private corporation whether for profit or not-for-profit, trust, estate or
other legally recognized entity. Whenever the term "person" is used in
connection with any clause providing for the imposition of a fine or
penalty or the order of action to comply with the terms of this Part, the
term "person" shall include the members of an association, partnership or
firm and the officers of any public or private corporation, whether for
profit or not-for-profit.
PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT - a revision
to, or exception to the revision of, the Township Official Plan submitted in
connection with the request for approval of a subdivision or land
development in accordance with DER regulations.
PUMPER/HAULER - any person, company, partnership or
corporation which engages in cleaning community or individual sewage
systems and transports the septage cleaned from these system.
PUMPER'S REPORT/RECEIPT - form which shall be used by all
licensed pumper/haulers to report each pumping of onEot sewage
disposal systems in the Township.
REHABILITATION - work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or
replace an existing onlot sewage disposal system.
REPLACEMENT AREA - an area designated as the future location
of an individual onlot sewage system that shall be installed should the
initial individual onlot system installed or to be installed fail or otherwise
become inoperable and which shall meet all the regulations of the DER
and all applicable Township ordinances for an individual onlot sewage
system, and shall be protected from encroachment by an easement
recorded on the final plan as filed with the Recorder of Deeds in and for
the County of Berks at Reading, Pennsylvania.
SEPTAGE - the residual scum and sludge pumped from septic
systems.
SEWAGE - any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or any
noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the public
health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
AP8313
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (hereinafter called S.E.O.) -a
person appointed by the Board to administer the provisions of this Part
and authorized by the DER in accordance with "Chapter 71,
Administration of Sewage Facilities Program" of Title 25, "Rules and
Regulations" to perform percolation tests, site and soil evaluation, and
issue sewage permits for onlot disposal systems.
SEWAGE FACILITIES - any method of sewage collection,
conveyance, treatment and disposal which will prevent the discharge of
untreated or inadequately treated sewage into the waters of this
Commonwealth or otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment
of sewage.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP - the ownership of a lot
by one (1) or more persons, which ownership is separate and distinct from
that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
SUBDIVISION - a subdivision as defined by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
amended, 53 P.S. §10101 et seq.
TOWNSHIP - the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania.
(C) All other definitions of words and terms used in this Part shall have
the same meaning as set forth in Chapter 73, "Standards for Sewage Disposal
Facilities" of Title 25, "Rules and Regulations, Department of Environmental
Resources.
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 302)
Section 403. Applicability. From the effective date of this Part, its provisions shall
apply to all persons owning property in the Township serviced by an onlot sewage
disposal system and to all persons installing or rehabilitating onlot sewage disposal
systems. (Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, §303)
Section 404. Sewage Permit Requirements.
(A) No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction or alter an individual sewage system or community sewage system
or construct or request bid proposals for construction or install or occupy any
building or structure for which an individual sewage system or community
>0:III -88
AP8313
sewage system is to be installed without first obtaining a permit indicating that
the site and the plans and specifications of such system are in compliance with
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (hereinafter called Act
537 or the "Act") and the standards adopted pursuant to that Act.
(B) No system or structure designed to provide individual or
community sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover
the same has been given by the Township S.E.O. If seventy-two (72) hours have
elapsed, excepting Sundays and holidays, since the S.E.O. issuing the permit
received notification of completion of construction, the applicant may cover said
system or structure, unless permission has been specifically refused by the S.E.O.
(C) The Township may require applicants for sewage permits to notify
the Township's certified S.E.O. of the schedule for construction of the permitted
onlot sewage disposal system so that inspection(s) in addition to the final
inspection required by Act 537 may be scheduled and performed by the
Township's certified S.E.O. at the cost of the applicant.
(D) No building or occupancy permit shall be issued by the Township
or its C.E.O. for a new building which will contain sewage generating facilities
until a valid sewage permit has been obtained from the Township's certified
S.E.O.
(E) No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said alteration
or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase in sewage flows
from the structures, until the Township's C.E.O. and the structure's owner
receive from the Township's S.E.O. either a permit for alteration or a replacement
of the existing sewage disposal system or written notification that such a permit
will not be required. In accordance with Chapter 73 regulations, the certified
S.E.O. shall determine whether the proposed alteration on conversion of the
structure will result in increased sewage flows.
(F) Sewage permits may be issued only by a certified S.E.O. employed
by the Township for that express purpose. The DER shall be notified by the
Township as to the identity of their currently employed certified S.E.O.
(G) No sewage permit may be issued unless proof is provided that the
owner of record has owned the lot since May 15, 1972, or that Act 537 planning
for that lot has been provided by the Township.
(H) No final Act 247 approval on a subdivision plan may begin until
Act 537 planning is approved by the Township.
XXIII -89
AP8313
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 304)
Section 405. Ground Markers. Any person who shall install new or rehabilitated
systems shall provide a marker or markers at ground level locating the subsurface
waste disposal tank and other important components of the system requiring periodic
inspection and maintenance. Requirements for marker types and locations will be
determined by the Township's S.E.O. In addition, a riser or access hatch shall be
constructed so as to enable easy access to the waste disposal tank, and prevent odors
from escaping and to prevent children from removing the hatch. Accessibility for visual
inspection and maintenance shall be provided in the drainage fields via four (4) inch
vertical, nonperforated PVC pipe connected directly to the drain tile at a minimum of
four (4) locations in the drainage field. If not installed by the Township or its
authorized agent, such installation shall be subject to its approval. (Ordinance 241,
November 28, 1994, Section 305)
Section 406. Replacement Areas.
(A) Requirements.
(1) After the effective date of this Part, a replacement area for an
individual onlot sewage system shall be required for all lots or lots to be
created which are not serviced or to be serviced by a community sewage
system, or for which a valid permit for installation of an individual onlot
sewage system has not been issued. Lots existing prior to the effective
date of this Part shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section.
(2) The replacement area provided shall comply with the Act
and with all regulations issued by the DER as incorporated into this Part
concerning individual onlot sewage systems, including isolation distances,
and with the terms of this Part and any other applicable Township
ordinances.
(B) Identification of Replacement Area.
(1) Each applicant who shall submit a plan for the subdivision
or development of land or who shall apply for a permit for the installation
of an individual onlot sewage system, or who shall request approval of a
planning module for land development or the adoption of a revision,
exception to revision or supplement to the official plan shall demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the S.E.O. that a suitable area exists on the lot or on
each lot to be created for an initial individual onlot sewage system and for
the replacement area. The S.E.O. shall perform or observe all tests
)0(1II -90
AP8313
required for the location of an individual onlot sewage system to confirm
the suitability of the replacement area. Allowance of open land for the
replacement area without testing performed or observed by the S.E.O.
shall not constitute compliance with the requirements of this Section.
(2) The location of the initial individual onlot sewage system
and the replacement area as confirmed by the S.E.O. shall be identified on
the plot plans and diagrams submitted as part of the permit application.
(3) If the application has been submitted as a part of an
application for subdivision or land development approval or as part of a
request that the Township approve a planning module for land
development or amend its official plan, or a request for an exception to the
revision of the official plan, the location of each initial individual onlot
sewage system and each replacement area shall be noted upon the plans.
If the application is for subdivision or land development approval, a note
constituting a permanent easement shall be added to the plans stating that
no improvements shall be constructed upon the subdivision or land
development shall contain language reflecting this limitation.
(4) Any revisions to a permit or plan affecting a replacement
area which previously has been approved pursuant to the provisions of
this Part shall be reviewed for approval by the Board or its authorized
representative.
(C) Construction Restrictions.
(1) The easement for the replacement area noted upon the plan
recorded with the Recorder of Deeds in and for County of Berks, at
Reading, Pennsylvania, shall state that no permanent or temporary
improvements of any character, other than shallow-rooted plant matter,
shall be constructed upon the replacement area.
(2) This provision shall be enforced by the Township unless the
person who desires to construct such improvements shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the S.E.O. that an alternate replacement area which
complies with all applicable regulations of the DER, this ordinance and all
other applicable Township ordinances, exists upon the lot. If such an
alternate replacement area shall be identified, the alternate replacement
area may be considered to be the replacement area required by this Part
and shall be designated as the replacement area. The newly designated
replacement area shall thereafter be considered the replacement area for
the purposes of this Part.
)0CIII -91
AP8313
(D) Relief from Replacement Area Requirement.
(1) If any lot held in single and separate ownership as of the
effective date of this Part does not contain land suitable for a replacement
area, the applicant submitting a land development plan or a planning
module for land development or desiring to install an individual onlot
sewage system may request that the Board grant an exception to the
requirement of providing a replacement area. The applicant for such an
exception shall present credible evidence to the Board demonstrating (a)
that the lot was held in single and separate ownership on the effective
date of this Part; (b) the size of the lot; (c) inability of the applicant to
acquire adjacent land or the unsuitability of adjacent land which might be
able to be acquired; and (d) the testing conducted to determine that the lot
is not suitable to provide a replacement area.
(2) At all times, the burden to present credible evidence and the
burden of persuasion shall be upon the applicant for an exception from
the terms of this Part. In no case shall any lot be exempted from the
requirements of Section 404 of this Part.
Section 407. Inspections.
(A) Any onlot sewage disposal system may be inspected by the
Township's authorized agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date of
this Part.
(B) The inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the
taking of samples from surface water, wells, other ground water sources, the
sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and /or the
introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the structure
severed to ascertain the path and ultimate destination of wastewater generated in
the structure. A copy of the inspection report shall be furnished to the owner
and current resident which shall include all of the following information which is
reasonably available to the individual or agency responsible for pumping the
septic tank; date of inspection; name and address of system owner; description
and diagram of the location of the system including location of access hatches,
risers and markers; size of tanks and disposal fields; current occupant's name
and number of users; indication of any system malfunction observed; results of
any and all soils and water tests; any remedial action required.
AP8313
(C) The Township's authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon
land for the purposes of inspections described above. In the event that access to
inspect the property is denied, the following steps shall be taken:
(1) The matter will be officially referred to the Board for action.
(2) The Board may schedule a review at the next scheduled
meeting of the Board, or, if the situation threatens the health or safety of
residents of the Township, the Board may commence an immediate
procedure to obtain a search warrant from the District Justice.
(3) Upon receipt of a search warrant to inspect the property, the
authorized agent of the Township shall be accompanied by an officer of
the County or State Police and the inspection shall be completed in
accordance with this subsection.
(4) The provisions of this subsection for obtaining a search
warrant may be waived only when the Board and its authorized agent
have been reason to believe that the sewage facilities or alternative system
is malfunctioning or being operated improperly such that the situation
poses an immediate and substantial safety, water pollution or health
hazard.
(D) A schedule of routine inspections may be established by the
Township, if necessary, to assure the proper function of the systems in the
Township.
(E) The Township's authorized agent shall inspect systems known to
be, or alleged to be, malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal that the
system is malfunctioning, the Township shall take action to require the
correction of the malfunction. If total correction is not technically or financially
feasible, in the opinion of the Township and a representative of the DER, action
by the owner to mitigate the malfunction shall be required.
(F) There may arise geographic areas within the Township where
numerous onlot sewage disposal systems are malfunctioning. A resolution of
these area wide problems may necessitate detailed planning and a Township
sponsored revision to the area's Act 537 Official Sewage Facilities Plan. When a
DER authorized official sewage plan revision has been undertaken by the
Township, mandatory repair or replacement of individual malfunctioning
sewage disposal systems within the study area may be delayed, at the discretion
of the Township, pending the outcome of the plan revision process. However,
the Township may compel immediate corrective action whenever a malfunction,
)0(11I -93
AP8313
as determined by the Township officials and the Pennsylvania DER, represents a
serious public health or environmental threat.
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 307)
Section 408. Operation. Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into
any onlot sewage disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the
system:
(A) Industrial waste.
(B) Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
(C) Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not
limited to, pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides,
gasoline and other solvents.
(D) Clean surface or ground water, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and French drains.
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 308)
Section 409. Maintenance.
(A) Any person owning a building served by an onlot sewage disposal
system shall have the septic tank pumped by a qualified pumper/hauler after
the effective date of this Part based on the following schedule:
(1) Properties located in Township Precinct #1. Within one (1)
year of effective date of this Part.
(2) Properties located in Township Precinct #2. Within two (2)
years of effective date of this Part.
(3) Properties located in Township Precinct #3. Within three (3)
years of effective date of this Part.
Thereafter, that person shall have the tank pumped at least once every
three (3) years. Receipts from the pumper/hauler shall be submitted to
the Township as required in §409(F).
(B) Any person providing a receipt or other written evidence showing
that their tank had been pumped within three (3) years of the first year
XXIII -94
AP8313
anniversary of the effective date of this Part or wherever an inspection program
reveals the treatment tanks are filled with solids in excess of one- third (1/3) the
liquid depth of the tank or with scum in excess of one-third (1/3) the liquid
depth of the tank.
(C) The required pumping frequency may be increased at the
discretion of the authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if buildup of
solids in the tank are in excess of the limitation set forth in §309(2) hereof, if the
hydraulic load on the system increases significantly above average, if a garbage
grinder is used in the building, if the system malfunctions or for other good
cause shown.
(D) Each time a septic tank or other subsurface waste disposal system
tank is pumped out, the Township, its authorized agent, or a private septage
pumper/hauler, whichever provides the service, shall provide to the owner of
the subsurface waste disposal system a signed pumpers report/receipt
containing at a minimum the following information:
(1) Date of pumping.
(2) Name and address of system owner.
(3) Address of tank's location, if different from owner's.
(4) Description and diagram of the location of the tank,
including the location of any markers, risers and access hatches and size of
the tank.
(5) Condition of baffels.
(6) The date existing system was installed.
(7) Last date of pump out.
(8) List of other maintenance performed.
(9) Any indications of system malfunction observed.
(10) Amount of septage or other solid or semisolid material
removed.
(11) List of recommendations.
AP8313
(12) Destination of the septage (name of the treatment facility).
(E) Upon completion of each required pumping, the Township, its
authorized agent, or a private septage waste hauler, shall fill out and submit a
pumper report/receipt, copies of which shall be provided by the Township to all
licensed pumpers/haulers. The Township's authorized agent, or a private
septage pumper/hauler shall provide one (1) copy of the pumper's
report/receipt to the owner and one (1) copy to the Township. Copies must be
received at the Township's business office within thirty (30) days of the date of
pumping. The pumper's report/receipt will include verification that the baffles
in the septic tank have been inspected and found to be in good working order.
(F) Any person owning a building served by an alternative system or
onlot sewage disposal system which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall
follow the operation and maintenance recommendations of the equipment
manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's recommendations and a copy of the
service agreement shall be submitted to the Township within six (6) months of
the effective date of this Part. Thereafter, service receipts shall be submitted to
the Township at the intervals specified by the manufacturer's recommendations.
In no case may the service or pumping intervals exceed those for those required
for septic tanks.
(G) Any person owning a building served by a cesspool or dry well
shall have that system pumped according to the schedule prescribed for septic
tanks in §509(1).
(H) The Township may require additional maintenance activity as
needed including, but not necessarily limited to, cleaning and unclogging of
piping, servicing and the repair of mechanical equipment, leveling of
distribution boxes, tanks and lines, removal of obstructing roots or trees, the
diversion of surface water away from the disposal area, etc. Repair permits
issued by the certified S.E.O. must be secured for these activities.
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 309)
Section 410. System Rehabilitation.
(A) No person shall operate and maintain an onlot sewage disposal
system in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be discharged to
a treatment tank. No sewage system shall discharge untreated or partially
treated sewage to the surface of the ground or into the waters of the
AP8313
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania unless a permit to discharge has been obtained
from the DER.
(B) The Township shall issue a written notice of violation to any person
who is the owner of a property in the Township which is found to be served by a
malfunctioning onlot sewage disposal system or which is discharging raw or
partially treated sewage without a permit.
(C) Within seven (7) days of notification by the Township that a
malfunction has been identified, the owner shall make application to the
Township's certified S.E.O. for a permit to repair or replace the malfunctioning
system. Within thirty (30) days of initial notification by the Township,
construction of the permitted repair on replacement shall commence. Within
sixty (60) days of the original notification by the Township, the construction shall
be completed unless seasonal or unique conditions mandate a longer period, in
which case the Township shall set an extended completion date.
(D) The Township's certified S.E.O. shall have the authority to require
the repair of any malfunction by the following methods: cleaning, repair or
replacement or components of the existing system, adding capacity or otherwise
altering or replacing the system's treatment tank, expanding the existing disposal
area, replacing the existing disposal area, replacing a gravity distribution system
with a pressurized system, replacing the system with a holding tank, other
alternatives as appropriate for the specific site.
(E) In lieu of, or in combination with, the remedies described in
§510(4), the S.E.O. may require the installation of water conservation equipment
and the institution of water conservation practices in structures served. Water
using devices and appliances in the structure may be required to be retrofitted
with water saving appurtenances or they may be required to be replaced by
water conserving devices and appliances. Wastewater generation in the
structure may also be reduced by requiring changes in water usage patterns in
the structure served. The use of laundry facilities may be limited to one (1) load
per day or discontinued altogether.
(F) In the event that the rehabilitation measures in §510(5) are not
feasible or do not prove effective, the Township may require the owner to apply
for a permit to construct a holding tank in accordance with Township ordinance.
Upon receipt of said permit the owner shall complete construction of the system
within thirty (30) days.
(G) Should none of the remedies described above prove totally effective
in eliminating the malfunction of an existing onlot sewage disposal system, the
MIT -97
AP8313
owner is not absolved of responsibility for that malfunction. The Township may
require whatever action is necessary to lessen or mitigate the malfunction to the
extent that it feels necessary.
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 310)
Section 411. Liens. The Township, upon written notice from the S.E.O. that an
imminent health hazard exists due to failure of a property owner to maintain, repair or
replace an onlot sewage disposal system as provided under the terms of this Part, shall
have the authority to perform, or contract to have performed, the work required by the
S.E.O. The owner shall be charged for the work performed and, if necessary, a lien shall
be entered therefore in accordance with law. (Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994,
Section 311)
Section 412. Disposal of Septage.
(A) All septage pumper/haulers operating within the Township shall
be licensed with the Township and shall comply with all reporting requirements
established by the Township.
(B) All septage originating within the municipal sewage management
district shall be disposed of at sites or facilities approved by DER. Approved sites
or facilities shall include the following: septage treatment facilities, wastewater
treatment plants, composting sites and approved farm lands.
(C) Septage pumper/haulers operating within the Township shall
operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§6018.101-1018.1003). Any
septage pumper/hauler who violates any of the provisions of this Part or
regulations of the Township, the conditions of its State permit, or of any State or
local law governing its operation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and costs, and in
default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed thirty (30) days. If any pumper/hauler shall have been convicted on two
(2) occasions of any violation of this Part, or for violating the conditions of its
State permit, or of any State or local law governing its operation, the Board shall
have the power to suspend said pumper/hauler from operating within the
Township for a period of not less than six (6) months or more than two (2) years
for each violation, as determined by the Township. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 312)
AP8313
Section 413. Administration.
(A) The Township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this Part.
(B) The Township shall employ qualified individuals to carry out the
provisions of this Part. Those employees shall include a certified S.E.O., C.E.O.,
a secretary, administrator or other persons as required. The Township may also
contract with private qualified persons or firms as necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Part.
(C) All permits, records, reports, files and other written material elating
to the installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of onlot sewage
disposal systems shall become the property of the Township. Existing and future
records shall be available for public inspection during required business hours at
the official municipal office. All records pertaining to sewage permits, building
permits, occupancy permits and all other aspects of the Township's OLDS
Management Program shall be made available, upon request, for inspection by
representatives of the DER.
(D) The Board shall establish all administrative procedures necessary to
properly carry out the provisions of this Part.
(E) The Board may establish a fee schedule, and subsequently collect
fees, to cover the cost to the Township of administering this program.
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 313)
Section 414. Appeals.
(A) Appeals from decisions of the Township or its authorized agents
under this Part shall be made to the Board in writing within forty-five (45) days
from the date of the decision in question.
(B) The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the l3oard at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, if the appeal is received at least fourteen (14)
days prior to that meeting. If the appeal is received within fourteen (14) days of
the next regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the
subsequent meeting. The Township shall thereafter affirm, modify or reverse the
aforesaid decision. The hearing may be postponed for a good cause shown by
the appellant or the Township. Additional evidence may be introduced at the
hearing; provided, that it is submitted with the written notice of appeal.
AP8313
(C) A decision shall be rendered in writing within forty-five (45) days
of the date of the hearing. If a decision is not rendered within forty-five (45)
days, the release sought by the appellant shall be deemed granted.
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Section 314)
Section 415. Penalties. Any person failing to comply with any provisions of this
Part shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and costs,
and not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and costs, or in default thereof shall
be confined in the County jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. Each day
of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 241, November 28,
1994, Section 315)
AP8313
Section 416. Septic Tank Pumper's Report
SEPTIC TANK PUMPER'S REPORT
1. Date of Pumping / / 2. System: Septic Aerobic Cesspool Dry Well
3. Property Owner's Name
Address
City State Zip Code
4. Address of Tank Location
(if different than #2) State Zip Code
5. Description and diagram of the location of the tank (use box below),
including the location of any markers, risers and access hatches and size of
the tank. Description
6. Date system was installed (in not known, approximate date) / /
7. Date of last pump out (if not known, approximate date) / /
8. List of other maintenance performed.
Diagram
0 Baffle Replacement ( ) Extensions (riser rings)
( ) Inspection Ports
( ) Other
( ) Snaked the line
9. Any indications of system maintained observed.
( ) High Water Level in Tank ( ) Wet Areas Near System or Site
( ) Noticeable Odors ( ) Sewer Backup into House
( ) Abundant Grass Growth Near System or Site
( ) Backflush of Water from Absorption Area to Tank
( ) Other
10. Amount of Septage or other solid or semisolid material removed.
( ) 500 Gallon Tank ( ) 1750 Gallon Tank
( ) 750 Gallon Tank ( ) 2000 Gallon Tank
( ) 1000 Gallon Tank ( ) 2250 Gallon Tank
( ) 1250 Gallon Tank ( ) 2500 Gallon Tank
( ) 1500 Gallon Tank ( ) Other
XXIII -101
AP8313
11. Recommendations
12. Destination of the septage (name of treatment facility, include address
if private property)
DER Permit #
Signature of Pumper Company
A copy of this report is to be submitted to the property owner listed above
and a copy mailed within thirty (30) days after pumping to:
(Ordinance 241, November 28, 1994, Exhibit)
XXIII -102
AP8313
Part 5
Holding Tanks
Section 501. Purpose. The purpose of this Part is to establish procedures for the
use and maintenance of holding tanks designated to receive and retain sewage whether
from residential or commercial uses and it is hereby declared that the enactment of this
Part is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of this municipality. (Ordinance 198, April 11, 1988, Section
1)
Section 502. Definitions. Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates
otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Part shall be as follows:
BOARD - The Board of Supervisors of Spring Township, Berks County,
Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK - A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. Holding tanks include but are not limited to the
following:
(1) CHEMICAL TOILET - A toilet using chemicals that
discharge to a holding tank.
(2) RETENTION TANK - A holding tank where sewage is
conveyed to it by a water carrying system.
(3) VAULT PIT PRIVY - A holding tank designed to receive
sewage where water under pressure is not available.
IMPROVED PROPERTY - Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure sewage
shall or may be discharged.
OWNER - Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, or any property located in the Township.
PERSON - Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
XXIII -103
AP8313
SEWAGE - Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and
any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the public
health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP - The Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance 198, April 11, 1988, Section 2)
Section 503. Rights and Privileges Granted. That the Township is hereby
authorized and empowered to undertake within the Township the control and methods
of holding tank sewage disposal and the collection and transportation thereof.
(Ordinance 198, April 11, 1988, Section 3)
Section 504. Rules and Regulations. That the Township acting thorough the
Board is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations
concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to time effect the purpose
herein. (Ordinance 198, April 11, 1988, Section 4)
Section 505. Rules and Regulations To Be In Conformity With Applicable Law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Township acting through the Board shall
be in conformity with the provisions herein, all other Ordinances of the Township, and
all applicable laws, and applicable rules and regulations of administrative agencies of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Ordinance 198, April 11, 1988, Section 5)
Section 506. Rates and Charges. The Township acting through the Board shall
have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect rates, assessments, and other
charges in the area served by its facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized
by applicable law. (Ordinance 198, April 11, 1988, Section 6)
Section 507. Exclusiveness of Rights and Privileges. The collection and
transportation of all sewage from any improved property utilizing a holding tank shall
be done solely by or under the direction and control of the Township, and the disposal
thereof shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department
of Environmental Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Ordinance 198,
April 11, 1988, Section 7)
Section 508. Duties of Improved Property Owner. The owner of any improved
property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
(A) Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any
Ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any applicable law, and the rules
XXIII -104
AP8313
and regulations of the Township acting through the Board and any
administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(B) Permit only to Township or its agent to collect, transport, and
dispose of the contents therein.
(Ordinance 198, April 11, 1988, Section 8)
Section 509. Violations. Any person who violates any provisions of Section 507
shall, upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars and not more than three hundred ($300.00)
dollars and costs, and in default of said fine and costs to undergo imprisonment in the
Berks County Prison for a period not in excess of thirty (30) days. (Ordinance 198, April
11, 1988, Section 9)
Section 510. Abatement of Nuisances. In addition to any other remedies
provided in this part, any violation of Section 507 above shall constitute a nuisance and
shall be abated by the Township, acting through the Board, by either seeking
appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ordinance
198, April 11, 1988, Section 10)
Section 511. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance
is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sentences, clause, sections, or part of this Part. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of the Township, that this part would
have been adopted had such constitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or
part thereof not been included therein. (Ordinance 198, April 11, 1988, Section 12)
XXIII -105
AP8313
Part 6
City of Reading Sewer Use
Subpart A. General Provisions.
Section 601. Purpose and Policy. This Part sets forth uniform requirements for
users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, and
enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §1251, et seq., and the General Pretreatment Regulations, 40
CFR, Part 403, and amendments, thereto. The objectives of this Part are:
(A) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation.
(B) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into publicly owned
treatment works that will prevent or restrict the beneficial reuse of the resulting
sludge from the wastewater treatment process.
(C) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with
the publicly owned treatment works.
(D) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who
may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment
and the general public.
(E) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the publicly owned treatment works.
(F) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned treatment
works.
(G) To enable the City of Reading to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the publicly owned
treatment works is subject.
This Part shall apply to all users of the City of Reading publicly owned treatment works
and to persons outside the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users
of the City publicly owned treatment works. The Part authorizes the issuance of
XXIII -106
AP8313
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein. This Part supersedes City of Reading Ordinance No. 61-84,
1- 87, 104-89, 7-94 and 48-86 as amended, and provisions of that Ordinance are null and
void where they conflict with specifics contained herein. (Ordinance No. 271,
November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 602. Administration. This Part provides for the regulation of
contributors to the POTW and wastewater system through the issuance of permits to
certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for users;
authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; requires user reporting;
assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted; and provides for the
setting of fees for their equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
This Part shall apply to all users of the POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
Industrial Waste Administrator shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this Part. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Industrial Waste
Administrator may be delegated by the Industrial Waste Administrator to other City
personnel or to the City's authorized agent. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999,
Section 1)
Section 603. Abbreviations and Acronyms. The following abbreviations or
acronyms shall have the designated meanings:
APR - Average percentage rate.
ASTM - American standard testing materials.
BAT - Best available treatment.
BATEA - Best available technology economically achievable.
BCT - Best control technology.
BMP - Best management practices.
BMR - Baseline monitoring report.
B/N - Base/neutral.
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand.
XXIII -107
AP8313
BPJ - Best professional judgment.
BPT - Best professional technology.
CERCLA - Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act.
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
CIU - Categorical industrial user.
COD - Chemical oxygen demand.
CSO - Combined sewer overflow.
CWA - Clean Water Act.
CWF - Combined waste stream formula.
DMR - Discharge monitoring report.
DSS - Domestic sewage study.
EMS - Enforcement management system.
EP - Extraction procedure.
EPA - Environmental Protection Agency of the United States.
ERP - Enforcement response plan.
FDF - Fundamentally different factor.
FOV - Finding of violation.
FOG - Fats, oil and grease.
FR - Federal Register.
FTE - Full-time equivalent.
FWA - Flow-weighted averaging.
XXIII -108
AP8313
FWPCA - Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
GC/ MS - Gas chromatograph/ mass spectrophotometry.
gpd - Gallons per day.
I + I - Infiltration and inflow.
IU - Industrial user.
IWA - Industrial Waste Administrator.
IWS - Industrial waste survey.
MAHL - Maximum allowable headworks loading.
MGD - Million gallons per day.
mg/1 - Milligrams per liter.
MOU - Memorandum of understanding.
MSDS - Material safety data sheet.
NH3-N - Ammonia (NH3) expressed as nitrogen (N).
NIOSH - National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health.
NMP - National municipal policy.
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NON - Notice of noncompliance.
NOV - Notice of violation.
OCPSF - Organic chemicals, plastics and synthetic fibers.
O&G - Oil and grease.
O&M - Operations and maintenance.
AP8313
OSHA - Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
OWEC - Office of Water Enforcement and Compliance.
PAD - Proportioned actual domestic flow.
PaDEP - Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PAH - Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons.
PAI - Proportioned actual industrial flow.
PASS - Pretreatment audit summary system.
PCB - Polychlorinated biphenols.
PCI - Pretreatment compliance inspection.
PCME - Pretreatment compliance monitoring enforcement.
PCS - Permit compliance system.
PIRT - Pretreatment Implementation Review Task Force.
POTW - Publicly owned treatment works.
ppd - Pounds per day.
ppm - Parts per million.
ppb - Parts per billion.
PPETS - Pretreatment permits enforcement tracking system.
PQR - Permit quality review.
PSNS - Pretreatment standards for new sources.
PSES - Pretreatment standards for existing sources.
QA/ QC - Quality assurance quality control.
QNCR - Quarterly noncompliance report.
XXIII -110
AP8313
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
RNC - Reportable noncompliance.
SARA - Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act.
SIC - Standard industrial classification.
SIU - Significant industrial user.
SMP - Solvent management plan.
SNC - Significant noncompliance.
SPCC - Spill prevention control and countermeasures.
SPMS - Strategic planning and management system.
STP - Sewage treatment plant.
STLC - Soluble threshold limit concentration.
SU - Standard units.
SUO - Sewer Use Ordinance.
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act.
TCLP - Toxicity characteristic leachate procedure.
TDS - Total dissolved solids.
TICH - Total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons.
TOMP - Toxic organic management plan.
TRC - Technical review criteria.
THE - Toxicity reduction evaluation.
TSS - Total suspended solids.
AP8313
TTO - Total toxic organics.
TTLC - Total threshold limit concentration.
U.S.C. - United States Code.
ug/1 - micrograms per liter.
VOA - Volatile organic analysis.
VOC - Volatile organic compounds.
VSS - Volatile suspended solids.
WENDB - Water enforcement national data base.
WEF - Water Environment Federation.
WQA - Water Quality Act.
WQS - Water quality standard.
WWTP - wastewater treatment plant.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 604. Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this Part, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT or THE ACT - the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §1251, et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY - the EPA Regional III Administrator.
APPURTENANCE - auxiliary structures attached to a sewer which shall
include, but not be limited to, pump stations, slots, regulators, outfalls, force
mains, manholes, catch basins, tide gates, monitoring devices and metering
chambers.
AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES or AGENTS OF THE CITY - a person who
by reason of his or her general position or job description with the City has
specific duties and responsibilities to perform on behalf of the City. Also
XXIII -112
AP8313
included are agents of the City, who are authorized by the TWA to act on behalf
of the City through an authorization letter.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER -
(1) If the user is a corporation:
(a) The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president
of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making
functions for the corporation.
(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities employing more than two
hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or
expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00)
(in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
(3) If the user is representing Federal, State or local
governments, or an agent thereof, an authorized representative shall mean
a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government facility.
(4) The individuals described in subsections (1) - (3) above may
designate another authorized representative if said authorization is
submitted to the City in writing and specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters of the company.
BATCH DISCHARGE - the discharge of all or part of the contents of a
tank that occurs intermittently or over a short period of time.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD - the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed
as a concentration (e.g., mg/1).
AP8313
BIOLOGICALS - preparations made from living organisms and their
products, including vaccines, cultures, etc., intended for use in diagnosing,
immunizing or treating humans or animals or in research pertaining thereto.
BLOOD PRODUCTS - any products derived from human blood including,
but not limited to whole blood, blood plasma, platelets, red or white blood
corpuscles and other derived licensed products, such as interferon, etc.
BODY FLUIDS - liquids emanating or derived from humans including
blood products, cerebrospinal, pleural, peritoneal and pericardial fluids, and
amniotic fluids and semen and vaginal secretions but excluding feces, urine,
nasal secretions, sputum, sweat, tears, saliva and breast milk, unless any such
excluded substance contains visible blood or is isolation waste.
BUILDING DRAIN - that part of the lowest horizontal piping within a
building that carries water, wastewater or stormwater to a building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER - the extension from the building drain to the public
sewer, or other place of disposal. Also referred to as "house connection."
BYPASS - the intentional or unintentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of a user's treatment facility.
CHAIN OF CUSTODY - written documentation such as receipts and
record book entries to show the history of possession, custody and/ or control of
a sample from collection through analysis.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) - a measure of the amount of
oxygen required to oxidize organic and oxidizable inorganic compounds in
water.
CHLORINE DEMAND - the quantity of chlorine absorbed in water,
sewage or other liquids, allowing a residual of one-tenth (0.1) mg/1, after fifteen
(15) minutes of contact.
CITY - the City of Reading, Pennsylvania. The agent of the City who is
authorized by this Part to implement the City's industrial pretreatment program
shall be the Industrial Waste Administrator.
COLLECTION FACILITIES - the sewers, lift stations, and other City
facilities used to collect wastewaters from individual users within specific
tributary districts and transport them to conveyance facilities for transmission to
the treatment plant for processing.
XXIII -114
AP8313
COLOR - as analyzed by methods specified by 40 CFR, Part 136.
COMMERCIAL USER - a source of discharge of wastewater to the City
sewer system from premises used partially or entirely for commercial purposes.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE - the sample collection technique resulting from
the combination of individual wastewater grab samples taken a t selected
intervals based on either an increment of flow or time.
CONTACT COOLING WATER - any water used for cooling purposes
which comes into direct contact with the object being cooled such as any raw
material, intermediate product, waste product or finished products.
CONTROL AUTHORITY - shall refer to the City or the City of Reading
POTW.
CONVENTIONAL WASTEWATER POLLUTANTS - pollutants so
designated in accordance with §304(a)(4) of the Act as being effectively managed
by secondary treatment as defined by 40 CFR, Part 133.
DAILY MAXIMUM - the maximum allowable discharge of a pollutant
during a calendar day. Where maximum limitations are expressed in units of
mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day.
Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant derived
from all measurements taken that day.
DIRECT CONNECTION - the connection of a building sewer directly to a
sewer owned by the City.
DIRECT DISCHARGE - the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DISCHARGE - the introduction of wastewater, water, and/or pollutants
into the City's facilities from any source.
DOMESTIC WASTE - the normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments. Also known as sewage.
EASEMENT - the acquired legal right to use land owned by others for a
specific purpose.
XXIII -115
AP8313
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN - a plan which sets forth the City's
enforcement response to violations of this Part, as required by 40 CFR, Part 403.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA - shall refer to the
United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term
may also be used as a designation for the Regional Water Management Division
Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE - any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the
standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with §307 of the Act.
FACILITY or FACILITIES - see "wastewater facilities" in this Section.
FLASHPOINT - the temperature at which a liquid or volatile solid gives
off vapor sufficient to form an ignitable mixture with the air near the surface of
the liquid or within the test vessel. Flashpoint is determined by the test methods
set out in 40 CFR §261.21.
GARBAGE - shall include, but not be limited to, the wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of product.
GARBAGE DISPOSAL UNIT or GARBAGE GRINDER - a mechanical
device used for grinding, shredding or macerating garbage to a small particle
size before discharge to the sewer.
GRAB SAMPLE - a sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed
fifteen (15) minutes.
GREASE - a substance which tests positive in the standard analytical
method used for this parameter. Grease may be composed of volatile and
nonvolatile residual fats, oils, fatty acids, soaps, waxes, mineral oils and other
materials of similar composition.
GREASE REMOVAL DEVICE - a device for removal of grease and /or oil
from a wastewater discharge.
XXIII -116
AP8313
HOLDING TANK WASTE - any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INDIRECT CONNECTION - a building sewer connection that is not a
direct connection; and whose wastewater discharge shall, notwithstanding the
passage in its normal course through other sewers or conduits, ultimately
discharge in whole or in part through City sewers.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE - the discharge or the
introduction of pollution from any nondomestic source regulated under §307(b),
(c) or (d) of the Act, 33 U.S.C. 1317, into the POTW (including holding tank waste
discharge into the system).
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT - any improved property used, in whole
or in part, for manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling any
product, commodity or article; or from which any process waste, as distinct from
sewage, shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL USER - a source of indirect discharge which, does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to §402 of
the Act. In addition, "industrial user" shall also be defined as an establishment
which discharges or introduces industrial waste into the POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE - shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Act of
June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394, known as the Clean Streams Law, and the
regulations adopted thereunder.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE ADMINISTRATOR (IWA) - the person designated
by the City to administer its industrial waste program and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this Part or his/her duly authorized
representative.
INFECTIOUS WASTES - wastewater contaminated by or containing any
agent or organism, such as a virus or a bacteria, capable of being communicated
by invasion and multiplication in body tissues and capable of causing disease or
adverse health impacts in humans.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT - the
maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
AP8313
INTERFERENCE - a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both: (i) inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; and (ii) therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any
more stringent State or local regulations: §405 of the Act; the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any
State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the
Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
ISOLATION WASTE - biological waste and discarded materials
contaminated with blood, excretion, exudates or secretions from humans who
are isolated to protect others from certain highly communicable diseases, or
isolated animals known to be infected with highly communicable diseases and
specified by the Center for Disease Controls (CDC) as classification 4.
MANHOLE - a shaft or chamber leading from the surface of the ground to
a sewer; large enough to enable a person to gain access to the sewer.
MAY is permissive; SHALL is mandatory.
MEDICAL WASTE - any solid waste which is generated in the diagnosis,
treatment (e.g., provisions of medical services) or immunization of human beings
or animals in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or testing of
biologicals.
MONTHLY AVERAGE - the arithmetic mean of the values for effluent
samples collected over a calendar month.
MUNICIPALITY - any city, borough, township, municipal authority,
county, county authority, State authority or sewer district that discharges
wastewater into the sewers owned by the City.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL STANDARD any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with §§307(b) and (c) of the Act, 33
U.S.C. §1317, which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40
CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
AP8313
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT - a permit issued pursuant to §402 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. 1342.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD - any regulation developed under the Authority of
§301(b) of the Act and 40 CFR §403.5.
NONSIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER - a user designated as such by
the IWA based on the user's discharge quantity and quality. Such users may
include, but are not limited to, commercial users, medical offices (doctor, dentist,
etc.), garages and auto repair facilities, funeral parlors and laboratories. The
ultimate determination of the status of nonsignificant industrial user is within
the discretion of the IWA pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Part.
NEW SOURCE -
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under §307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that Section,
provided that:
(a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
(b) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(c) The production or wastewater generating processes of
the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
XX[II -119
AP83I3
criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this
definition has commenced if the owner or operator has:
(a) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on
site construction program:
i) Any placement, assembly or installation of
facilities or equipment; or,
ii) Significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement,
assembly, or installation of new source facilities or
equipment; or
(b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used
in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do
not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER - water used for cooling which does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.
OUTFALL - the mouth of a sewer, drain or conduit where an effluent is
discharged into the receiving waters, or discharged into the POTW collection
system.
OWNER or OPERATOR - any person who owns, leases, operates, or
controls or supervises a source.
PASS THROUGH - a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the City's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
PERMITTEE - shall refer to the City of Reading POTW.
XXIII -120
AP8313
PERSON - any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all Federal, State and local governmental entities. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural
where indicated by the context.
PH - a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT - dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked, or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes,
and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
POLLUTION - the manmade, or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT - the reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other
means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by
an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS - any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, including a pretreatment
standard or procedural provision of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (62
Stat. 115, 33 U.S.C. §1251, et seq.) or the Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394,
known as The Clean Streams Law, or any rule or regulation, ordinance or term or
condition of a permit or order adopted or issued by the Commonwealth or a
POTW for the implementation or enforcement of an industrial waste
pretreatment program established under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
or the Clean Streams Law.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS - prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
AP8313
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES - the absolute or conditional prohibition from discharge of a
substance, group of substances or type of substance as defined in §602(1) of this
Part.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW - a treatment works
as defined by §212 of the Act, 33 U.S.C. §1292, which is owned by the City. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT - that portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE - a special category of solid waste that
includes specific types of medical waste that includes solid, semisolid, or liquid
materials, but does not include domestic sewage materials. This waste is subject
to the handling and tracking requirements of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. Categories of regulated medical waste are defined as
blood, blood products, body fluids, contaminated sharps, discarded cultures and
stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, isolation wastes,
pathological waste and oncological waste.
RESIDENTIAL USERS - persons only contributing sanitary wastewater to
the municipal wastewater system.
SANITARY SEWER - a sewer that is designed to carry liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface wastes
that are not discharged intentionally.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE - any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SEWAGE - human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWER - a pipe or conduit, and other appurtenance provided to carry
wastewater or stormwater.
SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER -
XXIII -122
AP8313
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
(a) Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand
(25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown
wastewater);
(b) Contributes a process waste stream which makes up
five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or,
(c) As designated as such by the City on the basis that t
has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(3) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection
(2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR
§403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE - an industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the specific criteria set forth
in 40 CFR §403.8(f)(2)(vii). For purposes of this definition, an industrial user is in
significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following
criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily
maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any
amount.
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which thirty-three percnet (33%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month
period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the
XXIII -123
AP8313
average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
(3) Any other discharge violation that has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public.
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
City's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge.
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled
date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater
discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction or attaining final compliance.
(6) Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date,
any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules.
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance, including failure
to report and resample in accordance with Section 641.
(8) Any other violation(s) which the City determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
SLUDGE - the solids, residues and precipitate separated from wastewater
by the unit processes of a publicly owned treatment works or industrial
pretreatment systems.
SLUG LOAD or SLUG - any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, or
at a flow rate or concentration which would cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in Subpart B of this Part.
SOURCE - any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be the discharge of pollutants.
XXIII -124
AP8313
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE - a
classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued
by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
STANDARD METHODS - methods for the examination of water and
wastewater published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
STATE - Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORM SEWER - a sewer that carries stormwater and other wash waters
or drainage, but excludes domestic, sanitary, commercial and industrial wastes.
Also called a storm drain.
STORMWATER - any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
SURFACE WATER POLLUTANT - stormwater or other wash water or
drainage carrying any pollutants which affect the characteristics of wastewater.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS - the total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with EPA laboratory procedures
(40 CFR, Part 136).
SUPERINTENDENT - the person designated by the City to supervise the
operation of the POTW or his/her duly authorized representative.
TOXIC POLLUTANT - any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other Acts.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT - any discharge of pollutants from the
City's facilities into waters of the State.
TURBIDITY - a condition in water or wastewater caused by the presence
of suspended matter, resulting in the scattering and absorption of light rays and
determined by measurements of light diffraction, usually reported in arbitrary
turbidity units.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER - any person who contributes, causes or
permits the contribution of wastewater into the City's POTW.
AP8313
WASTEWATER - the spent water of the community. Liquid and watercarried
industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, institutions and
governmental facilities whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to
the POTW.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES (FACILITIES) - the structures, equipment
and processes required for the collection, treatment and disposal of wastewater
and sewage sludge which are owned and operated by the City.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT - that
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of wastewater and
sewage sludge sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment plant,
sewage treatment plant or wastewater treatment works.
WATERS OF THE STATE or WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH - all
streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs,
reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or
accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or
private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or
any portion thereof.
ZERO DISCHARGE WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT SYSTEM - a
wastewater pretreatment system with no discharge to the sewer system.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart B. General Sewer Use Requirements.
Section 605. Prohibited Discharge Standards.
(A) General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other national, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(B) Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the
POTW including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees F (sixty (60)
degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR §261.21.
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than five (5.0) or more than
eleven (11.0), or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the
POTW or equipment.
(3) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to
the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage
with particles greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension, animal
guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or flushings, entrails,
whole blood, medical waste, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings grass clippings, rags, spent
grains, spent hops, waste paper, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, lime
slurries, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining
or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing
wastes.
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference with the POTW.
(5) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in
no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into
AP8313
the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees F (forty (40)
degrees C).
(6) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(7) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or ass through.
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the City in accordance with Subpart P of this Part.
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, odor problem, or a hazard to life, or
to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair.
(10) Wastewater with a true color in excess of one hundred (100)
platinum cobalt units, except by dischargers with a higher limit specified
in their permit.
(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations or any
radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by State or Federal laws or regulations.
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage and
noncontact cooling water, unless specifically authorized by the City.
(13) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(14) Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which
may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(15) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded to at least
particles less than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension. Garbage grinders
may be connected to public sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the
XXIII -128
AP8313
purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers,
providing that all requirements of applicable City ordinances are satisfied.
(16) Chlorine demand in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the wastewater facilities or which may cause the
effluent from the City's wastewater treatment facilities to violate any State
or Federal rules, regulations or permit requirements including, but not
limited to, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permits.
(17) Concentrations of BOD or TSS or NH3-N which exceed
specific threshold values without payment of a surcharge to cover the
additional costs of treatment. The current threshold value for BOD is
three hundred (300) mg/1 and for TSS is three hundred twenty-five (325)
mg/1 and for NH3-N is twenty (20) mg/ 1. Payment of a surcharge does
not prevent the City from initiating any actions available under Section
611 below, when the City determines that any other general discharge
limitations are violated. Furthermore, payment of a surcharge shall not
constitute an affirmative defense to any action taken pursuant to Section
611 below.
(18) Any substance which may cause the POTW's residues,
sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere
with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to
the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under §405 of the
Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under §405 of the
Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act,
the Toxic Substances Control Act, or other Federal or State criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(19) Slugs as defined in Section 604 of this Part.
(20) Isolation wastes or regulated medical waste (see definitions
under Section 604 of this Part.
(21) Wastewater causing two (2) readings on an explosion hazard
meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the
POTW, of more than five percent (5%) or any single reading over ten
percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit of the meter. Materials include,
but are not limited to: gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, paint products,
kerosene, toluene, xylene, ethers, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
XXIII -129
AP8313
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, or any
other flammable or explosive substances which the City, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or the Environmental Protection
Agency has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the City
POTW.
(22) Discharges prohibited by State or Federal regulations.
When the City determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW any of the above
enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW,
the City may: (i) Advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; (ii)
Develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the interference with the POTW;
or (iii) proceed with enforcement pursuant to the provisions of this Part. Pollutants,
substances or wastewater prohibited by this Section shall not be processed or stored in a
manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22,
1999, Section 1)
Section 606. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405- 471, are
hereby incorporated.
(A) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
City may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40
CFR §403.6(c).
(B) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the City shall
impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR
§403.6(e).
(C) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR §403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.
(D) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR §403.15.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Section 607. Local Limits.
(A) Limits for discharging pollutants which are of concern to the
POTW will be made using headworks loading analyses which have been
reviewed and approved by the EPA. Limits may be in the form of monthly
average concentration, daily maximum concentration or instantaneous
maximum concentration. Limits will be contained in the wastewater discharge
permits issued. The limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal
unless indicated otherwise. The City may impose mass limitations in addition to,
or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above.
(B) The City's objective in setting the limits is to restrict industrial
waste discharges to the. above-described concentrations which will not harm
either the sewer system or the treatment plant, will not have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb or public
property, or constitute a nuisance. The City may set lower or higher limitations
in specific cases if, in the opinion of the City, said actions will be consistent with
the above- stated objective. In the setting of such lower or higher limitations, the
City will give consideration to such factors as the volume of wastewater flow in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, degree of treatability of the waste,
and other pertinent factors. The City reserves the right to reevaluate and revise
the limitations as needed. All local limit changes will be submitted to the
approval authority for approval. The more stringent of EPA or Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania requirements and limitations shall apply in any case where
either is more stringent than those presently in force.
(C) An industrial user classified as a categorical industrial user shall be
required to meet the EPA categorical standards, if such standards are more
stringent than the local discharge limitations.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 608. State Requirements. State requirements and limitations on
discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal
requirements and limitations or those in this Part. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22,
1999, Section 1)
Section 609. Right of Revision. The City reserves the right to establish by
ordinance limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system
if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Section 601 of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
XXIII -131
AP8313
Section 610. Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The City may
impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 611. Remedies. If any wastewater is discharged or is proposed to be
discharged to the wastewater facilities in violation of the limitations or prohibitions
described in §602 of this Part, the City may:
(A) Reject the wastes.
(B) Require surcharge payments to be made to the City to cover its
added cost of handling, monitoring and treating the wastes which exceed
threshold values in accordance with rates set and approved by the City.
(C) Revoke a discharger's permit.
(D) Recover any and all actual costs expended by the City in correcting
any problems caused by discharges in violation of this Part.
(E) As authorized by this Part, take any other administrative sanctions,
enforcement actions and remedial actions as may be desirable, necessary or
permitted to achieve the purpose of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 612. Accidental Discharges.
(A) Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited or other substances regulated by this Part. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at
the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for
review, and shall be approved by the City before construction of the
facility. No user shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until
accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the City. Review and
approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial
user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this Part. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the
responsibility of the user to immediately notify the City of the incident. The
XXIII -132
AP8313
notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, and corrective actions.
(B) Written Notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental
discharge, the user shall submit to the City a detailed written report describing
the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
(C) Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call
in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall insure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedures.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart C. Pretreatment of Wastewater.
Section 613. Pretreatment Facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment
as necessary to comply with this Part and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in Section 605 of this
Part within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State or the City, whichever is
more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be acceptable to the City
before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such
facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions
of this Part. The issuance of any permit by the City for pretreatment facilities pursuant
to this Part does not constitute an approval of the design of any such pretreatment
system. The user remains responsible for the design, construction, operation and
maintenance of an acceptable pretreatment facility. The City shall have no
responsibility or liability to any user whose system fails for any reason whatsoever to
produce a discharge acceptable to the City. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999,
Section 1)
Section 614. Additional Pretreatment Measures.
(A) Whenever deemed necessary and with reasonable justification, the
City may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods,
designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers,
relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams
from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of
this Part.
(B) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are
necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of
grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved
by the City and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly,
as needed, by the user at their expense. Maintenance records shall be made
available to the City upon request.
(C) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
XXIII -134
AP8313
Section 615. Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans. At least once every two
(2) years, the City shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an
accidental discharge/slug control plan. The City may require any user to develop,
submit for approval and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the City may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/ slug control plan shall
address, at a minimum, the following:
(A) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(B) Description of stored chemicals that have the reasonable potential
to discharge to the POTW.
(C) Procedures for immediately notifying the City of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by Section 639 of this Part.
(D) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/ or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 616. Installation of Zero Discharge Pretreatment System. Prior to
installation of a zero discharge pretreatment system, the user must submit a zero
discharge pretreatment system design plan for City acceptance. In order to obtain City
acceptance, the user must demonstrate that he or she will provide full pretreatment of
all wastewater and will cease to discharge process wastewater to the facilities by an
effective date prescribed by the City and the user must obtain a zero discharge permit
from the City. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
XXIII -135
AP8313
Subpart D. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application.
Section 617. Wastewater Discharges. It shall be unlawful to discharge to the
POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the City in accordance with the
provisions of this Part, subject to State and Federal laws and regulations. (Ordinance
No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 618. Wastewater Analysis. When requested by the City, a user must
submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within ninety
(90) days of the request. The City is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and
may periodically require users to update this information. (Ordinance No. 271,
November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 619. Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement.
(A) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the City,
except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application
pursuant to Section 620 of this Part or the previous City Ordinance 61-1984 may
continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
(B) The City may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge
permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Part.
(C) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this Part and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Subparts J through L
of this Part. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a
permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State and
local law.
(D) No permit holder shall discharge industrial wastewater in excess of
the quantity, rate of discharge, concentrations or any other limits specified in the
permit. Any person desiring to modify his or her permit must first apply for an
amended permit.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 620. Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections. Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into
the POTW prior to the effective date of this Part, and does not have a permit currently,
and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days
XXIII -136
AP8313
after said date, apply to the City, for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with
Section 622 of this Part, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this Part except in
accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the City. (Ordinance No. 271,
November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 621. Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections. Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the
beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater
discharge permit, in accordance with Section 622 of this Part, must be filed at least
ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 622. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents. All users
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application.
The City may require all users to submit as part of an application the following
information:
(A) All information required by Section 634(B) of this Part.
(B) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the
facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the
POTW.
(C) Number of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual
hours of operation.
(D) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production.
(E) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(F) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation, and all points of discharge and pretreatment system plans.
(G) Time and duration of discharges.
AP8313
(H) Wastewater Constituents and Characteristics. Sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with §304(g) of the Act and 40 CFR,
Part 136, as amended.
(I) The name and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge, the
number of sampling events shall be determined by the City; and a written
statement as to whether or not applicable pretreatment standards are being met,
and if not, whether additional in -plant modification and additional pretreatment
is required for the user to meet such applicable pretreatment standards.
If additional pretreatment or in-plant modification will be required
to meet the pretreatment standards, the user will provide a schedule by which to
achieve the standards in a timely manner. The schedule will be reported as the
pretreatment compliance schedule. The following conditions shall apply to this
schedule:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g.
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing construction, completing construction).
No increment shall exceed nine (9) months.
(2) Not later than fourteen (14) days following each completion
date in the schedule, the user shall submit a progress report to the City
including at a minimum, whether or not, he or she complied with the
increments of progress. If such increment of progress was not completed
on time, the user shall also report the date on which he or she expects to
complete the increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps
being taken by the user to return to the schedule established. In no event
shall completion dates be more than nine (9) months apart.
(K) Information on the disposal of substances to the POTW which are
considered hazardous under 40 CFR, Part 261.
(L) Signatory requirements.
(M) Applicable fees.
(N) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the City to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate
applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
)0G11 -138
AP8313
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 623. Application Signatories and Certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications, user reports and inspection reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 624. Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions. The City shall evaluate the
data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Based on the
application, the City may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and
conditions enumerated in the permit.
The City may deny a request for a permit when the information supplied indicates the
user will be unable to reasonably meet the City's standards. Any person denied a
permit may request a hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 612(7).
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
XXIII -139
AP8313
Subpart E. Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process.
Section 625. Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration. A wastewater discharge
permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the
effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period
less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the City. Each wastewater discharge permit
will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. The permit may be
administratively extended by the City as long as the duration of the permit does not
exceed five (5) years. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 626. Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents. Wastewater discharge
permits shall be expressly subject to specific permit provisions contained therein as well
as to provisions of this Part and all other regulations, user charges and fees established
by the City. Wastewater discharge permits may include such conditions as are
reasonably deemed necessary by the City to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect
worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient
air quality, and protect against damage to the City's collection system and POTW. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(A) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years.
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the City in accordance with
Section 629 of this Part, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit.
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
the average and or maximum wastewater constituents permitted in the
wastewater discharge.
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency and sample type based on Federal, State and local law, and
reporting frequency.
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
AP8313
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State or local law.
(B) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum volume or rate of
discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization.
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works.
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of
spill and slug prevention, control plans, solvent management plans, toxic
organic management plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated or nonroutine discharges.
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization
plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment.
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those
which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge
permit.
(8) Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical
reports and plant records relating to wastewater discharges.
(9) Compliance schedules.
AP8313
(10) Provisions for authorized City employees and agents to
enter and inspect the premises, including provisions for copying records,
inspecting monitoring equipment and sampling effluent.
(11) Compliance with Federal, State and other government laws,
rules and regulations.
(12) Signatory requirements.
(13) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to
ensure compliance with this Part, and State and Federal laws, rules and
regulations.
(C) The zero discharge permit may require, among other things, that:
(1) The zero discharge system be installed as proposed and be
fully operational.
(2) All sewer drain lines in the facility be capped off and sealed.
(3) The user notify the City in writing, and obtain a revised
wastewater discharge permit from the City before resuming discharge if
he/she wishes to reconnect to the sewer.
(4) City personnel be authorized to enter such premises without
delay and at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection and as
otherwise authorized by this Part.
(D) The nonsignificant user permit may include the items listed in
subsections (A) and (B) of this Section.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 627. Wastewater Discharge Permit Reconsiderations. The City may
provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person,
including the user, may petition the City to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance.
(A) Failure to submit a timely written request for review shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
AP8313
(B) The petitioner, in its written request, must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
(C) During the pendency of a written request for a reconsideration
and/or an appeal, the effective date of the wastewater discharge permit shall be
stayed; provided, however, that the City shall have the right to take any and all
steps necessary to cause a cessation of any discharge which would cause an
immediate threat to the health and safety of any person and/or would constitute
a threat to the integrity of the sanitary sewer system or the POTW. This Section
shall only be operative to stay the effective date of the wastewater discharge
permit where the City has affirmatively responded to the application and
granted a stay for such reasonable time as the City deems necessary to consider
the requests for reconsideration and/or appeal and, furthermore, said stay of the
permit shall only be effective for the specific provisions of the permit which have
either been appealed and/or a request for reconsideration has been submitted by
the applicant. The request for reconsideration and/ or appeal shall not be
considered a stay of the entire permit, but only for those specific sections of the
permit from which the applicant is seeking relief.
(D) The City shall act on the written request within a reasonable time
period, not to exceed ninety (90) days. The City's decision not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered a final
administrative action provided that the petitioner may file an appeal pursuant to
Section 673 hereunder.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 628. Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification. The City may modify a
wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
(A) To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(B) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(C) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
XXIII -143
AP8313
(D) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the City's POTW, City personnel or the receiving waters.
(E) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit.
(F) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting.
(G) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR §403.13.
(H) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
(I) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
A user may apply for modification of a discharge permit by filing a new application
form showing substantial significant and material changes that have been proposed
since filing the original application. No application for modification will be considered
unless it demonstrates such changes.
After a review of the application and inspection of the facility, the City may, at its
discretion, modify the original permit. If such application is rejected, the existing permit
shall remain in full force and effect.
The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least thirty
(30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the
permit shall include a hearing on modifications to his or her permit in accordance with
the provisions of Subpart L of this Part. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999,
Section 1)
Section 629. Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer. Wastewater discharge
permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at
least thirty (30) days advance notice to the City and the City approves the wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the City must include a written certification by
the new owner or operator which:
(A) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes.
(B) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
XXIII -144
AP8313
(C) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit
void as of the date of facility transfer. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section
1)
Section 630. Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation. The City may revoke a
wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
(A) Failure to provide prior notification to the City of changed
conditions pursuant to Section 638 of this Part.
(B) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application.
(C) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(D) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(E) Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and
records.
(F) Failure of the user to meet the effluent limitations contained in the
wastewater discharge permit.
(G) Failure to pay fines after the appeal process has been exhausted.
(H) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(I) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(J) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application.
(K) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility.
(L) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this Part.
AP8313
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer
of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are
void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. (Ordinance
No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 631. Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance. A user with an expiring
wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by
submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 626 of this Part, a
minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater
discharge permit. Having met this requirement the user's existing permit shall remain
in effect until a new permit is issued. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999,
Section 1)
Section 632. Reinstatement of Permit. Before any further discharge of industrial
wastewater may be made by a user whose permit has been revoked, the user must
apply for, and be granted, a reinstatement of the terminated permit, or a new permit, as
the City may require, and pay any delinquent fees and all fines, charges and other costs
occasioned by the violation. Costs shall include, but not be limited to: inspection,
monitoring, sampling and related expenses; restitution to other affected parties;
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City in enforcing the permit; disconnecting
and reconnecting the user to the facility; and other actual damages incurred due to the
violation; provided that where there is a bona fide dispute between the user and any
other affected party, the user shall not be required to pay restitution so long as the user
shall show evidence of insurance or other security that the user can pay said restitution
to the affected party if it is ultimately determined that the user is liable to said third
parties. Any such fines, fees, charges and costs shall be paid for by the user before any
new permit will be issued, except for the provision for disputed restitution set forth
above. When all costs cannot be readily determined, the City may require and accept a
bond or irrevocable letter of credit which it considers sufficient and which will be
subject to appropriate adjustment after all costs have been determined. (Ordinance No.
271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 633. Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions.
(A) If another municipality, or user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the City shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
(B) Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (A)
above, the City shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
AP8313
(1) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality.
(2) An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW.
(3) Such other information as the City may deem necessary.
(C) An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (A) above,
shall contain the following conditions:
(1) A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a
sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this Part and local
limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in Section 607 of this
Part. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must
be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City's ordinance or
local limits.
(2) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis.
(3) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the City; and
which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing
municipality and the City.
(4) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide
the City with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities.
(5) Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW.
(6) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge.
(7) A provision ensuring the City access to the facilities of users
located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries
for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed
necessary by the City.
XXIII -147
AP8313
(8) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the
terms of the intermunicipal agreement.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart F. Wastewater Monitoring and Reporting Requirements.
Section 634. Baseline Monitoring Reports.
(A) Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR §403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW
shall submit to the City a report which contains the information listed in
subsection (B) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the City a
report which contains the information listed in subsection (13) below. A new
source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(B) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(1) Identifying Information. The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.
(2) Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
(3) Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the
POTW from the regulated processes.
(4) Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow
use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR §403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of Pollutants.
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to
each regulated process.
(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
XXIII -149
AP8313
standard or by the City, of regulated pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and
long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be
reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations
and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
Section 642 of this Part.
(c) Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in Section 643 of this Part.
(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements. (Note: For certain users, the authorized user
and the qualified professional may be the same individual.)
(7) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment
and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than
the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
A compliance schedule pursuant to this Section must meet the
requirements set out in Section 635 of this Part.
(8) Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 623 of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 635. Compliance Schedule Progress Reports. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 634(B)(7) of this Part:
(A) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not
limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation).
(B) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months.
)(XIII -150
AP8313
(C) The user shall submit a progress report to the City no later than
fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule.
(D) In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the City.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 636. Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to
such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the City a report
containing the information described in Section 634(B)(4), (5), (6) and (8) of this Part.
For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance
with the procedures in 40 CFR §403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure
of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with Section 626 of this Part. (Ordinance No. 271,
November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 637. Monitoring and Periodic Self-Monitoring Compliance Reports.
(A) Sampling and analysis of industrial wastewater for the purpose of
compliance determinations with respect to Subpart B prohibitions and
limitations shall be done through industry self-monitoring and through
monitoring done by the City. All analyses, including sampling results submitted
in support of any application reports, evidence or required by any permit or
order shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40
CFR, Part 136, and amendments thereto or, if 40 CFR, Part 136, does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, in accordance
with procedures approved by EPA. The City may require an independent
laboratory to conduct the sampling and analysis at the user's own cost if the user
does not monitor and analyze in accordance with EPA procedures, specifically 40
CFR, Part 136.
XXIII -151
AP8313
(B) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the City in the user's permit, but in no case less than twice per year, submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic selfmonitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 623
of this Part. The user must also submit a self-monitoring report with the results
on a form prescribed by the City, if so requested by the City.
(C) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order
shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
(D) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this Section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the City, using the
procedures prescribed in Section 642 of this Part, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in the report.
(E) The user shall ensure compliance with the recordkeeping
requirements of Section 645 of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 638. Reports of Changed Conditions. Each user must notify the City of
any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the
nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change.
(A) The City may require the user to submit such information as may
be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 622 of
this Part.
(B) The City may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section
624 of this Part or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section
628 of this Part in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
AP8313
(C) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow variations as stated in the user's permit and the discharge
of any previously unreported pollutants.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 639. Reports of Potential Problems/ Notifications of Accidental Spills.
(A) In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch
discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the
user shall immediately telephone and notify the City of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
(B) Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the City, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property,: nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which
may be imposed pursuant to this Part.
(C) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in subsection (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 640. Reports from Unpermitted Users. All users not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the City as the City
may require. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 641. Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the City within twentyfour
(24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City within
thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to
resample if the City monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the City
Mil -153
AP8313
samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of
this sampling. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 642. Analytical Requirements. All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report, for the purpose of compliance with this Part; or in fulfillment of
the user's permit self-monitoring requirements, shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR, Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR, Part 136, does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses
must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. (Ordinance
No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 643. Sample Collection.
(A) Except as indicated in subsection (B) below, the City reserves the
right to require flow proportional composite samples whenever the user is
required to collect wastewater samples. When flow proportional sampling is
infeasible or derives no benefit, the City may authorize the use of time
proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being
discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous discharge limits. The City will review the appropriate method of
sampling with the user.
(B) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
(C) For automatic samplers, the intake line hose must be at least onefourth
(1/4) inches (six-tenths (0.6) cm) internal diameter and the velocity in the
intake line must be maintained at least at two (2) feet per second.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 644. Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on
the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
XXIII -154
AP8313
Section 645. Recordkeeping.
(A) Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Part shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this Part and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed
the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3)
years unless there is pending a dispute of litigation involving the subject of these
records, in which case these records are to be kept for a period of three (3) years
following resolution of such litigation or dispute.
(B) All users who discharge or propose to discharge wastewater
directly or indirectly to the facilities shall maintain records which substantiate
any information supplied in permit applications. Such records shall include, but
not be limited to, pH measurements or pH tapes, chemical usage data, log sheets,
hazardous waste manifests, water meter readings, effluent monitoring reports,
self-monitoring compliance reports and any other informational requirements of
this Part or required by a user's wastewater discharge permit or any applicable
State and Federal laws and regulations. These records are to be kept for a period
of three (3) years unless there is pending a dispute of litigation involving the
subject of these records, in which case these records are to be kept for a period of
three (3) years following resolution of such litigation or dispute.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 646. Selling, Closing or Moving a Business. Any user who will be
selling, closing or moving a business from its present location must notify the City in
writing thirty (30) days before disposing of any process waste, associated with the move
or the cessation of business, into the sewer system if said waste is not currently
permitted to be discharged. The City has a shutdown facility procedure for the
discharge of wastes not previously permitted into the sewer system which must be
adhered to upon selling, closing or moving a business or operation. Failure to notify
the City prior to discharging such waste into the facilities may subject the user to civil
or criminal penalties in accordance with this Part. The facility shutdown procedure
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(A) A written plan detailing how each chemical and solution is to be
discharged to the sewer system, with or without treatment.
XXIII -155
AP8313
(B) The information required in subsection (1) above must be reviewed
and approved by the City prior to any solutions or chemicals being disposed of
into the sewer system. Only those solutions approved by the City may be
discharged to the sewer system. The City must be informed at least forty-eight
(48) hours in advance of when chemicals are to be discharged to the sewer.
(C) The City reserves the right to request information on the final
disposition of any material that the City prohibits to be discharged to the sewer.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 647. Temporary Business Closings.
(A) A permitted user shall give City personnel written notice within
five (5) working days prior to ceasing operations which will be of ninety (90)
days or greater in duration.
(B) A permitted user shall give City personnel notice five (5) working
days prior to reactivating operations. The user shall not reactivate operations if
the permit is suspended until after receiving written approval from the City
following a City inspection.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 648. Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste.
(A) Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of
a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under
40 CFR, Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR, Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the
type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than
one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the
hazardous constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar
month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All
notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after
the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications or changed conditions must be submitted under Section 638 of this
XXIII -156
AP8313
Part. The notification requirement in this Section does not apply to pollutants
already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under
the self-monitoring requirements of Sections 634, 636 and 637 of this Part.
(B) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (A)
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR §§261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than
fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of
any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR §§261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a one (1) time notification. Subsequent months during which
the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not
require additional notification.
(C) In the case of any new regulations under §3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the City, the EPA Regional
Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the
effective date of such regulations.
(D) In the case of any notification made under this Section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
(E) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance
not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Part, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
XXIII -157
AP8313
Subpart G. Inspection Powers and Compliance Monitoring.
Section 649. Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling. The City and its agents
shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is
complying with all requirements of this Part and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the City ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying,
and the performance of any additional duties.
(A) Powers. Inspections shall be conducted at the discretion of the
City. Duly authorized employees and agents of the City, upon presenting
identification and appropriate credentials, are authorized:
(1) To enter without unreasonable delay and at reasonable times
those premises (public or private) of any person of class of user either
receiving services from the City or applying for services from the City in
which a discharge source or treatment system is located or which records
required to be maintained pursuant to this Part.
(2) During regular working hours and at other reasonable times,
and within reasonable limits and in a reasonable manner, to have access to
and to copy records pertaining to this Part, the pretreatment program,
RCRA, and waste disposal, inspect any monitoring equipment or method
required pursuant to this Part and sample and/or analyze any effluent
which the owner or operator of such discharge source is required to
sample and/or analyze under this Part and any Part adopted pursuant
thereto.
(3) During such on-site inspections, to carry out all inspections,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine,
independent of information supplied by any person discharging into the
facilities, compliance or noncompliance with City pretreatment
requirements.
(B) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, the City will be permitted to enter without delay for the
purposes of performing specific responsibilities. The user may provide an escort
for the City at his or her discretion.
AP8313
(C) The City shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or
metering of the user's operations.
(D) The City may require the user to install at his or her own cost
monitoring or metering equipment as necessary to facilitate the accurate
observation, sampling, and measurements of the wastewater discharge. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices
used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated semi-annually
or at a frequency recommended by the manufacturer, to ensure their accuracy.
The monitoring and metering equipment shall be located and maintained on the
user's premises. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship to the user, the City may allow such facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area, with the approval of the public agency having
jurisdiction over such street or sidewalk, and located so the discharge will not be
obstructed by public utilities, landscaping or parked vehicles.
(E) When more than one user discharges into a common sewer, the
City may require installation of separating monitoring and metering equipment
for each user. When there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents
and characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the City
may require that separate monitoring and metering facilities be installed for each
separate discharge.
(F) Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with City ordinances and any
applicable construction standards required by the City or by local, State or
Federal law.
(G) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the City and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
(H) Unreasonable delays in allowing the City to the user's premises
shall be a violation of this Part.
(I) The City shall comply with the user's reasonable health and safety
policies, including the use of personal protective equipment.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Section 650. Search Warrants. If the City has been refused access to a building,
structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this Part, or that there is a need to inspect
and/ or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City
designed to verify compliance with this Part or any permit or order issued hereunder,
or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
City may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Court of Common Pleas of Berks
County, Pennsylvania. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 651. User Documentation. The City may, by ordinance, order, permit or
letter, require any person who discharges into the facilities to:
(A) Establish and maintain records.
(B) Make reports.
(C) Install, calibrate, use and maintain monitoring equipment or
methods (including where appropriate, biological monitoring methods).
(D) Sample and/or analyze discharges and effluent (in accordance with
the method, at the locations, at the intervals and in the manner as the City shall
prescribe).
(E) Provide other information relating to discharges into the facilities
of the project as the City may reasonably require to ensure compliance with
prescribed pretreatment. Such information shall include, but not be limited to,
those records, reports and procedures required by applicable State and Federal
law.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart H. Confidential Information.
Section 652. EPA Regulations. The EPA regulations, 40 CFR §§2.201 through
2.302 addressing confidential business information, are hereby incorporated by
reference. All City employees and City agents are bound by these requirements.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 653. Public Information. Information and data on a user obtained from
reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge
permits and monitoring programs, and from the City's inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City, that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. Any such request
must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested
and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret
processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving
the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
"effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR §2.302 will not be reorganized as confidential
information and will be available to the public without restriction.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart I. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance.
Section 654. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance. The City shall
publish at least annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality
where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean:
(A) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements
taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average
limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount.
(B) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH).
(C) Any other discharge violation that has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public.
(D) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(E) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining
final compliance.
(F) Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
(G) Failure to accurately report noncompliance, including failure to
report and resample in accordance with Section 641.
XXIII -162
AP8313
(H) Any other violation(s) which the City determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart J. Administrative Enforcement Remedies.
Section 655. Notification of Violation. When the City finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the City may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days
of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted by the user to the City. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this Section shall limit the authority of the City to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of
violation. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 656. Consent Orders. The City may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period
specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 658 and 659 of this Part and shall be
judicially enforceable. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 657. Show Cause Hearing. The City may order a user which has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
to appear before the City and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request
that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be
a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ordinance
No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 658. Compliance Orders. When the City finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into
compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within
the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
MI' -164
AP8313
including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize
the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend
the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor
does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ordinance No. 271,
November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 659. Cease and Desist Orders. When the City finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the City may issue an order to the
user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(A) Immediately comply with all requirements.
(B) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/ or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999,
Section 1)
Section 660. Administrative Civil Penalties.
(A) When the City finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provisions of this Part, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may fine
such user in an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand ($25,000) per day for
each violation regardless of jurisdictional boundaries. Such fines shall be
assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other longterm
average discharge limits, fines may be assessed for each day during the
period of violation. The foregoing administrative civil penalties shall e enforced
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 664 and 672 of this Part.
(B) Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after sixty (60) calendar
days, be assessed a late charge of 10 percent (10%) APR. A lien against the user's
property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties.
(C) Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the City to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within
thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the City
XXIII -165
AP8313
may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful,
the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the
user. The City may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement
actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
(D) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 661. Emergency Suspensions. The City may immediately suspend a
user's discharge, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The City may also immediately
suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
(A) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City may take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The City may allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that
the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in
Section 662 of this Part are initiated against the user.
(B) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the City prior to the date of any show cause or
termination hearing under Section 662 of this Part.
Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any
emergency suspension under this Section. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999,
Section 1)
Section 662. Termination of Discharge. In addition to the provisions in Section
630 of this Part, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
(A) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.
XXIII -166
AP8313
(B) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.
(C) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge.
(D) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling.
(E) Violation of the pretreatment standards in Subpart B of this Part.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an
opportunity to show cause under Section 657 of this Part why the proposed action
should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the City shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ordinance No. 271,
November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart K. Judicial Enforcement Remedies.
Section 663. Injunctive Relief. When the City finds a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may
petition the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County, Pennsylvania through the City's
Attorney for appropriate legal and equitable relief for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed
by this Part on activities of the user. The City may also seek such other action as is
appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to
conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ordinance No.
271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 664. Civil Penalties.
(A) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of
this Part, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum
civil penalty of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation, per day.
In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
(B) The City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.
(C) In determining the amount of civil liability, there shall be taken into
account all relevant circumstances including, but not limited to, the extent of
harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the
user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
(D) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 665. Criminal Prosecution. A user who willfully or negligently violates
any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or who willfully or negligently
introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property
XXEII -168
AP8313
damage, or any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed, or
required to be maintained pursuant to this Part, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued under this Part or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device of method required under the Part, may be subject to criminal
prosecution in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania. Crimes
Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. §101, et seq. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 666. Remedies Nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this Part are
not exclusive. The City may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the City may take
other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart L. Supplemental Enforcement Action.
Section 667. Performance Bonds. The City may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision
of this Part, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory
bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the City to be
necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999,
Section 1)
Section 668. Liability Insurance. The City may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision
of this Part, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it
has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW
caused by its discharge. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 669. Public Nuisances. A violation of any provision of this Part, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the City. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject
to the provisions of the City Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the
City for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 670. Falsifying Information. Any person who knowingly makes any
false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan
or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part, or
wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Part, is subject to
prosecution in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code
pertaining to perjury and falsification in official matters pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. §4901,
et seq. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 671. Contractor Listing. Users which have not achieved compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a
contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City. Existing contracts for the
sale of goods or services to the City held by a user found to be in significant
noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the
discretion of the City. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Section 672. Assessment of Civil Penalties.
(A) Pursuant to provision of the Pennsylvania Penalty Bill (Act 9 of
1992), providing for enhanced penalty authority for publicly owned treatment
works which are authorized to enforce industrial pretreatment standards for
industrial waste discharges, and in addition to proceeding under any other
remedy available at law or equity for violation of pretreatment standards and/or
requirements, the City, as the operator of a publicly owned treatment works,
may assess a civil penalty upon an industrial user for violation of any of the
terms and provisions of this Part. The penalty may be assessed whether or not
the violation was willful or negligent. The civil penalty shall not exceed twentyfive
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day for each violation, regardless of
jurisdictional boundaries. Each violation for each separate day shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense under this Section.
(B) As part of any notice of assessment of civil penalties issued by the
City to an industrial user, there shall also be included a description of the
applicable appeals process to be followed, including the name, address and
telephone number of the person responsible for accepting such appeal, on behalf
of the City.
(C) For purposes of this Section, a single operational upset which leads
to simultaneous violations of more than one (1) pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be treated as a single violation as required by Federal Water
Pollution Control Act. The City may, however, recover its costs for
reestablishing the operation of the treatment works in addition to any civil
penalty imposed under this Section.
(D) The City shall publicly adopt a formal, written civil penalty
assessment policy (in its enforcement response plan) and make it publicly
available. Each industrial discharger participating in the pretreatment program
shall be given written notice of the policy. The penalty assessment policy shall
consider:
(1) Damage to air, water, land or other natural resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and their uses.
(2) Costs of restoration and abatement.
(3) Savings resulting to the person in consequence of the
violation.
AP8313
(4) History of past violations.
(5) Deterrence of future violations.
(6) Other relevant factors.
(E) Uses of Penalties. All civil penalties collected pursuant to this
Section shall be placed by the City in a restricted account and shall only be used
by the City and the publicly owned treatment works for the following uses:
(1) The repair of damage and any additional maintenance
needed or any additional costs imposed as a result of the violation for
which the penalty was imposed.
(2) Pay any penalties imposed on the City or the publicly
owned treatment works by the Federal or State government for violation
of pretreatment standards.
(3) For the costs incurred by the City or publicly owned
treatment works to investigate and take the enforcement action that
resulted in a penalty being imposed.
(4) For the monitoring of discharges in the pretreatment
program and for capital improvements to the treatment works, including
sewage collection lines, which may be required by the pretreatment
program.
(5) Any remaining funds may be used for capital improvements
to the treatment works, including collection lines.
(F) Injunctive Relief. The City shall have the power to obtain
injunctive relief to enforce compliance with or restrain any violation of any
pretreatment requirement or standard pursuant to and in accordance with the
provisions of Pennsylvania Penalty Bill (Act 9 of 1992), 40 CFR §403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A)
and any other applicable statute and/or common law. Injunctive relief shall be
available upon the showing of one or more of the following:
(1) A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent
danger or substantial harm to the POTW or the public.
(2) A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the environment.
AP8313
(3) A discharge from an industrial user causes the POTW to
violate any condition of its discharge permit.
(4) The industrial user has shown a lack of ability or intention to
comply with a pretreatment standard.
Notwithstanding the preceding subsection, an injunction affecting an industrial
operation not directly related to the condition or violation in question, may be
issued if the Court determines that other enforcement procedures would not be
adequate to affect prompt correction of the condition or violation. In addition to
an injunction, the Court in any such proceedings may levy civil penalties in
accordance with Act 9 of 1992 and this Part.
(G) Appeal. An industrial user assessed with a civil penalty under the
terms of this Section shall have thirty (30) days to pay the proposed penalty in
full, or, if the industrial user wishes to contest either the amount of the penalty or
the fact of the violation, the industrial user must file an appeal of the action
within thirty (30) days pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S.A. (relating to administrative law
and procedure). Failure to appeal within this period shall result in a waiver of all
legal rights to contest the violation or the amount of the penalty.
(H) The penalty authorized in this Section is intended to be concurrent
and cumulative, and the provisions of this Section shall not abridge or alter any
right of action or remedy, now or hereafter existing in equity, or under the
common law or statutory law, criminal or civil, available to a person, the City,
Township (Authority) or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(I) Such penalty assessments may be added to the user's next
scheduled sewer service or sewer surcharge bill.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 673. Administrative Hearings/ Appeals.
(A) Right to Appeal. Any person or user aggrieved by any order,
assessment of penalty, issuance of permit or denial of permit may appeal said
order, assessment, issuance of permit or denial of permit after service of the same
by the City.
(B) Right to Hearing. Any order, assessment of penalty, issuance of
permit or denial of permit shall inform the user that a written request for an
appeal on the alleged violations, order, issuance of permit or denial of permit,
and/ or penalty must be filed within thirty (30) days after service of the notice to
XXIII -173
AP8313
preserve the user's right to hearing. The notice will be deemed properly served
upon the user if a copy is served upon him or her personally, or sent by
registered or certified mail to his or her last known address, or if he or she is
served with notice by an other method of service now or hereafter authorized in
civil actions under the laws of the State. In an emergency situation, if written
request for an appeal/hearing is not made by the user within thirty (30) days of
the service of notice, the user will be foreclosed from hearing regarding any
penalty assessed. In a nonemergency situation if written request for a hearing is
not made by the user within thirty (30) days of the service of notice, the user will
be foreclosed from hearing regarding any order, assessment of penalty, issuance
of permit or denial of permit.
(C) Appeal Process, Hearing Request and Conference Option.
(1) As stated immediately above, written request for
appeal/hearing must be filed with the Director of Public Works within
thirty (30) days from the date that the City took the action which is the
subject of the manner of the appeal to preserve the user's rights.
(2) All appeals shall contain the following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the
applicant.
(b) The date on which the City took the action which is
the subject matter of the appeal.
(c) The reason(s) for such appeal, and a specification of
objections setting forth the manner in which the appellant is
aggrieved and the relevant issues to be resolved by the Hearing
Board.
(d) A statement detailing the relief demanded by the
appellant.
(3) A true and correct copy of the written appeal shall be served
on a City Solicitor personally or by registered or certified mail within
forty-eight (48) hours after the appeal is filed.
(4) Conference Option. At the time an appeal is requested, the
user may also request a conference with the City prior to the scheduling of
an administrative hearing. Said conference will include appropriate
members of the City staff and its agents. Violations and penalties will be
XXIII -174
AP8313
explained and discussed. Electing his option does not foreclose and/or
affect the user's right to hearing provided that the written request for
hearing was filed within thirty (30) days of service as noted above. The
purpose of this option is to provide the user with an informal forum
within which to discuss the alleged violations and to expedite conclusion
and/or resolution of outstanding enforcement actions. If resolution is not
reached within ninety (90) days from the date of the scheduled conference
the City shall schedule the matter for formal hearing. In any event either
party may request a formal hearing at any point during the conference
proceedings.
(5) Hearing Protocol.
(a) Upon receipt of the appeal the Hearing Board shall
schedule a hearing for the appellant and give the latter written
notice of the time, date and place of such hearing. A hearing will
not be held if waived by the appellant or if the parties stipulate all
of the essential facts or agree to submit direct or rebuttal testimony
or documentary evidence in affidavit form, sworn or affirmed on
personal knowledge, or by deposition.
(b) Written briefs of the parties or their counsel may be
filed with the Hearing Board and served on the opposing party,
within five (5) days after the hearing and prior to any adjudication.
(c) At any hearing, parties shall have the right of
presentation of evidence, cross-examination, objection, motion and
argument. The Hearing Board shall not be bound by technical
rules of evidence but all relevant and material evidence of
reasonable probative value shall be admissible. All witnesses shall
be sworn or shall affirm.
(d) The Hearing Board shall not be required to maintain a
verbatim transcript of the hearings.
(e) At the conclusion of the proceedings, and after
consideration of the evidence and briefs of the parties, if any, the
Hearing Board shall issue an adjudication which shall contain
findings of facts and conclusions of law, and, if appropriate, an
order. A written copy of such adjudication shall be mailed to each
party.
XXIII -175
AP8313
(f) The decision and adjudication of the Hearing Board
shall be final and binding upon the parties subject to any further
right of appeal which may be provided by law.
(g) Failure to perfect an appeal in the manner and form
required by this section shall be sufficient for dismissing the
appeal.
(h) The action of the City shall be final as to any person
who fails to file an appeal or to perfect an appeal pursuant to this
Section.
(D) Hearing Board.
(1) An Industrial Hearing Board shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of Council for resolution of differences
between the City and any aggrieved party of any improved property on
matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this
Part by the City and to hear any appeals filed by such aggrieved parties.
No one appointed to the Industrial Board herein, either as a representative
at large, legal representative, industrial representative, or registered
professional engineer shall have any right or power to sit, vote, act or in
any way participate with regard to any appeal of any industry with which
it is in any way connected. Board members shall refrain from taking any
such action on any such matter and shall avoid any conflict of interest or
appearance of impropriety.
(2) One (1) member of the Board shall be a member of the Public
Works Department; one (1) member shall be a professional engineer
skilled in practice of sanitary engineering; one (1) member shall be a
representative of industry or manufacturing enterprise; one (1) member
shall be a lawyer; and one (1) member shall be selected at large for his
interest in accomplishing the objectives of this Part.
(3) The initial appointments to the Board shall be for the
following terms:
(a) Public Works Department representative - five (5)
years.
(b) Registered professional engineer (sanitary/
environmental/civil/chemical engineer) - four (4) years.
)0(111 -176
AP8313
(c) Industrial representative - three (3) years.
(d) Legal representative - two (2) years.
(e) Representative at large - one (1) year.
All succeeding terms shall be for a period of five (5)years. The Mayor,
with the consent of Council, shall appoint representatives to fill vacancies
on the Board to complete unexpired terms. Interim appointments may be
permitted to serve an additional full term on the Board.
(4) The powers of the Hearing Board shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(a) To hear appeals from any person aggrieved by the
application of this Part including, but not limited to, any order or
decision made or issued by the City.
(b) To make rules with regard to conducting its hearings,
such rules to be submitted to Council for their advice and consent.
(c) To make such findings of fact as may be required by
the application this Part.
(d) To decide questions presented.
(5) Any party aggrieved by any decision of said Hearing Board
shall have the right to file an appeal under the Local Agency Law to the
Court of Common Pleas of the County of Berks within thirty (30) days of
said decision; however, said appeal shall not act as a supersedes of any
final order.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 674. Petitions for Declaratory Rulings. Any person affected by any
statutory provision administered by the City or affected by any rule or order of the City
may, in accordance with State law and this Part petition the City for a declaratory ruling
as to the applicability of such statute, rule or order. This petition shall clearly and
concisely identify:
(A) The precise statute, rule or order under which a declaratory ruling
is sought.
AP8313
(B) How the petitioner is affected by the statute, rule or order.
(C) The petitioner's position on how the applicable statute, rule or
order should be interpreted, including citations to any applicable documents or
law that support the petitioner's position.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 675. Costs. In addition to such administrative, civil or criminal fines as
may be imposed, any user who violates any provisions of this Part or any condition of a
permit, or plan approval related thereof, shall be financially responsible and liable to
the City in addition to normal service charges and surcharges for industrial
investigation and monitoring of compliance with this Part including, but not limited to,
the following:
(A) Cost of mileage, labor and materials incurred in detecting and
correcting the violation.
(B) Laboratory analysis costs associated with detecting and correcting
the violation.
(C) Additional treatment costs caused by the violation or association
with detecting and correcting the violation.
(D) Costs of any additional equipment acquired or expended by the
City for detecting or correcting the violation.
(E) Repair and/ or replacement of any part of the facility damaged by
the violation.
(F) Any liability, damages, fines or penalties incurred by the City as a
result of the violation.
(G) Costs incurred in enforcing compliance, including prosecution
and/ or settlement of outstanding violations.
(H) Other costs as are associated with the prosecution, negotiation
and/or settlement of a violation.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 676. Denial of Access. If the City or its duly authorized employees and
agents, upon presenting identification and appropriate credentials, are denied access to
XXIII -178
AP8313
carry out inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures as described in this Part,
the City may immediately institute civil proceedings, including proceedings for
necessary injunctive relief, or criminal proceedings. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22,
1999, Section 1)
Section 677. Inspection of Connections. If any person shall construct, install,
alter or repair any sewer or connect to any sewer in violation of the requirements of this
Part the City may, in its discretion, order or direct such person to uncover and fully
expose any or all portions of such sewer or connection and afford the City and its
representatives adequate opportunity for examination and inspection of the work. If
the connection and appurtenances thereto shall be found not to be in full accord with
the requirements of this Part and the standards established and address its provisions,
then the City may serve the offender with a written notice as provided in Subpart J.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart M. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations.
Section 678. Upset.
(A) For the purposes of this Section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
(B) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of subsection (3) below are met.
(C) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or
other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of
the upset.
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures.
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the City
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset. A written
submission must be provided within five (5) days:
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue.
(c) Steps being taken andjor planned to reduce, eliminate
and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(D) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
XXIII -180
AP8313
(E) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
(F) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the
treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 679. Prohibited Discharge Standards. A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general
prohibitions in Section 605(A) of this Part or the specific prohibitions in Section 605(B)
of this Part except Sections 605(B)(1), (2), (3), (8), (19), (20), (21) and (22) if it can prove
that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that
either:
(A) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference.
(B) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 680. Bypass.
(A) For the purposes of this Section:
(1) Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams
from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(2) Severe Property Damage means substantial physical damage
to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
XXIII -181
AP8313
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.
Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in
production.
(B) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for
essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of subsections (C) and (D) of this Section.
(C) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the City, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if
possible.
(D) A user shall submit oral notice to the City of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its
cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the
bypass. The City may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
(E) Bypass is prohibited, and the City may take an enforcement action
against a user for a bypass, unless:
(1) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage.
(2) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance.
(3) The user submitted notices as required under subsections
(C) and (D) of this Section.
XXIII -182
AP8313
(F) The City may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the City determines that it will meet the three conditions listed
in subsection (E) of this Section.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Subpart N. Wastewater Treatment Rates.
Section 681. Surcharge Rate.
(A) Purpose. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any
person or municipality whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be admitted into the sewerage system by the City, provided that
such agreement does not violate any national pretreatment standards or local
limits, and subject to payment of a surcharge therefore by such person or
municipality or by proper and continuous pretreatment prior to discharge into
the sewerage system. The surcharge shall be based on present invested costs and
operating costs. The City may impose mass limitation, concentration limits
based on mass proportion or selected industrial reductions methods in allocating
the maximum pollutant loading to the wastewater treatment plant. In
accordance with Section 607, changes to local limits must be submitted to the
approval authority for approval.
(B) Additional Charges for Strong Wastes. There shall be additional
charges for nondomestic wastes, discharged to the POTW from any industry
business or commercial enterprise and having BOD5, TSS and/or NH3-N in
excess of the average BOD5, TSS and/or NI-I3-N of normal domestic sewage.
Normal domestic sewage shall be defined as having the following concentration:
(1) BOD5 - three hundred (300) mg/l.
(2) TSS - three hundred twenty-five (325) mg/1
(3) NH3-N - twenty (20) mg/l.
There shall be no strong waste surcharges applied to residential domestic wastes.
(C) Surcharge Formula. In order to determine the additional charge for
nondomestic wastes with strength greater than that of normal domestic sewage,
the following formula shall be used:
SQ = 0.00834 QI [(BOD5-300)TA + (TSSI-325)TB + (NH3- NI- 20)TC]
Where:
SQ is the quarterly surcharge to be added to the quarterly sewer
rental charge.
AP8313
0.00834 is a constant to convert waste strength expressed in mg/1
to thousand pounds of waste.
QI is the quarterly volume of nondomestic wastewater flow
expressed in millions of gallons.
BOD5 is the five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand of the nondomestic
wastewater expressed in mg/l.
TSSI is the total suspended solids in mg/1 of the nondomestic wastewater.
NFI3-NI is the ammonia, expressed as nitrogen in mg/1 of the
nondomestic wastewater.
Three hundred (300), three hundred twenty-five (325) and twenty (20) are
constants expressing wasteload strength of domestic waste in mg/1 for the
respective pollutant parameters. TA represents the cost incurred by the
City in treating one thousand (1,000) pounds of BOD5. TB represents the
cost of treating one thousand (1,000) pounds of total suspended solids. TC
represents the cost incurred by the City in treating one thousand (1,000)
pounds of ammonia. TA, TB and TC vary each year as treatment plant
operation and maintenance costs change. Therefore, TA and TB and TC
shall be determined at the beginning of each calendar year by the City
based upon budgeted operating costs, and adopted by resolution by the
City.
When a value of BOD5 and/or total suspended solids and/or ammonia of
a nondomestic waste is less than three hundred (300), three hundred
twenty-five (325) and twenty (20) mg/1 respectively, the value of three
hundred (300), three hundred twenty-five (325) and twenty (20) mg/1
respectively shall be used in the calculation of the strong waste discharge in
place of the actual value which is less than three hundred (300), three
hundred twenty-five (325) and twenty (20) mg/1, respectively.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 682. Septage Rates. Septage haulers or any other person disposing of
sanitary or other waste into the sewage system of the City at designated points as herein
provided shall pay a dumping fee to include the following charges:
(A) Testing fee for each and every delivery to the City of Reading's
wastewater treatment system.
AP8313
(B) Per gallon treatment charge based on the rated capacity of the
waste delivery vehicle.
(C) Per gallon surcharge based on the rate capacity of the waste
delivery vehicle as payment for excessive BOD5, total suspended solids, and total
dissolved solids common to septic waste.
The rates shall be revised annually at the beginning of each year by the City through
resolution. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
XXIII -186
AP8313
Subpart 0. Fees.
Section 683. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Part to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the City's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the
program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the
City's schedule of charges and fees. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 684. Charges and Fees. The City may adopt charges and fees which may
include:
(A) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
City's pretreatment program.
(B) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures.
(C) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(D) Fees for permit applications.
(E) Fees for filing appeals.
(F) Fees for administrative hearing.
(G) Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
(H) Fees for removal of pollutants otherwise subject to the Federal
pretreatment standards.
(I) Fees for treatment of extra strength wastewater including extra fees
for the treatment of industrial waste containing toxic waste and pollutants.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 685. Application/Sampling/ Analysis. The fee schedule applicable to
filing permit applications and sampling/analysis of wastewater by the City shall as
follows:
(A) $500 - fee to accompany each initial industrial waste discharge
permit application for categorical industries, each site.
XXIII -187
AP8313
(B) $250 - fee to accompany each reapplication or revision to and
industrial waste discharge permit for categorical industries, each site.
(C) $100 - fee to accompany each initial industry's waste discharge
permit application for noncategorical industries, each site.
(D) $50 - fee to accompany each reapplication or revisions to an
industrial waste discharge permit for noncategorical industries, each site.
(E) $300 - charge for each scheduled or industry requested sampling
and analysis and/or inspection - minimum per site.
(F) $300 - charge for industries requiring sampling of multiple
discharge points; $250 - for each additional sampling over one.
(G) $300 - charge for unscheduled sampling and analysis where
industrial pollutants found in wastewater exceed permit limits plus out-ofpocket
expenses for additional testing and related costs.
Note: Nothing shall prevent the EPA, PaDEP or the City of Reading from imposing
other fees, penalties or damages where wastewater discharged to the City's treatment
works exceeds permit limits.
The fees and charges established by this Part shall apply to all industries within the City
of Reading sewage service area that discharge industrial waste to the City's Fritz Island
Wastewater Treatment Plant.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part and are separate from all
other fees chargeable by the City. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 686. Fee Collection.
(A) Registered bills will be mailed quarterly. Bills must be paid within
thirty (30) days of receipt. A late charge of ten percent (10%) APR will be applied
to all bills paid after the due date.
(B) Sixty (60) days after receipt, all unpaid bills, exempting cases where
a repayment schedule has been approved by the City, will be subject to civil
and/or criminal action(s) with all applicable charges and fees incurred by the
City being applied to the debt.
(C) A list of all bills unpaid after sixty (60) days, not including cases
where other repayment arrangements have been approved by the City, may be
XXIII -188
AP8313
published at least semiannually in the largest daily newspaper published in the
municipality where the POTW is located.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Subpart P. Septage Discharge Permit System.
Section 687. Septage Permitting System. Licensed septage and holding tank
haulers shall obtain a valid permit from the City and comply with all the conditions of
this permit and this Part. The septage hauler permit shall be valid for one (1) year with
renewal January 1 of each fiscal year.. The permit may be suspended or revoked
according to the policies outlined in Section 630 of this Part. Haulers shall apply for this
permit on forms provided by the City and shall submit, together with the permit fee, an
application containing the following information:
(A) Name, company name, address, telephone number.
(B) Vehicle identification, make and capacity.
(C) Copy of septage hauler's license.
(D) Any additional information requested by the City.
(E) Signed and notarized statement certifying that the information
presented in the application is correct.
(F) Performance bond.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 688. Septage/Waste Disposal.
(A) Septic tank and holding tank waste may be introduced into the
POTW only at locations designated by the City, and at such times as are
established by the City. Such waste shall not violate Subpart B of this Part or any
other requirements established by the City. Septic tank waste haulers will be
required to obtain a hauler's permit and may be required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit.
(B) The City shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The City may require generators of hauled
industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The City also may
prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled
industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this Part. Gallonage and
hours for delivery of waste may be reduced, extended, increased or otherwise
)0G11 -189
AP8313
changed or altered by and at the discretion of the City. City personnel may
require that the load be dumped over a period of a one-half (1/2) hour or more,
depending upon the flow and characteristics of the incoming sewage as the
City's treatment plant.
(C) Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the City. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the
City. The City may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance
with applicable standards. The City may require the industrial waste hauler to
provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
(D) Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for
every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents,
and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. The City reserves the
right to prohibit the discharge of hauled industrial waste.
(E) Each waste hauler shall furnish the following items to the City
personnel upon arrival at the septage receiving facility:
(1) Load manifest form (provided by the City) which states the
hauling company, hauler name, vehicle license number, quantity and
source (owner and address) of the septage, probable content of the
septage, and a certification statement signed by the hauler and generator,
attesting to the accuracy of the information provided on the load manifest
form.
(2) Previously purchased load ticket(s) corresponding to the
capacity of the truck.
(3) Grab samples of the septage taken by the waste hauler under
supervision by the City. The City reserves the right to refuse to accept any
load that is suspected of being or has been determined through sampling
and analysis to be detrimental to the operations of the plant, the safety of
its workers, or to the health or welfare of the public.
(F) The hauler shall keep a copy of his/her official permit in the truck,
and display the City-issued permit sticker on the windshield.
(G) The hauler shall display his tank capacity on the truck.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
XXIII -190
AP8313
Section 689. Septage Prohibitions.
(A) Septage haulers shall not discharge specifically prohibited waters,
wastewaters, or substances to the City facilities in accordance with Subpart B of
this Part.
(B) No grease trap wastes may be discharged.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 690. Septage Records. Vehicles shall be maintained and records shall be
kept in accordance with State law. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 691. Compliance Required. No statement contained in this Section shall
exempt the hauler from complying with all Federal, State or local requirements.
(Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
XXIII -191
AP8313
Subpart P. Miscellaneous.
Section 692. Interference with City Property. No person shall maliciously,
willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
City-owned structure, appurtenance or equipment. No person shall dump garbage, fill,
refuse or other materials on land easements, rights-of-way, or other structures,
including manholes, which are part of the wastewater facilities. Persons initiating
construction activities that may alter City structures must be permitted pursuant to the
requirements outlined in this Part. Persons causing such interference shall be billed by
the City for any actual damages, the cost of correcting the interference and may be
subject to civil and/or criminal penalties of this Part. (Ordinance No. 271, November
22, 1999, Section 1)
Section 693. Severability. If any provision of the Part is invalidated by any court
of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall
continue in full force and effect. (Ordinance No. 271, November 22, 1999, Section 1)
AP8313
Part 7
Spring-Lawn Sewer District
Subpart A. Establishment of Spring-Lawn Sewer District.
Section 701. Merger of Township of Spring and Borough of West Lawn. By
Agreement of Merger as approved by the Board of supervisors of the Township of
Spring and the Borough Council of the Borough of West Lawn, and as approved and
confirmed at the municipal election held on November 2, 2004, the registered voters of
the Township of Spring and the Borough of West Lawn voted to merge the Borough of
West Lawn with and into the Township of Spring effective January 1, 2006. (Ordinance
No. 325, January 3, 2006, Recital)
Section 702. Provisions of West Lawn Ordinances. The Township of Spring
desires to adopt certain Ordinances, or provisions of Ordinances, of the Borough of
West Lawn relating to sewer so as to apply, pending of fulfillment of conditions in the
Agreement of Merger, in a designated area of the new merged Township of Spring.
(Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Recital)
Section 703. Adoption of Ordinances by Reference and Establishment of the
Spring-Lawn Sewer District. The Code of Ordinances of the Township of Spring is
hereby amended and supplemented by adopting by reference and incorporating therein
the following Ordinances of the Borough of West Lawn:
(A) Ordinances (numbers deleted) pertaining to the Borough of West
Lawn and Sewer Rentals for the areas of the Borough of West Lawn and the
Owners of property served by the Borough of West Lawn Sewers and Sewer
System located in the areas known as West Wyomissing and Wyomissing Hills to
be applied only to the area formerly known as the Borough of West Lawn and
the areas heretofore served by the Borough of West Lawn Sewers and Sewer
System, which said areas are and will ultimately be serviced and sewerage
disposed of by the Joint Municipal Authority of Wyomissing Valley;
(B) It is hereby established that the areas designated above shall
comprise the "Spring-Lawn Sewer District".
(Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 704. Amendments to Adopted Ordinances.
(A) Each ordinance hereby adopted by reference is amended to replace
all references to "Borough of West Lawn" with "Township of Spring."
XXIII -193
AP8313
(B) Each ordinance hereby adopted by reference is amended to replace
all references to "Sewer System" with "Spring-Lawn Sewer System".
(Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 3)
Section 705. Initial Sewer Charges. The initial user charges for the Spring-Lawn
Sewer System shall be as follows:
(A) Collection and Treatment Charge: Effective January 1, 2006, the
charge for collection and treatment of domestic sewage discharged into the
Spring-Lawn Sewer System, shall be a monthly charge, payable as hereinafter
provided, based upon the water consumption of the property sewered, and shall
be computed at the following rates which will apply to all quantities of water
consumed:
(1) The first 1,000 cubic feet or portion thereof -- $10.00;
(2) All over 1,000 cubic feet -- $3.00 per 100 cubic feet or portion
thereof;
(3) Minimum monthly charge -- $10.00.
(Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 4)
Section 706. Construction. The ordinances adopted herein by reference are not
intended to replace or repeal any ordinances of the Township of Spring, but are
intended to be a supplement thereto and intended to apply only to the Borough of West
Lawn and areas serviced thereby where designated in Section 804 above. (Ordinance
No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 5)
Section 707. Provisions to be Continuations of Existing Regulations. The
provisions of this Part, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and/ or codes
enforced immediately prior to the enactment of this Part, are intended as a continuation
of such ordinances and codes and not as new enactments. The provisions of this Part
shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or
prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any of the adopted ordinances adopted herein by
reference. (Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 6)
Section 708. Repealer. All other sewer ordinances of the Borough of West Lawn,
other than those ordinances specifically adopted by reference by this Part are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith,
)0(III -194
AP8313
except to the extent otherwise provided herein, are hereby repealed. (Ordinance No.
325, January 3, 2006, Section 7)
Section 709. Severability. Should any part of this Part be found unconstitutional,
illegal, invalid, or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, illegality, invalidity, or unenforceability, shall not affect, impair,
nullify, or otherwise prevent the implementation of the remainder of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 8)
(Section 710. Reserved for Future Use)
AP8313
Subpart B. Mandatory Connection.
Section 711. Definitions.
"Authority" means and refers to Township of Spring (West Lawn
Borough Authority) as presently or hereafter constituted, which has been created
by said Board of Supervisors (Borough Council) and to which has been referred
by said Board of Supervisors (Borough Council) the specific project of sewers.
"Industrial Waste" means and refers to the liquid, gaseous or solid waste
from industrial processes as distinct from domestic sewage.
"Lateral" means and refers to that part of the Spring-Lawn Sewer System
extending from a public main or street sewer to curb line or property line if there
is no curb, and where the main or street sewer line is laid under a sidewalk, the
word "lateral" shall mean and refer to the "Y" connection from the main or street
sewer line.
"Occupied building" means and refers to any structure erected and
intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human
beings or animals and from which structure sewage and industrial waste, or
either thereof, is or may be discharged.
"Person" shall include individuals or natural persons, artificial persons
existing only in contemplation of law, and shall be construed to include
associates, partnerships, limited partnerships, joint stock companies and
corporations.
"Property accessible to the Spring-Lawn Sewer System" means and refers
to real estate which adjoins, abuts on, or is adjacent to, the Spring-Lawn Sewer
System.
"Sewage" means and refers to the normal water carried household and
toilet wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
"Spring-Lawn Sewer System" means and refers to the sanitary sewer
collection system and appurtenant facilities about to be constructed in and for
the Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn), and the interceptor sewers of
the Township (Authority) and any improvements, additions or extensions that
hereafter may be made thereto by the Township (Borough), or to any part or
parts of any or all thereof.
XXIII -196
AP8313
"Borough" means and refers to the Borough of West Lawn, Berks County,
Pa., or the duly constituted and elected municipal authorities thereof.
"Township" means and refers to the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania.
(WL Ordinance No. 138, June 15, 1954, Section 1; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No.
325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 712. Notice of Completion. Whenever the Spring-Lawn Sewer System is
completed and ready for public use it shall be the duty of the Township (Borough) to
cause notice of the fact to be giving by advertisement published once in one newspaper
of general circulation in the Township (Borough), and such advertisement shall state
that said sewer may be used by all property owners in the Township (Borough) subject
to the payment of any connection charges and of annual sewer rentals in amounts as
may from time to time be fixed by the Township (Borough). (WL Ordinance No. 138,
June 15, 1954, Section 2; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006,
Section 2)
Section 713. Mandatory Connection.
(A) All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon
property accessible to the Spring-Lawn Sewer System shall at their own expense
connect such building with the Spring-Lawn Sewer System within sixty days
after the date of publication specified in Section 712 hereto.
(B) All persons owning any property accessible to the Spring-Lawn
Sewer System upon which a building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the
erection of such building and at their own expense, connect the same with the
Spring-Lawn Sewer System.
(C) All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the Spring-Lawn Sewer System shall, at their
own expense, connect such building with the Spring-Lawn Sewer System within
sixty days after notice to do so from the Township (Borough).
(WL Ordinance No. 138, June 15, 1954, Section 3; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No.
325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 714. Discharge only into the Spring-Lawn Sewer System. It shall be
unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to the Spring-Lawn Sewer
System to erect, construct or use or maintain or cause to be erected, constructed, used or
maintained, any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or other receptacle on such
XXIII -197
AP8313
premises for receiving sewage, after the expiration of the particular period specified in
Section 812 hereof, or otherwise at any time to erect, construct, use or maintain any
pipe, conduit, drain or other facility for the discharge of sewage except into the Spring-
Lawn Sewer System. (WL Ordinance No. 138, June 15, 1954, Section 4; as adopted by
Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 715. Use of Septic Tank is Nuisance. Any person who erects, constructs,
uses, or maintains a privy, cesspool, sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible
to the Spring-Lawn Sewer System in violation of this Subpart, shall be deemed and shall
be declared to be erecting, constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the
Township (Borough) is hereby authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided
by the law. (WL Ordinance No. 138, June 15, 1954, Section 5; as adopted by Spring
Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 716. Connections must be in Compliance. No connection shall be made
to the Spring-Lawn Sewer System except in compliance with ordinances and resolutions
as well as such Rules and Regulations as may, from time to time, be enacted adopted,
approved or promulgated by the Township (Borough). (WL Ordinance No. 138, June
15, 1954, Section 6; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 717. Failure to Connect. After the expiration of the particular periods
specified in Section 713 of this Subpart, if any owner of an occupied building on
property accessible to the Spring-Lawn Sewer System shall have failed to connect such
property with the Spring-Lawn Sewer System as required by said Section 713, the
Township (Borough) shall cause to be served on the owner of such property, so failing
to connect to said Spring-Lawn Sewer System, and also upon the occupants of the
building in question, a copy of this ordinance and a written or printed notice requiring
such connection to be made, and such notice shall further state that its requirements
shall be compiled with within sixty days from the date thereof. (WL Ordinance No. 138,
June 15, 1954, Section 7; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006,
Section 2)
Section 718. Plumbing Permit. Persons, forms, and corporations, desiring to do
plumbing intended to be connected to the Spring-Lawn Sewer System shall obtain from
the Secretary of Board of Supervisors (Borough Council) in the form to be provided, a
permit entitling the applicant to engage in regular or particular work during the
calendar year in which the permit is granted, for which permit a fee of (to be
determined by Resolution) Dollars shall be charged therefore. The permit thus granted
is revocable at will of said Board of Supervisors (Borough Council) and the permit is
renewable from year to year by endorsement or by exchange for a new permit at the
discretion of the Secretary of said Board. No plumbing or connections shall be made
without this permit. (WL Ordinance No. 138, June 15, 1954, Section 8; as adopted by
Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
XXIII -198
AP8313
Section 719. Competent Plumber. Any person, firm, or corporation which, for a
period of at least one year previous to the passage of this ordinance has been regularly
engaged in the plumbing business in the Township (Borough), shall be deemed
competent to hold a permit; and all other persons, firms or corporations, desiring to do
plumbing business in said Township (Borough), or to do a particular piece of work to
be connected with the Spring-Lawn Sewer System shall exhibit such evidence of
competency as said Township (Borough) from time to time may require. (WL
Ordinance No. 138, June 15, 1954, Section 9; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325,
January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 720. Refusal to Obtain Permit. Any plumber, or other person who shall
neglect or refuse to take out a permit or comply with the provisions of this Subpart, or
fail to make the reports herein designated, shall not be deemed competent to perform
any work intended to be connected with the sewers, and no work performed by such
plumbers or other persons shall be connected with any sewers. (WL Ordinance No.
138, June 15, 1954, Section 10; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006,
Section 2)
Section 721. Violations. The provisions of the Subpart are declared to be for the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township (Borough). Any person found
guilty of violating any provision of this Subpart in a summary proceeding shall be fined
the sum of $35.00 and costs. Each period of twelve months during which such violation
shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (WL Ordinance No. 138, June
15, 1954, Section 11; as amended by WL Ordinance No. 263, February 1, 1977, Section 1;
as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 722. Easements. Township (Borough) hereby grants to Township
(Authority) all and every easement, right of way and any and all other rights necessary
or desirable on, over or under the streets, sidewalks and alleys in the Township
(Borough) for the purpose of constructing the Spring-Lawn Sewer System therein. (WL
Ordinance No. 138, June 15, 1954, Section 12; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325,
January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 723. Severability. If any provisions, sentence, clause, section or part of
this Subpart is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Subpart. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors (Borough Council) that this Subpart
would have been enacted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provisions,
sentence, clause, section or part not been included herein. (WL Ordinance No. 138, June
15, 1954, Section 13; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
AP8313
Sections 724 through 730. (Reserved for Future Use)
)0(III -200
AP8313
Subpart C. Borough of West Lawn Sewer Rentals.
Section 731. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
"Borough" means the Borough of West Lawn, Berks County, Pa.
"Council" means the group of elected officials acting as the governing
body of the Borough.
"Sewer System" means all the facilities for collecting sewage.
"Sewage" means the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
"Sanitary Sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
"Sewage Treatment Works" means an arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating and disposing of sewage.
"Domestic Sewage" means the normal water carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
"Industrial Wastes" means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from domestic sewage.
"Water Company" means Pennsylvania American Water (formerly
Sinking Spring Water Company, West Lawn, Berks County, Pa.)
"Persons" means any individual, firm, company, association, society
corporation or group.
"Township" means the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(WL Ordinance No. 137, June 7, 1955, Section 1; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No.
325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 732. Imposition of Sewer Rent or Charge. There is hereby imposed upon
each property located within the Township (Borough) limits, served by the Spring-
Lawn Sewer System and having the use thereof, a quarterly sewer rent or charge
payable as hereinafter provided, for the use, whether direct or indirect, of the Spring-
XXIII -201
AP8313
Lawn Sewer System based in the quantity of water consumed as evidence by meter
readings of water meters installed and maintained by the Water Company for the
purpose of measuring water purchased from said Water Company, and such other
meters as may be installed pursuant to any provisions of this Subpart, at the rates
hereinafter set forth. (WL Ordinance No. 137, June 7, 1955, Section 2; as adopted by
Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 733. Charges for Domestic Sewage.
SEE SECTION 705 OF SUBPART A OF THIS PART.
(WL Ordinance No. 137, June 7, 1955, Section 3; as amended by WL Ordinance No. 142,
June 7, 1955, Section 1; as further amended by WL Ordinance No. 167, December 1,
1959, Section 1; as further amended by WL Ordinance No. 195, March 18, 1963, Section
1; as further amended by WL Ordinance No. 212, June 7, 1966, Section 1; as further
amended by WL Ordinance No. 215, March 7, 1966, Section 1; as further amended by
WL Ordinance No. 241, April 2, 1974, Section 1; as further amended by WL Ordinance
No. 245, March 4, 1975, Section 1; as further amended by WL Ordinance No. 251,
February 3,1976, Section 1; as further amended by WL Ordinance No. 271, 1981, Section
1; as further amended by WL Ordinance No. 274, 1981, Section 1; as further amend by
WL Ordinance No. 330, July 11, 1995, Sections 1 and 2; as further amended by WL
Ordinance No. 373, 2004, Section 1; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3,
2006, Section 2)
Section 734. Measuring Volume Domestic Sewage.
(A) Methods of Measuring Volume.
(1) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the
Water Company discharges domestic sewage into the Spring-Lawn Sewer
System, the volume of water consumed, as determined from the meter
readings by the Township (Borough) shall be used in computing the
sewer rental.
(2) In cases where dwellings and establishments have sources of
water supply in addition to or other than from the Water Company, those
dwellings and establishments shall provide a meter on such additional or
other source of supply. The total amount of water consumed as shown by
these meter readings will be used in computing the sewer rental.
(B) Measuring Devices: All meters or other measuring devices not
provided by the Water Company but required to be used under the provisions of
this Subpart shall be furnished and installed by the property owner and shall be
XXIII -202
AP8313
under the control of the Board of Supervisors (Council), and may be tested,
inspected or repaired by Township (Borough) employees whenever the Board of
Supervisors (Council) deems necessary. The owner of the property upon which
such other measuring device is installed shall be responsible for its maintenance
and safekeeping; and all repairs thereto shall be made at the property owner's
expense, whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary wear and tear
and other causes. Bills for such repairs, if made by the Township (Borough), shall
be due and payable at the same time, and collected in the same manner as are the
bills for the sewer services. Such bills from and after their date due shall
constitute a lien upon the property upon which such measuring device is
installed.
(C) Meter Reading: The Board of Supervisors (Council) shall be
responsible for the reading of all meters or measuring devices, and they shall be
available to Township (Borough) employees for meter reading at any time.
(WL Ordinance No. 137, June 7, 1955, Section 4; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No.
325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 735. Industrial Waste. Industrial waste may be discharged into the
Spring-Lawn Sewer System subject to the terms and conditions of the Agreement dated
May 1, 1954, entered into between The Joint Municipal Authority of Wyomissing
Valley, Berks County, Pa., and Township (West Lawn Borough Authority, Berks
County, Pa.), the provisions of which Agreement relating to the discharge of industrial
waste and the charges for treatment thereof are incorporated in this Subpart by
reference thereto as though fully set forth herein; provided, however, that the collection
charge for any such industrial waste shall be based upon the rates set forth in Section
705 of this Part as though such industrial waste was domestic sewage. (WL Ordinance
No. 137, June 7, 1955, Section 5; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3,
2006, Section 2)
Section 736. Time and Management of Payment. The above rentals and charges
on the date the particular connection is made to the Spring-Lawn Sewer System. All
bills shall be rendered quarterly on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year.
The owners of properties connecting during any such quarterly period shall be billed
retroactively to the first day of such quarter. Quarterly charges for sewage service shall
be subject to six (6) percent penalty if not paid within thirty (30) days after they are due.
If not paid within sixty (60) days after they are due, the bill plus the penalty shall bear
interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month or fraction thereof, until paid.
Payments mailed as evidence by the United States Post Office mark on or
previous to the end of the period during which bills are payable at par will be deemed
to be a payment within such period.
)0(111-203
AP8313
All persons connected to the Spring-Lawn Sewer System must give the
Township (Borough) their correct address. Failure to receive bills will not be
considered an excuse for nonpayment nor permit an extension of the period during
which bills are payable at face. (WL Ordinance No. 137, June 7, 1955, Section 6; as
adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 737. Liens, Delinquent Sewer Rentals and Penalties. All sewer rentals,
together with all penalties thereon not paid on or before the end of one year from each
billing date shall be deemed to be delinquent. All delinquent sewer rentals and all
penalties thereon shall be a lien on the property served and shall be entered as a lien
against such property in the office of the Prothonotary of Berks County, and shall be
collected in the manner provided by the law for the filing and collection of such liens.
(WL Ordinance No. 137, June 7, 1955, Section 7; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No.
325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 738. Segregation of Sewer Revenues. The funds received by the
Township (Borough) from the collection of the rentals and all the penalties thereon as
herein provided for and any fines collected by the Township (Borough) in connection
with the Spring-Lawn Sewer System shall be segregated and kept separate and apart
from all other funds of the Township (Borough) and shall be used only for the purpose
of defraying the expenses of the Township (Borough) in the operation, maintenance,
repair, alteration, inspection, depreciation, or other expenses in relation to such sewer
system and for and toward any payments due under any agreement with Shillington
Municipal Authority for the transportation of sewage and with The Joint Municipal
Authority of Wyomissing Valley for the treatment of sewage, from the Spring-Lawn
Sewer System and for such payments as the Township (Borough) may be required to
make under any lease or agreement it may enter into for and of, or in connection with,
said Spring-Lawn Sewer System with the Township (Authority), in accordance with the
provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended. (WL Ordinance No. 137,
June 7, 1955, Section 8; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006,
Section 2)
Section 739. Rules and Regulations. The Township (Borough) reserves the right
to, and may from time to time, adopt, revise, amend and readopt such rules and
regulations as it deems necessary and proper for the use and operation of the Spring-
Lawn Sewer System, and all such rules and regulations shall be and become a part of
this Subpart. (WL Ordinance No. 137, June 7, 1955, Section 9; as adopted by Spring
Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 740. Construction and Severability. If any of the provisions, sections,
sentences, clauses or parts of this Subpart or the application of any provisions hereof
shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remainder of
XXIII -204
AP8313
this Subpart, it being the intention of the Township (Borough) that such remainder shall
be and remain in full force and effect. (WL Ordinance No. 137, June 7, 1955, Section 11;
as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Sections 741 through 750. (Reserved for Future Use)
AP8313
Subpart D. West Wyomissing Sewer Rentals.
Section 751. Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
meaning of the terms used in this Subpart shall be as follows:
"Spring-Lawn Sewer System" - All facilities for collecting sewage owned
or operated, or owned and operated by either the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania (Borough of West Lawn, Berks County, Pennsylvania), or
by the Township (West Lawn Borough Authority, Berks County, Pennsylvania).
"Domestic Sewage" - The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
"Industrial Wastes" - The liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from domestic sewage.
(WL Ordinance No. 166, January 20, 1960, Section 1; as adopted by Spring Ordinance
No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 752. Imposition of Sewer Rent or Charge. Effective July 1, 1995, there is
hereby imposed upon each property located within that portion of Spring Township,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, known as "West Wyomissing", served by the Spring-
Lawn Sewer System and having the use thereof, a quarterly charge for collection and
treatment of domestic sewage, payable as hereinafter provided, for the use, whether
direct or indirect, of the said Spring-Lawn Sewer System, based upon the water
consumption of the property served, computed at the rates set forth herein. (WL
Ordinance No. 166, January 20, 1960, Section 2; as amended by WL Ordinance No. 332,
September 5, 1995, Section 1; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006,
Section 2)
Section 753. Collection Charge for Domestic Sewage.
SEE SECTION 705 OF SUBPART A OF THIS PART.
(WL Ordinance No. 166, January 20, 1960, Section 3; as amended by WL Ordinance No.
332, September 5, 1995, Section 2; as further amended by WL Ordinance No. 371,
February 3, 2004, Section 1; as further amended by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3,
2006, Section 4)
Section 754. Measuring Volume of Domestic Sewage. The methods of
measuring the volume of Domestic Sewage discharged into the Spring-Lawn Sewer
System shall be the same as those provided for properties within the limits of the
XXIII -206
AP8313
Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn). (WL Ordinance No. 166, January 20,
1960, Section 4; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 755. Industrial Waste. Industrial waste may be discharged into the
Spring-Lawn Sewer System subject to the terms and conditions of the Agreement dated
May 1, 1954, entered into between the Joint Municipal Authority of Wyomissing Valley,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, and Township (West Lawn Borough Authority, Berks
County, Pennsylvania), the provisions of which Agreement relating to the discharge of
industrial waste and the charges for treatment thereof are incorporated in this Subpart
by reference thereto as though fully set forth herein; provided, however, that the
collection charge for any such industrial waste shall be based upon the rates set forth in
SECTION 705 OF SUBPART A OF THIS PART as though such industrial waste was
domestic sewage. (WL Ordinance No. 166, January 20, 1960, Section 5; as adopted by
Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 756. Time and Method of Payment. The time and method of payment of
the above charge shall be the same as are provided for owners of properties located
within the limits of the Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn). (WL Ordinance
No. 166, January 20, 1960, Section 6; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3,
2006, Section 2)
Section 757. Liens, Delinquent Sewer Rentals and Penalties. All sewer charges,
together with all penalties thereon, not paid on or before the end of one year from each
billing date shall be deemed to be delinquent. All delinquent sewer charges and all
penalties thereon shall be a lien on the property served and shall be entered as a lien
against such property in the Office of the Prothonotary of Berks County, and shall be
collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of such liens. (WL
Ordinance No. 166, January 20, 1960, Section 7; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No.
325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 758. Segregation of Sewer Revenues. The funds received by the
Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn) from the collection of the charges and all
penalties thereon as herein provided for, shall be segregated in the same manner as
provided for in the case of funds derived from the operation of the Spring-Lawn Sewer
System within the limits of the Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn). (WL
Ordinance No. 166, January 20, 1960, Section 8; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No.
325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 759. Effective Date. This Subpart shall become effective at once and shall
be applicable to the properties located within that portion of Spring Township, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, known as "West Wyomissing", as soon as they become
connected with and have the right to use the Sewer System. The Township of Spring
(Borough of West Lawn) reserves the right to make such changes from time to time as
XXIII -207
AP8313
in its opinion may be desirable or beneficial, and to amend this Subpart or to change the
collection charge in such manner and at such times as in its opinion may be advisable.
(WL Ordinance No. 166, January 20, 1960, Section 9; as adopted by Spring Ordinance
No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 760. Severability. If any of the provisions, sections, sentences, clauses or
parts of this Subpart or the application of any provisions hereof shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remainder of this Subpart, it being
the intention of the Township (Borough) that such remainder shall be and remain in full
force and effect. (WL Ordinance No. 166, January 20, 1960, Section 10; as adopted by
Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
AP8313
Subpart E. Wyomissing Hills Sewer Rentals.
Section 761. Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
meaning of the terms used in this Subpart shall be as follows:
"Sewer System" - All facilities for collecting sewage owned or operated,
or owned and operated by either the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania (Borough of West Lawn, Berks County, Pennsylvania), or by the
Township (West Lawn Borough Authority, Berks County, Pennsylvania).
"Domestic Sewage" - The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
"Industrial Wastes" - The liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from domestic sewage.
(WL Ordinance No. 199, October 1, 1963, Section 1; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No.
325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 762. Imposition of Sewer Rent or Charge. Effective July 1, 1995, there is
hereby imposed upon each property located within the Borough of Wyomissing Hills,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, served by the Spring-Lawn Sewer System and having the
use thereof, a quarterly charge for collection and treatment of domestic sewage, payable
as hereinafter provided, for the use, whether direct or indirect, of the said Spring-Lawn
Sewer System, based upon the water consumption of the property served, computed at
the rates set forth herein. (WL Ordinance No. 199, October 1, 1963, Section 2; as
amended by WL Ordinance No. 333, September 5, 1995, Section 1; as adopted by Spring
Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 763. Collection Charge for Domestic Sewage.
SEE SECTION 705 OF SUBPART A OF THIS PART.
(WL Ordinance No. 199, October 1, 1963, Section 3; as amended by WL Ordinance No.
243, April 2, 1974, Section 2; as further amended by WL Ordinance No. 276, 1981; as
further amend by WL Ordinance No. 333, September 5, 1995, Section 2; as further
amended by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 4)
Section 764. Measuring Volume of Domestic Sewage. The methods of
measuring the volume of Domestic Sewage discharged into the Spring-Lawn Sewer
System shall be the same as those provided for properties within the limits of the
AP8313
Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn). (WL Ordinance No. 199, October 1, 1963,
Section 4; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 765. Industrial Waste. Industrial waste may be discharged into the
Spring-Lawn Sewer System subject to the terms and conditions of the Agreement dated
May 1, 1954, entered into between the Joint Municipal Authority of Wyomissing Valley,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, and Township (West Lawn Borough Authority, Berks
County, Pennsylvania), the provisions of which Agreement relating to the discharge of
industrial waste and the charges for treatment thereof are incorporated in this Subpart
by reference thereto as though fully set forth herein; provided, however, that the
collection charge for any such industrial waste shall be based upon the rates set forth in
SECTION 705 OF SUBPART A OF THIS PART as though such industrial waste was
domestic sewage. (WL Ordinance No. 199, October 1, 1963, Section 5; as adopted by
Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 766. Time and Method of Payment. The time and method of payment of
the above charge shall be the same as are provided for owners of properties located
within the limits of the Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn). (WL Ordinance
No. 199, October 1, 1963, Section 6; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3,
2006, Section 2)
Section 767. Liens, Delinquent Sewer Rentals and Penalties. All sewer charges,
together with all penalties thereon, not paid on or before the end of one year from each
billing date shall be deemed to be delinquent. All delinquent sewer charges and all
penalties thereon shall be a lien on the property served and shall be entered as a lien
against such property in the Office of the Prothonotary of Berks County, and shall be
collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of such liens. (WL
Ordinance No. 199, October 1, 1963, Section 7; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325,
January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 768. Segregation of Sewer Revenues. The funds received by the
Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn) from the collection of the charges and all
penalties thereon as herein provided for, shall be segregated in the same manner as
provided for in the case of funds derived from the operation of the Spring-Lawn Sewer
System within the limits of the Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn). (WL
Ordinance No. 199, October 1, 1963, Section 8; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325,
January 3, 2006, Section 2)
Section 769. Effective Date. This Subpart shall become effective at once and shall
be applicable to the properties located within the Borough of Wyomissing Hills, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, as soon as they become connected with and have the right to use
the Spring-Lawn Sewer System. The Township of Spring (Borough of West Lawn)
reserves the right to make such changes from time to time as in its opinion may be
XXIII -210
AP8313
desirable or beneficial, and to amend this Subpart or to change the collection charge in
such manner and at such times as in its opinion may be advisable. (WL Ordinance No.
199, October 1, 1963, Section 9; as adopted by Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3,
2006, Section 2)
Section 770. Severability. If any of the provisions, sections, sentences, clauses or
parts of this Subpart or the application of any provisions hereof shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remainder of this Subpart, it being
the intention of the Township (Borough) that such remainder shall be and remain in full
force and effect. (WL Ordinance No. 199, October 1, 1963, Section 10; as adopted by
Spring Ordinance No. 325, January 3, 2006, Section 2)
AP8313
Part 8
Adamstown Borough Sewer Use
Section 801. Agreement between Adamstown Borough and Township of Spring.
The Borough and the Township are adjoining municipalities. The Borough owns and
operates a wastewater treatment plant (the "Treatment Plant") which provides
wastewater treatment and disposal services to lands within the Borough and through an
agreement among the Borough, East Cocalico Township, and East Cocalico Township
Authority, to certain lands within East Cocalico Township. The Borough does not require
all of the existing capacity in the Treatment Plant to provide wastewater treatment and
disposal services to lands within the Borough.
The portion of the Township located closest to the boundary between the
Township and the Borough is provided with on-lot sewage disposal service. There have
been malfunctions in on-lot sewage disposal systems within this area, which is identified
in Section 829 and which area will be hereinafter referred to as the "Service Area". In
order to address the malfunctioning on-lot sewage disposal systems, the Township has
explored methods of providing public sewer service to the properties within the Service
Area. The Township has requested that the Borough provide wastewater treatment and
disposal capacity at the Treatment Plant to enable the Township to provide public sewer
service to the Service Area. The Borough has agreed to allow the Township to become a
bulk customer of wastewater treatment and disposal services under the terms and
conditions set forth herein which will allow the Township to provide public sewer service
to the Service Area. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 802. Definitions. When used in this Agreement, the following terms,
whether capitalized or not, shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
Borough: The Borough of Adamstown, Lancaster and Berks Counties,
Pennsylvania.
Borough Conveyance System: The portion of the Borough Sewer System
which conveys wastewater to the Treatment Plant.
Borough Sewer System: The complete wastewater collection, conveyance,
treatment and disposal system owned and operated by the Borough.
Connection Point: The manhole at which the Spring Conveyance System is
connected to the Borough Sewer System, Manhole Number 56.
DEP: The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or any
agency successor thereto.
XXIII -212
AP8313
Domestic Waste: Normal water-carried waste from kitchens, water closets,
lavatories, laundries and bathrooms, including but not limited to waste typical to
households, from sanitary conveniences wherever located or existing.
EPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency or any agency
successor thereto.
gpd: Gallons per day.
I/I: Inflow and infiltration; the introduction of ground water, storm water
or surface water into the Spring Conveyance System.
Industrial Waste: Any and all wastes, other than Domestic Waste,
discharged from industrial establishments, certain commercial establishments
including but not limited to hospitals and restaurants, and other similar businesses
or institutional activities, and in other respects as such term is defined in The
Clean Streams Law, Act of June 22, 1937, as amended and as may be amended, 35
P.S. §691.1 et seq.
Permit: A permit or approval which authorizes a new connection to the
Spring Conveyance System or an expansion of the use of the Spring Conveyance
System by a property connected to the Spring Conveyance System whether or not
new construction or a new connection is proposed.
Service Area: That portion of Spring Township, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, encompassing certain. properties which have frontage on Old
Lancaster Pike and Fur low Road delineated in Section 829 of this Part. The Berks
County Tax Identification Numbers of each property within the Service Area is
also set forth in Section 829.
Spring Conveyance System: The facilities to be constructed within Spring
Township and within the Borough which will convey wastewater discharged from
structures within the Service Area to the Borough Sewer System.
Tapping Fees: The fee which the Borough imposes pursuant to the Borough
Code and Act 57 of 2003 to recover capital costs of collection, conveyance and
treatment facilities that are part of the Borough Sewer System.
Treatment Plant: The wastewater treatment and disposal facility owned
and operated by the Borough.
Wastewater: All Domestic Waste, Industrial Waste and I/ I.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
XXIII -213
AP8313
Section 803. Bulk Customer. The Township shall become a bulk wastewater
conveyance, treatment and disposal customer of the Borough. The Township agrees that
the Township has not acquired any ownership interest in any portion of the Borough
Sewer System, including but not limited to acquisition of capacity in the Borough
Conveyance System or the Treatment Plant beyond the interest of any other customer of
the Borough Sewer System to be entitled to discharge wastewater into the Sewage System
to the extent such customer has paid tapping fees for use of the Borough's capacity and
continues to pay applicable fees and charges for the conveyance, treatment and disposal
of wastewater. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 804. Service Area. The Township shall limit the provision of public sewer
service utilizing the Spring Conveyance System and Treatment Plant to those properties
within the Service Area identified in Section 829 of this Part. The Township shall not be
permitted to provide public sewer service utilizing the Spring Conveyance System
and /or the Treatment Plant to any property outside of the Service Area without prior
written consent of the Borough, which consent the Borough may withhold or grant in its
sole and unfettered discretion. The Borough and the Township agree that for planning
purposes the Borough shall initially allocate 10,000 gpd of annual average flow in the
Borough Sewer System for the Township's customers within the Service Area.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 805. Construction of Conveyance System. The Township shall submit the
plans for the design and construction of Spring Conveyance System and the Connection
Point to the Borough Engineer for review and approval prior to commencement of
construction. All facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Borough's adopted specifications for wastewater facilities. The Borough Engineer shall
provide written review comments or issue written approval of such plans within one
month after receipt. If the Borough Engineer requests revisions to the plans, the
Township shall make all requested revisions and resubmit the plans to the Borough
Engineer for review. The Borough Engineer shall provide review comments or issue
written approval within two weeks of a resubmission of the plans. The Township shall
provide shop drawings to the Borough Engineer for review and approval prior to
commencement of construction if requested by the Borough Engineer. The Borough
Engineer shall provide review comments or issue written approval of the shop drawings
within two weeks. In all reviews, the Borough Engineer shall use the same standards and
criteria which the Borough imposes upon persons within the Borough proposing to
extend the Borough Sewer System. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 806. Notice of Construction. The Township shall provide the Borough
Engineer with 48 hours notice prior to the commencement of construction of the Spring
Conveyance System and the Connection Point. The Township shall allow the Borough
Engineer to inspect and approve the construction of the Connection Point and the Spring
Conveyance System. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
XXIII -214
AP8313
Section 807. Permits. The Township acknowledges that it is the responsibility of
the Township to obtain all other permits, including but not limited to any required
highway occupancy permits and a DEP Water Quality Management Permit for installing
the Spring Conveyance System and Connection Point. The Township shall be solely
responsible for all costs and expenses relating to all required permits and approvals.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 808. Planning Module. The Township shall be responsible for all costs
which may be associated with any planning module for land development or other DEP
approval which may be necessary for the construction of the Spring Conveyance System,
the connection of the Spring Conveyance System to the Borough Sewer System and the
treatment of wastewater from the Spring Conveyance System at the Treatment Plant. The
Township shall provide the Borough with a copy of any planning module for land
development filed with DEP. The Township shall provide the Borough with written
verification from DEP that the Borough is not required to file a separate planning module
for land development or make any improvements to the Treatment Plant to provide the
wastewater treatment and disposal service contemplated under this Agreement. The
Township and the Borough agree that this Agreement shall become null and void if as
part of any sewer planning approval for the construction of the Spring Conveyance
System, the connection of the Spring Conveyance System to the Borough Sewer System
and the treatment of wastewater from the Spring Conveyance System at the Treatment
Plant DEP requires the Borough to make any improvements to the Borough Sewer
System or requires the Borough to provide sewer service to any property in the Township
outside of the Service Area. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 809. Individual Connections and Tapping Fees. Prior to the connection of
the Spring Conveyance System to the Borough Sewer System, the Township shall provide
the Borough with a list of each structure to be connected to the Spring Conveyance
System, indicating how the structure is occupied (i.e. as a single family dwelling, multi
family dwelling, commercial establishment, etc.), to enable the Borough to calculate the
Tapping Fee due for each structure which will be connected to the Spring Conveyance
System. The Township shall pay to the Borough a Tapping Fee for each structure on a
property identified in Exhibit "A" which shall be calculated in accordance with the thencurrent
Borough tapping fee ordinance, codified as Chapter 18, Sewers and Sewage
Disposal, Part 6, Tapping Fees, prior to the discharge of any wastewater from the Spring
Conveyance System into the Borough Sewer System. The current Borough Tapping Fee is
$1,786.00 per dwelling unit and $1, 786.00 per EDU for all nonresidential uses. The
Borough may amend the Tapping Fee at any time provided, however, that the Borough
shall forward a copy of the ordinance amending the Tapping Fee to the Township to
enable the Township to collect the proper Tapping Fee. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27,
2006, Agreement)
AP8313
Section 810. Continuing Notice of Connections. The Borough acknowledges that
the Township may not immediately connect all of the principal structures on the
properties identified in Exhibit "A" to the Spring Conveyance System. The Township shall
provide a list of the structures on the properties identified in Exhibit "A" connected to the
Spring Conveyance System during the initial construction of the Spring Conveyance
System, prior to the discharge of wastewater from the Spring Conveyance System into the
Borough Sewer System. The Township shall provide the Borough with written notice
within one week after any other structure on a property identified in Section 829 is
connected to the Spring Conveyance System. The principal structures on all of the
properties identified in Section 829 shall be connected to and shall use the Spring
Conveyance System within five years after the date of this Agreement. (Ordinance No.
328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 811. Sewer Rental Rates. The Township shall pay to the Borough the
minimum quarterly sewer rate for each principal structure on a property identified in
Exhibit "A" which is not connected to the Spring Conveyance System during the initial
construction of the Spring Conveyance System until a principal structure on each such
property is connected to the Spring Conveyance System. (Ordinance No. 328, February
27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 812. Operation and Maintenance of Spring Conveyance System. The
Township shall be solely responsible for the operation and maintenance of the Spring
Conveyance System. The Township shall maintain the Spring Conveyance System
including, but not limited to, all pressure sewers and grinder pumps that may be
necessary to service certain properties within the Service Area, in accordance with all
applicable Borough standards and specifications. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006,
Agreement)
Section 813. Flow Monitoring. The Township acknowledges that the projected
wastewater flows at the Connection Point will not allow for accurate flow metering.
Therefore, the Township acknowledges that the Township shall:
(A) Require all structures which shall be connected to the Spring
Conveyance System to install water meters with remote readers that accurately
measure all water obtained from wells prior to connection to the Spring
Conveyance System. All water meters and remote readers shall meet Borough
standards and specifications.
(B) Notify all owners of structures connected to the Spring Conveyance
System that Borough representatives will read water meters on a quarterly basis
and as necessary to verify unusual wastewater flows or meter readings.
XXIII -216
AP8313
(C) Establish a program for regular inspections to determine areas of I/I
together with the prompt mitigation of I/I within 90 days after. the Borough
notifies the Township in writing that the Borough has observed unusual
wastewater flows from the Spring Conveyance System or has any other reason to
believe that I/I is occurring.
(D) Establish a program to prohibit the connection of sump pumps,
storm water discharge pipes, and similar facilities to the Spring Conveyance
System together with a program for the monitoring and removal of such improper
connections.
(E) Adopt regulations which require owners of all structures connected
to the Spring Conveyance System to allow access to authorized personnel,
including Borough personnel, to read water meters and to make inspections to
verify sources and/ or meter malfunctions of unusual wastewater flows.
(F) Establish a program to promptly report any improper effluent
discharged into the Spring Conveyance System.
(G) Provide the Borough with annual wastewater flow information in
accordance with DEP requirements for submission of the Borough's Chapter 94
annual report on or before March 1 of each calendar year.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 814. Pretreatment. The Township recognizes that the Treatment Plant is
subject to an EPA pretreatment program. The Township agrees that this will comply with
all pretreatment requirements and, if any structures other than residential dwellings are
connected to the Spring Conveyance System at any time in the future, will enact and
implement a pretreatment program. If the Borough determines that any wastewater
which enters the Borough Sewer System from the Spring Collection System exceeds any
parameter for acceptable wastewater established in the industrial waste pretreatment
resolution or any standard which DEP or the EPA imposes on the Treatment Plant for
raw wastewater discharges, the Township shall install or shall cause the installation of all
necessary pretreatment facilities so that wastewater discharged from the Spring
Conveyance. System into the Borough Sewer System meets such standards. The Borough
or its staff and consultants may, from time to time, sample or monitor the quality and
quantity of wastewater discharged from the Spring Conveyance System at the
Connection Point. If any industrial waste is discharged from the Spring Collection System
into the Borough Sewer System, the Township shall reimburse the Borough for all costs
incurred in treatment of such industrial waste plus a penalty of $5,000.00 per incident or
$500.00 per incident parameter tested and determined to exceed Borough limits,
whichever is greater. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
XXIII -217
AP8313
Section 815. Billing of Customers. The Township has requested that the Borough
provide certain services in addition to the wastewater treatment and disposal services set
forth in this Agreement to enable the Township to properly bill its customers. The
Borough will provide the following services to the Township:
(A) Reading of water meters of all structures within the Service Area
connected to the Spring Conveyance system on a quarterly basis. The schedule for
such meter reading shall be mutually agreeable to the Borough and the Township.
(B) Provision of a quarterly report identifying each structure connected
to the Spring Conveyance System together with the water used in the preceding
calendar quarter. The format of this report shall be mutually agreeable to the
Borough and the Township. If the Township requires that this report utilize
certain software to insure compatibility with any existing Township software, the
Township shall provide all necessary software and installation of same on the
Borough's computer system at no cost to the Borough.
(C) The Borough shall provide meter readings as necessary when
dwellings within the Service Area are transferred. The Township shall provide the
Borough with not less than two working days' notice of the need for such a meter
reading.
(D) The Borough shall bill the Township for the ancillary services
itemized in this Agreement at the rate of $500.00 per quarter. This sum shall be
adjusted annually in mutual negotiations between the Borough and the
Township. If an agreeable -price cannot be negotiated, the Township shall
become responsible for performing all of the identified services and providing
the Borough with copies of each quarterly meter reading and summary reports
which the Borough has agreed to provide to the Township.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 816. Calculations. The Borough shall calculate the amounts due for
wastewater treatment and disposal services, conveyance services, and ancillary services
as follows:
(A) The Borough shall calculate the wastewater treatment and disposal
charges by adding together a charge for each and every dwelling or other
structure within the Service Area connected to the Spring Sewer System and a
flat charge for the ancillary services. The per dwelling unit charge shall be
comprised of the treatment charge and the conveyance charge.
AP8313
(B) The treatment and disposal charge per dwelling shall be identical
to the sewer rates which the Borough imposes upon individual dwellings in the
Borough at the time the Borough undertakes the quarterly water meter readings.
The Township acknowledges that the Borough may change the sewer rates and
charges from time to time for Borough customers, and the per dwelling unit
treatment and disposal charge to the Township will be identically revised.
(C) The conveyance charge per dwelling unit shall be calculated in
accordance with Section 830 of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 817. Billing of Township. The Borough shall bill the Township on a
quarterly basis for all sums due for wastewater treatment and disposal services,
conveyance charges, and the ancillary services set forth in this Agreement. The Borough
shall not bill individual customers within the Service Area. (Ordinance No. 328,
February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 818. Quarterly Invoices. The Township shall make payments to the
Borough of each quarterly invoice for wastewater treatment and disposal services,
conveyance changes and ancillary services as follows:
(A) The Township shall pay each such quarterly invoice within 45 days
of the date of the invoice.
(B) If the Township does not make any payment to the Borough when
due, the Borough shall add a penalty of ten (10%) percent of the amount due.
(C) If the Township does not make payment within 90 days after the
date of a quarterly invoice, interest shall accrue at the rate of eighteen (18%)
percent per annum until paid in full.
(D) If the Township disputes an invoice forwarded by the Borough, the
Township shall make payment of the, invoice and shall with the payment state all
grounds upon which the Township disputes the amount of the invoice. The
Borough shall investigate the dispute and shall provide the Township with a
written response to the dispute concerning the invoice within two weeks after the
next regular Council meeting. If the Borough agrees that the Township has been
overcharged, all amounts which have been overpaid shall be applied to the next
invoice or invoices. If the Borough's written response does not satisfy the Township,
then the Township may, at its expense, retain an independent engineer,
reasonably acceptable to the Borough, to evaluate the dispute. If the independent
engineer identifies any problems with metering or other equipment maintained by
)0C111 -219
AP8313
the Borough, the Borough shall promptly replace or repair such equipment and
shall give the Township credit for all amounts the independent engineer has
determined that the Township was overcharged.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 819. Township Responsibility. The Township shall be solely responsible
for establishing fees, charges, surcharges, penalties and assessments of any type for its
customers and for billing and collection of all fees, charges, surcharges, penalties and
assessments of any type from all customers within the Service Area. (Ordinance No. 328,
February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 820. Indemnification. The Township acknowledges that the Township
shall be solely responsible for, and shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the
Borough and its employees, agents, and servants (collectively "Indemnitees"), from any
and all liability, loss or damage, including attorneys' fees and costs of investigation and
defense, as a result of claims, demands, costs or judgments against Indemnitees which
arise from or relate in any manner to of the design, installation, construction,
maintenance or operation of any facilities installed as part of the Spring Conveyance
System, including, but not limited to, personal injury and property damage claims of
their parties. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 821. Township Reimbursement. The Township shall reimburse the
Borough for all costs associated with the negotiation and preparation of this Agreement
and the preparation, advertisement and enactment of an ordinance under the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, and for all fees incurred relating to review of plans,
inspection of improvements, review of easements and documents or otherwise relating to
the installation of the Spring Conveyance System and Connection Point. The Township
shall pay all such fees and costs within 45 days after the date of an invoice for such costs.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 822. Good Faith. The Borough and the Township shall at all times deal in
good faith with each other as to the subject matter of this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 823. Interpretation. This Agreement shall be interpreted in accordance
with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27,
2006, Agreement)
Section 824. Enforcement. Any action commenced to enforce any provision of this
Agreement shall be brought in the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
AP8313
Section 825. Intergovernmental Cooperation Act. Council of the Borough and the
Board of Supervisors of the Township has enacted or shall enact an ordinance pursuant to
the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act to authorize execution of this Agreement.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 826. Remedies. Any remedies provided in this Agreement, including, by
way of illustration and not limitation, the imposition of any surcharge, and all other
remedies provided by law or equity, shall be cumulative and concurrent. (Ordinance No.
328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 827. Severability. Should any one or more of the provisions of this
Agreement for any reason be held illegal or invalid, such illegality or invalidity shall not
effect any, other provisions of this Agreement and this Agreement shall in such
circumstances be construed and enforced as if such illegal or invalid provisions had not
been contained herein. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
Section 828. Perpetual Agreement. This Agreement shall become effective upon
its execution and delivery by the parties hereto. If the Spring Conveyance System is not
constructed and connected to the Borough Sewer System within three years from the date
of this Agreement, this Agreement shall expire and shall have no further force or effect. If
the Spring Conveyance System is constructed and connected to the Borough Sewer
System within three years from the date of this Agreement, this Agreement shall be
perpetual. (Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
AP8313
Section 829. Old Lancaster Pike Sewage Service Area Properties to be Served.
Numbe Street
r
Berks County
PIN
Property Description
307 E Main 437302579377 2 story alum/vinyl/stl, detached
309 E Main 437307670721 2 story frame, detached improvements
311 E Main 437307671736 2 story brick/masonry
100 Furlow 437307674818 1 story asbestos
101 Furlow 437307671587 2 story alum/vinyl/stl, detached
102 Furlow 437307675901 1 story alum/vinyl/stl, detached
104 Furlow 437307675984 1 story brick/masonry
106 Furlow 437307687131 2 story brick/masonry, detached
Furlow 437307687242 Vacant Lot
Furlow 437307688066 Vacant Lot
Furlow 437307676986 Vacant Lot
2128 Old Lancaster 437302788969 2 story alum/vinyl/stl
2130 Old Lancaster 437302787651 1 story brick/masonry, detached
2131 Old Lancaster 437302797466 1 story stucco
2134 Old Lancaster 437302785654 1 story frame/masonry
2135 Old Lancaster 437302796174 1 story brick/ masonry
2136 Old Lancaster 437307784636 1 story alum/vinyl/stl
2138 Old Lancaster 437307783529 1 story alum/vinyl/stl
2139 Old Lancaster 437307784909 2 story brick/masonry, detached
2140 Old Lancaster 437307781468 1-1/2 story asbestos
2141 Old Lancaster 437307783903 2 story alum/vinyl/stl, detached
2143 Old Lancaster 437307781853 1 story alum/ vinyl/ stl
2144 Old Lancaster 437307689314 1-1/2 story brick/masonry, detached
2145 Old Lancaster 437307689629 2 story frame, detached improvements
2149 Old Lancaster 437307687590 2 story alum/vinyl/stl, detached
2150 Old Lancaster 437307686178 1 story alum/vinyl/stl
2151 Old Lancaster 437307687426 2 story alum/vinyl/stl
2152 Old Lancaster 437307685182 1 story brick/masonry, detached
2153 Old Lancaster 437307685397 2 story composition, detached
2154 Old Lancaster 437307685029 2 story brick/masonry
2155 Old Lancaster 437307684334 2 story alum/vinylistl, detached
2156 Old Lancaster 437307684075 2 story brick/masonry
2157 Old Lancaster 437307682360 commercial building, detached
2158 Old Lancaster 437307684023 2 story brick/masonry
2159 Old Lancaster 437307682124 1 story alum/vinyl/stl, detached
2160 Old Lancaster 437307673989 2 story brick/masonry
2161 Old Lancaster 437307680751 2 story brick/masonry, detached
2162 Old Lancaster 437307673926 1 story brick/masonry
2164 Old Lancaster 437307672941 2 story brick/masonry, detached
Old Lancaster Flag Shop - On holding tank in
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)
XXIII -222
AP8313
Section 830. Calculation of Borough Conveyance System Charge.
A = Total Footage of Jointly Used Borough Sewer
Total Footage of Borough Owned Sewer
B = Spring Township Flow (Annual Average Flow Gallons per Day)'
Total Borough Wastewater Flow (Annual Average Flow Gallons per Day)
'Spring Township flow shall be determined from pervious year water meter readings and
multiplied by a factor of 1.10 to include a component for Infiltration Inflow.
'Total Borough Wastewater Flow shall be determined from previous year flows and will
include total flow from the Borough and Spring Township but not include flows from
East Cocalico Township Authority as they do not utilize the Borough collection system.
0 & M = Actual Previous Year Collection and Conveyance System Operation and
Maintenance Code = Cost shall include all expenses associated with
operation and maintenance of the Borough collection and conveyance
system including but not limited to operating labor and benefits, repair
costs, vehicle expenses, engineering and infiltration inflow investigation
and rehabilitation.
Spring Township Conveyance System Charge = O&M x A x B
Note that we did not include in the OI & M costs capital reserve contributions and
treatment facility debt service payments.
As an example it would look like the following:
A=
B=
10,986 feet = 0.337 This number should remain constant until
32,620 feet sewer is dedicated to the Borough.
10,000 gallons = 0.0287
338,248 + 10,000
O&M = $87,000 x 0.337 x 0.0287 = $841.90/ year or $210.48/qtr. Equivalent to
$210.489/40 EDUs = approximately $5.25/ EDU/Qtr.
(Ordinance No. 328, February 27, 2006, Agreement)


















AL4293
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 108.
CHAPTER )0(V
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Part 1
General Provisions
Short Title
Statement of Findings
Purpose
Statutory Authority
Applicability/ Regulated Activities
Repealer
Severability
Compatibility with Other Ordinance Requirements
Section 201. Interpretation
Section 202. Definitions
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Section 308.
Section 309.
Section 310.
Part 2
Definitions
Part 3
Stormwater Management
General Requirements
Requirements by Other Government Entities
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control During Regulated Earth
Disturbance Activities
Nonstructural Project Design (Sequencing to Minimize Stormwater
Impacts)
Ground Water Recharge (Infiltration/ Recharge/ Bioretention)
Water Quality Requirements
Streambank Erosion Requirements
Stormwater Management Districts
Calculation Methodology
Other Requirements
)0(V- 1
AL4293
Section 401.
Section 402.
Section 403.
Section 404.
Section 405.
Section 406.
Section 407.
Part 4
Drainage Plan Requirements
General Requirements
Exemptions
Drainage Plan Contents
Plan Submission
Drainage Plan Review
Modification of Plans
Resubmission of Disapproved Drainage Plans
Part 5
Inspections
Section 501. Schedule of Inspections
Part 6
Fees and Expenses
Section 601. Township Drainage Plan Review and Inspection Fees
Section 602. Expenses Covered by Fees
Section 701.
Section 702.
Section 703.
Section 704.
Section 705.
Section 706.
Part 7
Maintenance Responsibilities
Performance Guarantee
Adherence to Approved Stormwater Control and BMP Operations
and Maintenance Plan
Operations and Maintenance Agreement for Privately Owned
Stormwater Controls and BMPs
Stormwater Management Easements
Recording of Approved Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan and Related Agreements
Township Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund
AL4293
Part 8
Prohibitions
Section 801. Prohibited Discharges and Connections
Section 802. Roof Drains
Section 803. Alteration of SWM BMPs
Section 901.
Section 902.
Section 903.
Section 904.
Section 905.
Section 906.
Section 907.
Section 1001.
Section 1002.
Section 1003.
Section 1004.
Section 1005.
Section 1006.
Section 1007.
Part 9
Enforcement and Penalties
Right-of-Entry
Public Nuisance
General Enforcement
Suspension and Revocation of Permits and Approvals
Penalties
Notification
Enforcement
Part 10
Appendices
Appendix A - Stormwater Controls and Best Management Practices
Operations and Maintenance Agreement
Appendix B - Stormwater Management Design Criteria
Appendix C - Drainage Plan Application
Appendix D - Stormwater Management District Watershed Map
Appendix E - Low Impact Development Practices
Appendix F - West Nile Virus Guide
Appendix G - References
AL4293
AL4293
Part 1
General Provisions
Section 101. Short Title. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
Township of Spring Stormwater Management Ordinance"). (Ordinance No. 355, March 24,
2008, Section 1)
Section 102. Statement of Findings. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring finds that:
(A) Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities,
contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing
streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey
and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood reduction
efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
and threatens public health and safety.
(B) Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can also harm
surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns, accelerating
stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of stream-beds and stream-banks
thereby elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic
pollutant concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.
(C) A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment and activities
causing accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and
the protection of the people of the Township and all the people of the
Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
(D) Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed poses a threat to surface and
groundwater quality.
(E) Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
)0(V- 5
AL4293
(F) Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project
designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime, and sustain high water quality,
groundwater recharge, stream baseflow and aquatic ecosystems. The most cost
effective and environmentally advantageous way to manage storm water runoff is
through nonstructural project design, minimizing impervious surfaces and sprawl,
avoiding sensitive areas (i.e. stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and
designing to topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
(G) Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
(H) Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to
obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems
under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
(I) Non-stormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer
systems can contribute to pollution of waters of the Commonwealth by the
Township.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 103. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health,
safety, and welfare within the Township of Spring by maintaining the natural hydrologic
regime by minimizing the impacts described in Section 102 of this Chapter through
provisions designed to:
(A) Promote alternative project designs and layout that minimizes impacts
to surface and ground water.
(B) Promote nonstructural Best Management Practices (BMPs).
(C) Minimize increases in stormwater volume.
(D) Minimize impervious surfaces.
(E) Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
(F) Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
)0(V- 6
AL4293
(G) Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
(H) Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
(I) Focus on infiltration of stormwater, to maintain groundwater
recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
(J) Maintain existing base flows and quality of streams and watercourses,
where possible.
(K) Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain "existing uses" and
maintain the level of water quality to support those uses in all streams, and to
protect and maintain water quality in "special protection" streams.
(L) Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the
development site.
(M) Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the
NPDES permit requirements.
(N) Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address non-stormwater discharges into the Township's separate storm sewer
system.
(0)
(P)
(Q)
Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambed.s.
Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershedwide
stormwater management and planning.
(R) Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and BMPs that are implemented in the Township.
(S) NPDES Requirements. Federal regulations approved October 1999
require operators of small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) to obtain
NPDES Phase II permits from PaDEP by March 2003. ( NPDES II is an acronym for
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Phase II Stormwater
Permitting Regulations.) This program affects all municipalities in "urbanized
XXV- 7
AL4293
areas" of the state. This definition applies to all Schuylkill River watershed
municipalities identified in Table III-1 of the Schuylkill River Stormwater
Management Plan Volume II as NPDES Phase II municipalities. Therefore, these
identified municipalities will be subject to the NPDES Phase II requirements
mandated by the Federal Clean Water Act as administered by PaDEP. For more
information on NPDES II requirements, contact the PaDEP Regional Office.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 104. Statutory Authority.
(A) Primary Authority. The Township is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S.
Section 680.1, et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act" and the
Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. Section 65101, et seq., as
amended.
(B) Secondary Authority. The Township also is empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 105. Applicability/ Regulated Activities. All Regulated Activities and all
activlities that may affect stormwater runoff, including Land Development and Earth
Disturbance Activity, are subject to regulation by this Chapter. (Ordinance No. 355, March
24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 106. Repealer. Any ordinance or ordinance provision of this Township
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 107. Severability. Should any section or provision of this Chapter be
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Chapter. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24,
2008, Section 1)
Section 108. Compatibility With Other Ordinance Requirements. Approvals issued
and actions taken under this Chapter do not relieve the Applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
XXV- 8
AL4293
Part 2
Definitions
Section 201. Interpretation. For the purposes of this Chapter, certain terms and
words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
(A) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of
masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include
masculine gender.
(B) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like
kind and character.
(C) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of government, or any
other similar entity.
(D) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(E) The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 202. Definitions.
Accelerated Erosion - The removal of the surface of the land through the
combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate greater than
would occur because of the natural process alone.
Agricultural Activities - The work of producing crops and raising livestock
including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and installation of
conservation measures. For purposes of regulation by this Chapter construction of
new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
Alteration - As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the
moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also the changing
of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious; land
disturbance.
AL4293
As-built drawings - Those maintained by the Contractor as he constructs the
project and upon which he documents the actual locations of the building
components and changes to the original contract documents. An accurately drafted
version of same are turned over to the Township at the completion of the project as
the "record as-built drawings".
Applicant - A person who has filed an application for approval to engage in
any Regulated Activities as defined in Section 105 of this Chapter.
Bankfull - The channel at the top-of-bank or point where water begins to
overflow onto a floodplain.
Base Flow - Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water diversions,
reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
Bioretention - A stormwater retention area which utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (Best Management Practice) - Activities, facilities, designs, measures or
procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from land development, to protect
and maintain water quality and groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the
purposes of this Chapter, including but not limited to, structural and non-structural
stormwater management practices and operation and maintenance procedures. See
also Non-structured Best Management Practice (BMP).
Board of Supervisors - The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring.
Buffer - The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream, measured
perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of a stream.
(See Top of Bank)
Channel - A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open
surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainage ways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.
Channel Erosion - The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of small
channels and waterways, caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
Chapter 102 - Chapter 102 of the regulations of PaDEP, 25 Pa. Code Sect.
102.1 et seq.
AL4293
Chapter 105 - Chapter 105 of the regulations of PaDEP, 25 Pa. Code Sect.
105.1 et seq.
Chapter 106 - Chapter 106 of the regulations of PaDEP, 25 Pa. Code Sect.
106.1 et seq.
Cistern - An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
Conservation District - The Berks County Conservation District.
Culvert - A structure with appurtenant works, which carries water under or
through an embankment or fill.
Dam - An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed
for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a
refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other purposes which does or
may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
Department - The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PaDEP).
Designee - The agent of the Berks County Planning Commission, Berks
County Conservation District and /or agent of the Board of Supervisors involved
with the administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this Chapter by
contract or memorandum of understanding.
Design Professional (Qualified) - Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by
the Chapter.
Design Storm - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation
from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a 5-year storm) and
duration (e.g., 24-hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater
management systems.
Designated Watershed (ACT 167) -A Watershed which is listed under the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's "Index of Designated
Watersheds (Stormwater Management)" pursuant to the Stormwater Management
Act P.L. 864, No. 167, October 4, 1978, and published in the Pennsylvania Bulletin on
May 31, 1980 and August 9, 1980, as amended on November 19,1991, April 21, 1992,
June 21, 1994, April 16, 1996, April 15, 1997 and December 16, 1997).
A L4293
Detention Basin - An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely shortly after
any given rainfall event and are dry until the next rainfall event.
Developer -A person that seeks to undertake any Regulated Activities at a
project site in the Township.
Development - Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved real
estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to land development,
construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other structure, land
division, street construction, drilling, and site alteration such as embankments,
dredging, grubbing, grading, paving, parking or storage facilities, excavation,
filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As used in this Chapter, development encompasses
both new development and redevelopment.
Development Site - The specific tract of land where any Regulated Activities
in the Township are planned, conducted or maintained.
Diffused Drainage Discharge - Drainage discharge not confined to a single
point location or channel, such as sheet flow or shallow concentrated flow.
Discharge - 1. (verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage
basin or other point of interest 2. (noun) The rate and volume of flow of water such
as in a stream, generally expressed in cubic feet per second (volume per unit of
time). See also Peak Discharge.
Discharge Point - The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
Disturbed Areas - Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity
is occurring or has occurred.
Ditch - An artificial waterway for irrigation or stormwater conveyance.
Downslope Property Line - That portion of the property line of the lot, tract,
or parcels of land being developed located such that overland or pipe flow from the
site would be directed towards it.
Drainage Conveyance Facility -A Stormwater Management Facility designed
to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include channels, swales, pipes, conduits,
culverts, storm sewers, etc.
Drainage Easement -A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing
)0(V- 12
AL4293
the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
Drainage Permit - A permit issued by the Township after the drainage plan
has been approved.
Drainage Plan - The plan prepared by the Applicant or his representative
indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the particular site of interest
according to this Chapter.
Earth Disturbance Activity -A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavations, embankments, land development, agricultural plowing or
tilling, timber harvesting activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction,
and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
Emergency Spillway -A conveyance area that is used to pass peak discharge
greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the stormwater facility.
Encroachment -A structure or activity that changes, expands or diminishes
the course, current or cross section of a watercourse, floodway or body of water.
Ephemeral Stream - A transient stream, one that flows for a relatively
short time.
Erosion - The process by which the surface of the land, including channels, is
worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Plan -A plan for a project site which
identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
Exceptional Value Waters - Surface waters of high quality which satisfy
Pennsylvania Code Title 25 Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality
Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to anti-degradation).
Existing Conditions - The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land, the land
use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover is proven to
generate lower curve numbers or Rational "C" value, such as forested lands.
Flood - A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this Commonwealth.
Floodplain - Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
XXV- 13
AL4293
natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary - Mapped
as being a special flood hazard area.
Floodway - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100 -
year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is
as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area
where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year
frequency floodway, it is assumed - absent evidence to the contrary - that the
floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top-of-bank.
Fluvial Geomorphology - The study of landforms associated with river
channels and the processes that form them.
Forest Management/Timber Operations - Planning and activities necessary
for the management of forest land with no change of land use proposed. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting
and reforestation.
Freeboard - A vertical distance between the elevation of the design highwater
and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The space
is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
Grade - A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein. (To) Grade - to finish the surface of
a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
Grassed Waterway - A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface water.
Groundwater - Water beneath the earth's surface, often between saturated
soil and rock that supplies wells and springs.
Groundwater Recharge - Replenishment of existing natural underground
water supplies without degrading groundwater quality.
HEC-HMS - The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS).
High Quality Waters - Surface waters having quality which exceeds levels
necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and recreation in
XXV- 14
AL4293
and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25 Environmental
Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
Hotspots - Areas where land use or activities generate highly contaminated
runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in
stormwater.
Hydrograph -A graph of discharge versus time for a selected point in the
drainage system.
Hydrologic Regime (natural) - The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains
quality and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage, and groundwater supplies
under natural conditions.
Hydrologic Soil Group, - A classification of soils by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service, into four runoff
potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and
produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much
more runoff.
Impervious Surface -A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the
ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any roof, parking or
driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to
be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
Impoundment -A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater
runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
Infill - Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain undeveloped
but are within or very close proximity to urban areas. The development relies on
existing infrastructure and does not require an extension of water, sewer or other
public utilities.
Infiltration - Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by
plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolates downward to recharge
groundwater.
Infiltration Structures - A structure designed to direct runoff into the
underground water (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
Inlet - The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
AL4293
Intermittent Stream - A stream that flows only part of the time. Flow
generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal precipitation,
due to groundwater discharge.
Land Development - Any of the following activities:
(1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(a) A group of two or more residential or nonresidential
buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure, or
(b) The division or allocation of land or space, whether
initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other
features;
(2) A subdivision of land;
(3) Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.
Limiting zone -A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or underlying
strata which includes one of the following:
(1) A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional,
determined by direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil
mottling.
(2) A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or
masses of loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to
fill the voids between the fragments.
(3) A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition which is so
slowly permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
Lineament - A fracture on the order of 10's of kilometers long, usually
extending to the basement below sedimentary rock.
Lot - A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
XXV- 16
AL4293
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
Main Stem (Main Channel) - Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance
facility used as a reach in the hydrologic model for any watershed covered in this
Ordinance.
Manning Equation (Manning formula) -A method for calculation of velocity
of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open
channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open
channels" may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
Natural Condition - Existing conditions
Natural Hydrologic Regime (see hydrologic regime)
Natural Recharge Area - Undisturbed surface area or depression where
stormwater collects, and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes the
underground and groundwater.
Nonpoint Source Pollution - Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse
origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible, confined, or discrete
conveyances.
Non-stormwater Discharges - Water flowing in stormwater collection
facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a rainfall event or
snowmelt.
Nonstructural Best Management Practice (BMPs) - Methods of controlling
stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative site planning,
impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural depression areas,
temporary ponding on site and other techniques.
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is
delegated to PaDEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS - Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
Open Channel -A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open
surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals and pipes flowing partially full.
AL 4293
Outfall - "Point source" as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point where the
Township's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the Commonwealth.
Outlet - Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial
drain.
Parent Tract - The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of the Township's adoption of this
Chapter.
Parking Lot Storage - Involves the use of parking areas as temporary
impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
Peak Discharge - The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific
storm event.
Penn State Runoff Model - The computer-based hydrologic model developed
at the Pennsylvania State University.
Pipe - A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
Planning Commission - The planning commission of the Township of Spring.
Point Source - any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including,
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from which
stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in State regulations at 25 Pa. Code
§ 92.1.
Post Construction - Period after construction where disturbed areas are
stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning and all proposed
improvements in the approved land development plan are completed.
Pretreatment - Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide storage
or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they enter the
system, but not necessarily meet the water quality volume requirements of Section
306.
Project Site - The specific area of land where any Regulated Earth Disturbance
activities in the Township are planned, conducted or maintained.
Rain Garden - A BMP overlain with appropriate mulch and suitable
vegetation designed, constructed, and maintained for the purpose of providing
)0W- 18
AL4293
infiltration or recharge of stormwater into the soil and /or underground aquifer.
Rational Formula - A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
Recharge - The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration of
rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated wastewater.
Reconstruction - Demolition of, and subsequent rebuilding of impervious
surface.
Record As-built Drawings - Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the applicant to the Township.
Redevelopment - The demolition, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
improvement exceeding 2,000 square feet of land disturbance performed on sites
where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily
residential. Maintenance activities such as top-layer grinding and re-paving are not
considered to be redevelopment. Interior remodeling projects and tenant
improvements are also not considered to be redevelopment. Utility trenches in
streets are not considered redevelopment unless more than 50% of the street width
is removed and re-paved.
Regulated Activities - Any actions or proposed actions that involve the
alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.
Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity - Activity involving Earth Disturbance
subject to regulation under 25 PA Code Chapters 92, Chapter 102, or the Clean
Streams Law.
Release Rate - The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff from
a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff must be
reduced to protect downstream areas.
Repaving - Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
Replacement Paving - Reconstruction of and full replacement of an existing
paved (impervious) surface.
Retention Basin -A structure in which stormwater is stored and not released
during the storm event. Retention basins do not typically have an outlet to other
down stream conveyance features such as channels, storm sewer, or other surface
waters. Generally, these features empty via recharge and must infiltrate stored
)0(V- 19
AL4293
water in no more than 4 days. These features may have an emergency spillway or
other overflow device for large events.
Return Period - The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of
a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the 25-year return period
rainfall would be expected to recur on the average of once every twenty-five years.
Riser - A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to
control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
Road Maintenance - Earth disturbance activities within the existing road
cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting
road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and other similar activities.
Roof Drains - A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from a
roof and leads it away from the structure.
Rooftop Detention - Temporary ponding and gradual release of stormwater
falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating controlled-flow roof drains
into building designs.
Runoff - Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO - The Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Sediment Basin - A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and
designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported by water
during construction.
Sediment Pollution - The placement, discharge or any other introduction of
sediment into the waters of the Commonwealth.
Sedimentation - The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
Seepage Pit/Seepage Trench - An underground BMP structure designed,
constructed, and maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of
stormwater into the soil and /or groundwater aquifer.
Separate Storm Sewer System - A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains) primarily used for collecting
and conveying stormwater runoff.
)0(V- 20
AL4293
Shallow Concentrated Flow - Stormwater runoff flowing in shallow, defined
ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
Sheet Flow -A flow process associated with broad, shallow water movement
on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or concentrated.
Soil-Cover Complex Method -A method of runoff computation developed by
the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff
parameter called Curve Number (CN).
Source Water Protection Areas (SWPA) - The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water well or
surface water intake.
Special Geologic Features - Carbonate bedrock features, including but not
limited to closed depressions, existing sinkholes, fracture traces, lineaments, joints,
faults, intermittent lakes, ephemeral streams, caves and pinnacles, which may exist
and must be identified on a site when stormwater management BMPs are being
considered.
Special Protection Subwatersheds - Watersheds for which the receiving
waters are exceptional value (EV) or high quality (HQ) waters.
Spillway - A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm controlled by the stormwater facility.
State Water Quality Requirements - The regulatory requirements to protect,
maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and
the Clean Streams Law.
Storage Indication Method -A reservoir routing procedure based on solution
of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the change in storage) with
outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.
Storm Frequency - The number of times that a given storm "event" occurs or
is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "Return Period".
Storm Sewer - A system of pipes and /or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes domestic
sewage and industrial wastes.
Stormwater - The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching the
ground surface.
XXV- 21
AL4293
Stormwater Management District - Those subareas in which some type of
detention is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act 167.
Stormwater Management Facility - Any structure, natural or man-made, that,
due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects
stormwater runoff quality, rate or quantity. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open
channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.
Stormwater Management Plan - The plan for managing those land use
activities that will influence stormwater runoff quality and quantity and that would
impact the tributaries within any Watershed for which Berks County has adopted a
Stormwater Management Plan as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864,
(Act 167).
Stream -A natural watercourse.
Stream Buffer - The land area adjacent to each side of a stream, essential to
maintaining water quality. (See Buffer)
Stream Enclosure - A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of 100 feet in
length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated water of this
Commonwealth.
Subarea (Subwatershed)- The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the Stormwater
Management Plan.
Subdivision - The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any
means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including
changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or
building or lot development: Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any
new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
Surface Waters of the Commonwealth - Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands,
ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
Commonwealth.
AL4293
Swale - A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
Timber Operations - See Forest Management.
Time-of-Concentration (Tc) - The time for surface runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest within the
watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow time in
pipes or channels, if any.
Top-of-Bank - Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross section at
which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel and over the
floodplain.
Township - The Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
Township Engineer - A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for the Township.
Vernal Pond - Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by shallow
water for variable periods from winter to spring, but may be completely dry for
most of the summer and fall.
Watercourse -A channel or conveyance of surface water having defined bed
and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
Waters of the Commonwealth - Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds,
springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground
water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of
this Commonwealth.
Watershed - Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other body of
water, whether natural or artificial.
Wellhead - 1. a structure built over a well, 2. the source of water for a well.
Wellhead Protection Area - The surface and subsurface area surrounding a
water supply well, well field, spring or infiltration gallery supplying a public water
system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and
reach the water source.
AL4293
Wet Basin - Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain
urban runoff and always contains water.
Wetland - Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar
areas.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
Part 3
Stormwater Management
Section 301. General Requirements.
(A) Applicants proposing regulated activities in the Township of Spring
which do not fall under the exemption criteria shown in Section 402 shall submit a
drainage plan consistent with the applicable Watershed Stormwater Management
Plan to the Township for review. These criteria shall apply to the total proposed
development even if development is to take place in stages.
(B) All regulated activities involving an increase in impervious cover, a
diversion of stormwater runoff crossing or leaving a site, or an alteration to the
existing groundcover, shall be conducted in conformance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
(C) The Applicant is required to evaluate practicable alternatives to the
surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the Commonwealth, and must maintain as much as
possible the natural hydrologic regime
(D) The Drainage Plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing
provisions of Section 304 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic regime
and to promote groundwater recharge and protect groundwater and surface water
quality and quantity. The Drainage Plan designer must proceed sequentially in
accordance with Part 3 of this Chapter.
(E) Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered in any manner which could cause property damage
without permission of the affected property owner(s) and shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria specified in this Chapter.
(F) Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing discharge, whether
proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas, except as
otherwise provided by this Chapter. If diffused drainage discharge is proposed to
be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the Applicant must
document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport
the concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation,
flooding or other impacts will result from the concentrated discharge.
AL4293
(G) Where a development site is traversed by existing watercourses,
drainage easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses.
The terms of the easement shall conform to the stream buffer requirements
contained in Section 306(F) of this Chapter.
(H) Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the Commonwealth or wetlands shall
be subject to approval by PaDEP through the Joint Permit Application process, or,
where deemed appropriate by PaDEP, the General Permit process. When there is a
question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the Applicant
or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands,
otherwise approval to work in the area must be obtained from PaDEP.
(I) Any stormwater management facilities that would be located within
State highway rights-of-way or any alteration that affects stormwater flow directly
or indirectly toward a PennDOT facility shall be subject to PennDOT regulations.
Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc. are encouraged, where soil conditions
permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention facilities or other
structural BMPs.
(K) Roof drains shall not be connected to impervious surfaces in order to
promote overland flow and infiltration/ percolation of stormwater where
advantageous to do so. When site conditions preclude infiltration/ percolation, then
it shall be permitted on a case by case basis by the Township.
(L) All stormwater runoff shall be treated for water quality
(M) Transference of runoff to or from an EV/ HQ watershed is prohibited
unless otherwise authorized by PaDEP, DRBC or SRBC.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 302. Requirements by Other Government Entities. All activities regulated by
this Chapter must comply with any and all applicable local, county, state and federal
regulations. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 303. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control During Regulated Earth
Disturbance Activities.
(A) Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and Regulations,
)0(V- 26
AL4293
Part I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection,
Subpart C, protection of natural Resources, Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102,
"Erosion Control,".
(B) No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until the Township receives an approval from the Conservation District
of an Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Plan for construction activities.
(C) PaDEP has regulations that require an Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Plan for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under
25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
(D) In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a PaDEP "NPDES
Construction Activities" permit is required for Regulated Earth Disturbance
activities.
(E) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for Regulated Earth Disturbance
activities from the appropriate PaDEP regional office or County Conservation
District must be provided to the Township. The issuance of an NPDES Construction
Permit (or permit coverage under the statewide General Permit (PAG-2) satisfies the
requirements subsection 303.(A).
(F) A copy of the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control plan and any
required permit, as required by PaDEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
(G) Additional erosion and sediment pollution control design standards
and criteria, recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed,
shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to maintain
maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff
until the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization
(H) Erosion and sediment pollution control devices shall be installed
concurrently with earthmoving activities and whenever a situation is created which
would contribute to increased erosion.
AL4293
(I) No earthmoving or stripping of vegetation will be conducted in areas
of greater than thirty-three (33) percent slope unless specific approval is obtained
from the Township.
(J) Earthmoving and the addition of fill shall be maintained where
possible and practicable to preserve desirable natural features and the topography
of the site. Changes in grade and topography and other earthmoving shall be in
accordance with the approved Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Plan.
(K) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done
in such a way that will minimize erosion.
(L) All clearing and grading operations shall comply with the
requirements for Tree Preservation included in Chapter 32 (the Township of Spring
Zoning Ordinance).
(1) Land disturbance shall be limited to the actual construction site
and an access strip. The amount of disturbed area and the duration of
exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum.
(2) To the maximum extent practicable, mature healthy trees of at
least six (6) inches trunk width measured three (3) feet above the average
surrounding ground level shall be retained and protected. Such trees shall
not be removed except as provided on the approved subdivision or land
development plan and in accordance with the applicable provisions of
Chapter 32 (the Township of Spring Zoning Ordinance). The filling of soil
over the roots of trees to be preserved is prohibited. (The roots are presumed
to extend out from the tree as far as the tree's branches extent outward.)
(M) Procedures for protecting soils or geologic structures with water
supply potential from contamination by surface water or other disruption by
construction activity shall be established in consultation with the Township and
such areas shall include, at minimum, those underlain by carbonate limestone
formations. The Township may require pollution control facilities to be provided on
existing and proposed stormwater management systems within or adjacent to the
project site
(N) Provisions for protecting existing wells or other water supplies shall
be established.
(0) Unless otherwise permitted, graded slopes shall not be steeper than
three (3) horizontal units to one (1) vertical unit.
AL4293
(P) A minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil shall be provided on all
disturbed areas prior to final seeding and mulching.
(Q) Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open
channels, and at all points of discharge (PaDEP Erosion, Sediment and Pollution
Control Manual).
(R) Sediment and erosion pollution control facilities shall be designed
according to applicable governmental standards, specifically the following:
(1) PaDEP sediment and erosion control plan requirements in
Chapter 102, Title 25 [Pa.Code].
(2) Berks County Conservation District standards, which has been
delegated by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to
enforce the erosion and sediment pollution control plan.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit the
application and other necessary material to the Berks County Conservation
District. Comments shall be received and compliance therewith
accomplished prior to final plan approval.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 304. Nonstructural Project Design (Sequencing to Minimize Stormwater
Impacts).
(A) For projects disturbing one (1) acre or more, the design of all
Regulated Activities shall include evaluation of practicable alternatives to the
surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces, and the
degradation of waters of the Commonwealth, and must maintain as much as
possible the natural hydrologic regime of the site.
(1) An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of
being done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology and
logistics in light of overall project purposes, and other Township
requirements.
(2) All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are
presumed to have less adverse impact on quantity and quality of waters of
the Commonwealth unless otherwise demonstrated.
AL4293
(B) The Applicant shall demonstrate that the design of Regulated
Activities that disturb one (1) acre or more include the following issues:
(1) Preparation of an Existing Resource and Site Analysis Map
(ERSAM), showing environmentally sensitive areas including, but not
limited to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils, vernal
pools, flood plains, stream buffer zones, hydrologic soil groups A and B
(areas conducive to infiltration), areas of limestone or karst geology, special
geologic features, any existing recharge areas and any other requirements
outlined in the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(2) Establishment of appropriate buffers for each of the delineated
environmentally sensitive areas per the Township Zoning Ordinance and
this Ordinance (See Section 306(F) for stream buffers and Section 310(K) for
special geologic feature buffers).
(3) Preparation of a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas
identified in Section 304(B)(1).
(4) Identification of site specific existing conditions drainage areas,
discharge points, recharge areas and hydrologic soil groups A and B.
(5) Evaluation of Nonstructural Stormwater Management
Alternatives
(a) Minimization of earth disturbance
(b) Minimization of impervious surfaces
(c) Break up of large impervious surfaces.
(6) Compliance with the infiltration objective (Section 305) and
provisions for stormwater pretreatment prior to infiltration. Pretreatment
may not be necessary for rooftop runoff which enters the infiltration facility
directly from a roof leader.
(7) Compliance with water quality provisions (Section 306) and
streambank erosion protection objective (Section 307).
(8) Determination of applicable Management District Section 1004)
and performance of an existing conditions runoff analysis.
AL4293
(9) Preparation of final project design to maintain existing
conditions drainage areas and discharge points, to minimize earth
disturbance and impervious surfaces, and to the maximum extent possible, to
ensure the remaining site development has no surface or point discharge.
(10) Performance of a proposed conditions runoff analysis based on
the final design, and meeting the release rate and the overbank flow and
extreme event requirements (Section 308).
(11) Management of any remaining runoff through treatment prior
to discharge, as part of detention, bioretention, direct discharge or other
structural control.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 305. Ground Water Recharge (Infiltration/ Recharge/ Bioretention).
Maximizing the ground water recharge capacity of the area being developed is required.
Design of the infiltration stormwater management facilities shall give consideration to
providing ground water recharge to compensate for the reduction in the percolation that
occurs when the ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created. It is
recommended that roof runoff be directed to infiltration BMPs which can be over-designed
to compensate for runoff from, and infiltration losses due to, parking areas. These
measures are required to be consistent with Section 103, and take advantage of utilizing
any existing recharge areas.
Infiltration may not be feasible on every site due to site-specific limitations such as soil
type. If it cannot be physically accomplished, due to seasonal high water table, soil
permeability rate, soil depth or setback distances from special geologic features, then the
design professional shall be responsible to show that this cannot be physically
accomplished. If it can be physically accomplished, then the volume of runoff to be
infiltrated shall be determined from Sections 305(A)(3) depending on demonstrated site
conditions and shall be the greater of the two volumes.
(A) Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Infiltration Requirements. Regulated activities will be required
to infiltrate, where site conditions permit, a portion of the runoff created by
the development as part of an overall stormwater management plan
designed for the site. The volume of runoff to be infiltrated shall be
determined from Sections 305.(A)(3)(a) or 305.(A)(3)(b), depending upon
demonstrated site conditions.
AL4293
(2) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed
areas shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions and
shall be constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:
(a) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of
the BMP and the limiting zone.
(b) An infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient to
accept the additional stormwater load and drain completely as
determined by field tests conducted by the Applicant's design
professional.
(c) The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely
infiltrating the required retention (infiltration) volume within 4 days
(96 hours).
(d) Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration. The
pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from
clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater
quality
(3) The size of the infiltration facility shall be based upon the
following volume criteria:
(a) NRCS Curve Number equation.
The NRCS runoff equation shall be utilized to calculate
infiltration requirements (I) in inches.
I (Infiltration requirement, in inches) = (200 / CN) -2 Eqn: 305.1 I
Where:
CN = SCS (NRCS) curve number of existing conditions
contributing to the infiltration facility.
This equation is displayed graphically in, and the infiltration
requirement can be determined from Figure 305.1.
It has been determined that infiltrating 0.46 inches of runoff
from the impervious areas will aid in maintaining the
hydrologic regime of the watershed. However, the rounded
number 0.5 inches will be used.
XXV- 32
AL4293
Required Infiltration (I) in inches by NRCS CNI
a-
0
0.5
0
40
Figure 305.1. Infiltration requirement based upon NRCS Curve Number.
The retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) required to meet the
infiltration requirement would therefore be computed as:
Rev = (0.5 or I, whichever is greater)* impervious area (square feet) / (12
in/ft) = Cubic Feet
Eqn: 305.2
Where:
I = infiltration requirements (in inches.)
(b) Annual Recharge - Water Budget Approach.
If the goals of Sections 305.(A)(3)(a) cannot be achieved, then
0.5 inches of rainfall shall be infiltrated from all impervious
areas, up to an existing site conditions curve number of 81.
Above a curve number of 81, Equation 305.1 or the curve in
)0(V- 33
AL4293
Figure 305.1 should be used to determine the infiltration
requirement.
The retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) required again would
therefore be computed as:
Rev = (0.5 or I, whichever is greater) * impervious area (sq.ft.) / (12in/ ft) =
Cubic Feet.
(B) Soils - A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required
where practicable to determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. The
evaluation shall be performed by a qualified design professional, and at a minimum,
address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, presence of special geologic features
and subgrade stability. The general process for designing the infiltration BMP shall
be:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is under
consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of sub-grade stability;
infiltration is not permitted to be ruled out without conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface)
to determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate. Percolation tests
are not recommended for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration structure for the required retention (Rey)
volume based on field determined capacity at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface.
(4) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the Applicant's
design professional, it must be demonstrated to the Township that the soils
are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
(C) Carbonate Areas - The Applicant is required to investigate the ability
of all areas on the site which are not underlain by carbonate rock to meet the
infiltration requirements of Section 305(A). If this investigation proves infeasible,
infiltration may occur on areas underlain by carbonate rock. Nevertheless, extreme
caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in geologically susceptible
areas. Design of such infiltration facilities shall follow the recommended procedure
below in conjunction with Figure B-1 in Section 1002 (Appendix B); however, the
Applicant is not required to use infiltration in carbonate areas even if the site falls into the
)0(V- 34
AL4293
"Recommended" range on Figure B-1 in Section 1002 (Appendix B). If infiltration is not
proposed, the calculated infiltration volume (Section 305(A)) shall be treated by an
acceptable BMP.
Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in Figure B-1 in Section 1002 (Appendix B)
shall be calculated as follows:
( Area tributary to the infiltration BMP
*100%
Base Area of the infiltration BMP
The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as follows:
Area Description Weighting
All disturbed area to be made impervious 100%
All disturbed areas to be made pervious 50%
All undisturbed impervious areas 100%
All undisturbed pervious areas 0%
Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed infiltration BMP.
The effective soil thickness in Figure B-1 in Section 1002 (Appendix B) is the
measured soil thickness multiplied by the thickness factor based on soil
permeability, as follows:
Permeability Range
6.0 to 12.0 inches/hr
2.0 to 6.0 inches / hr
1.0 to 2.0 inches/hr
0.75 to 1.0 inches/hr
0.5 to 0.75 inches/hr
Thickness Factor
0.8
1.0
1.4
1.2
1.0
The design of all facilities over Karst shall include an evaluation of measures to
minimize adverse effects.
(D) Stormwater Hotspots - Following is a list of examples of designated
hotspots. If a site is designated as a hotspot, it has important implications for how
stormwater is managed. First and foremost, untreated stormwater runoff from
hotspots shall not be allowed to recharge into groundwater where it may
contaminate water supplies. Therefore, the Rev requirement shall NOT be applied
to development sites that fit into the hotspot category (the entire WQv must still be
treated). Second, a greater level of stormwater treatment shall be considered at
hotspot sites to prevent pollutant washoff after construction. EPA's NPDES
stormwater program requires some industrial sites to prepare and implement a
stormwater pollution prevention plan.
XXV- 35
AL4293
Examples of Hotspots:
(1) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities
(2) Vehicle fueling stations
(3) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities
(4) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities
(5) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.)
(6) Industrial sites (based on Standard Industrial Codes)
(7) Marinas (service and maintenance)
(8) Outdoor liquid container storage
(9) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities
(10) Public works storage areas
(11) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials
(12) Commercial container nursery
(13) Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate
review authority
The following land uses and activities are not normally considered hotspots:
(1) Residential streets and rural highways
(2) Residential development
(3) Institutional development
(4) Office developments
(5) Non-industrial rooftops
(6) Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries (which
may need an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Plan).
XXV- 36
AL4293
While large highways (average daily traffic volume (ADT) greater than 30,000) are
not designated as a stormwater hotspot; it is important to ensure that highway
stormwater management plans adequately protect groundwater.
(E) Caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in Source
Water Protection Areas as defined by the Township or local Water
Authority/ Provider.
(F) Infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other innovative
or traditional stormwater control facilities that are found within the PaDEP State
BMP Manual.
(G) Caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride (municipal salt
storage) would be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this pollutant and it may
contaminate the groundwater. The qualified design professional shall evaluate the
possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed infiltration facility and
perform a hydrogeologic justification study if necessary.
(H) The infiltration requirement in High Quality or Exceptional Value
waters shall be subject to the Department's Chapter 93 Antidegradation
Regulations.
(I) Dependant upon certain land uses or hotspots an impermeable liner
will be required in detention basins where the possibility of groundwater
contamination exists. A detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be required by
the Township.
0) The Township shall require the Applicant to provide safeguards
against groundwater contamination for land uses that may cause groundwater
contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
(K) For projects that disturb one (1) acre or more, unless greater setbacks
are specified in the Zoning Ordinance, the following setbacks for infiltration
facilities shall apply:
(1) 100 feet from water supply wells;
(2) 10 feet downslope or 100 feet upslope from building
foundations;
(3) 50 feet from septic system drainfields;
AL4293
(4) 100 feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock, unless
a preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate bedrock to show the
absence of special geologic features within 100 feet of the proposed
infiltration area; and
(5) 100 feet from the property line unless documentation is
provided to show all setbacks from wells, foundations and drainfields on the
neighboring property will be met.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 306. Water Quality Requirements. The applicant shall comply with the
following water quality requirements of this Part.
(A) Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment
facilities necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. The infiltration volume
computed under Section 305 may be a component of the water quality volume if the
Applicant chooses to manage both components in a single facility. If the infiltration
volume is less than the water quality volume, the remaining water quality volume
may be captured and treated by methods other than infiltration BMPs. The required
water quality volume (WQv) is the storage capacity needed to capture and treat a
portion of stormwater runoff from the developed areas of the site.
To achieve this goal, the following criterion is established:
The following calculation formula is to be used to determine the water
quality storage volume, (WQ,7), in acre-feet of storage for any watershed
within the Township of Spring:
WQ,=[(P)(R,)(A)1/ 12 Eqn: 306.1
WQ, = Water Quality Volume (acre-feet)
P = 1 inch
A = Total contributing drainage area to the water quality BMP (acres)
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is the percent of the area that is impervious
surface ((impervious area/ A)*100)
This volume requirement can be accomplished by the permanent volume of a
wet basin or the detained volume from other BMPs.
Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the
water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The design of the facility
XXV- 38
AL4293
shall provide for protection from clogging and unwanted sedimentation.
(B) For areas within defined Special Protection subwatersheds which
include Exceptional Value (EV) and High Quality (HQ) waters, Cold Water Fishery
(CWF) the temperature and quality of water and streams shall be maintained.
(C) To accomplish the above, the Applicant shall use innovative or
traditional stormwater control facilities that are found within the PaDEP State BMP
Manual.
(D) If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the
applicant shall create a stream buffer extending a minimum of fifty (50) feet to either
side of the top-of-bank of the channel. The buffer area shall be maintained with
appropriate native vegetation (Reference to Appendix H of Pennsylvania Handbook
of Best Management Practices for Developing Area for plant lists). If the applicable
rear or side yard setback is less than fifty (50) feet, the buffer width may be reduced
to twenty-five (25) percent of the setback to a minimum of ten (10) feet. However, in
no case shall such buffer be less in width than that specified for a riparian buffer in
the Township Zoning Ordinance. If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e.
deed, covenant, easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this Chapter, the
existing buffer shall be maintained. This does not include lakes or wetlands.
(E) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate PaDEP regional office must be provided to the
Township. The issuance of an NPDES Construction Permit (or permit coverage
under the statewide General Permit (PAG-2) satisfies the requirements of subsection
306(A).
(F) In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the land
developer SHALL consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and well heads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
XXV- 39
AL4293
(G) The following additional factors SHOULD be considered when
evaluating the suitability of BMPs used to control water quality at a given
development site:
(1) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(2) Stream bank erosion.
(3) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
The nature of the pollutant being removed.
Maintenance requirements.
Creation/ protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
Recreational value.
Enhancement of aesthetic and property value.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 307. Streambank Erosion Requirements. In addition to control of the water
quality volume, in order to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on downstream
streambank erosion, the primary requirement is to design a BMP to detain the proposed
conditions 2-year, 24-hour design storm to the existing conditions 1-year peak flow using
the SCS Type II distribution. Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as adding a
small orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure) so that the proposed conditions 1-year
storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the facility from a point where the
maximum volume of water from the 1-year storm is captured. (i.e., the maximum water
surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can begin at the start of the
storm (i.e., the invert of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility).
The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be a three (3) inch
diameter orifice and a trash rack shall be installed to prevent clogging. On sites with small
contributing drainage areas to this BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume to
allow a 24-hour attenuation with the 3 inch orifice, the calculations shall be submitted
showing this condition. Orifice sizes less than 3 inches can be utilized provided that the
design will prevent clogging of the intake. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
Section 308. Stormwater Management Districts.
(A) The Watersheds within the Township of Spring have been divided into
stormwater management districts as shown on the Management District Map(s) in
Section 1004 (Appendix D).
In addition to the requirements specified in Tables 308.1a through 308.1.d below, the
groundwater recharge (Section 305), water quality (Section 306), and streambank
erosion control (Section 307), requirements shall be implemented.
Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the Schuylkill River,
Tulpehocken Creek, Cocalico Creek and Conestoga River Watersheds for all
required design storms are shown in Tables 308.1.a through 308.1.d. Development
sites located in each of the Districts must control proposed conditions runoff rates to
existing conditions runoff rates for the design storms in accord with Tables 308.1.a
through 308.1.d.
TABLE 308.1.a - Water Quantity Requirements -
Schuylkill River Watershed
Management
District
Proposed Condition
Design Storm
Existing Condition Design
Storm
A
2-year
Reduce To
1-year
5- year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
B
2-year
Reduce To
1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
50-year 25-year
100-year 50-year
C
2-year
Reduce To
1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
)0(V- 41
AL4293
TABLE 308.1.b - Water Quantity Requirements-
Tulpehocken Creek Watershed
Management
District
Proposed Condition
Design Storm
Existing Condition Design
Storm
A
2-year
Reduce To
1-year
5- year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
B-1
2-year
Reduce To
1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
C 2-year
Reduce To
1-year
5-year 2-year
EXPLANATION OF DISTRICT C: Development sites which can discharge directly to the
Tulpehocken Creek main channel or major tributaries or indirectly to the main channel
through an existing stormwater drainage system (i.e., storm sewer or tributary) may do so
without control of post-development peak rate of runoff greater than the 5-year storm. If
the post-development runoff is intended to be conveyed by an existing stormwater
drainage system to the main channel, assurance must be provided that such system has
adequate capacity to convey the increased peak flows or will be provided with
improvements to furnish the required capacity. When adequate capacity of downstream
system does not exist and will not be provided through improvements, the postdevelopment
peak rate of runoff must be controlled to the pre-development peak rate as
required in District A provisions (i.e.,10-year post-development flows to 10 predevelopment
flows) for the specified design storms.
TABLE 308.1.c - Water Quantity Requirements-
Cocalico Creek Watershed
Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated activity
within the Cocalico Creek Watershed shall not exceed 50% of the
peak rates of runoff prior to development for all design storms
unless the pre-existing hydrograph is not exceeded at all points in
time.
AL4293
TABLE 308.1.d - Water Quantity Requirements -
Conestoga River Watershed
Management Proposed Condition
District Design Storm
A All Design Storms Reduce To
Existing Condition
Design Storm
30% of Peak Flow for All
Design Storms
B All Design Storms Reduce To 50% of Peak Flow for All
Design Storms
All areas, regardless of the release rate, must still meet the requirements of the
groundwater recharge criteria (Section 305), water quality criteria (Section 306), and
streambank erosion criteria (Section 307).
(B) General - Proposed condition rates of runoff from any regulated
activity shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development for the
design storms specified on the Stormwater Management District Watershed Map(s)
(Section 1004 (Appendix D)) and Section 308, of this Chapter.
(C) District Boundaries - The boundaries of the Stormwater Management
Districts are shown on an official map that is available for inspection at the
Township office. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Section
1004 (Appendix D). The exact location of the Stormwater Management District
boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours (or most accurate
data required) provided as part of the Drainage Plan.
(D) Sites Located in More Than One District - For a proposed development
site located within two or more stormwater management district category subareas,
the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet the Management District
Criteria for which the discharge is located, as indicated in Section 308. The
calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the grading plan
changes the drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if
discharges from multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the discharge site. In
this case, peak discharge in any direction shall follow Management District A
criteria provided that the overall site discharge meets the Management District
Criteria for which the discharge is located.
AL4293
(E) Off-Site Areas - Off-site areas that drain through a proposed
development site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site.
(F) Site Areas - Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed
impact area utilizing stormwater management measures shall be subject to the
Management District Criteria. In other words, unimpacted areas bypassing the
stormwater management facilities would not be subject to the Management District
Criteria.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 309. Calculation Methodology.
(A) Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of
greater than 200 acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted calculation
technique that is based on the NRCS soil cover complex method. Table 309-1
summarizes acceptable computation methods and the method selected by the
design professional shall be based on the individual limitations and suitability of
each method for a particular site. The Rational Method shall be used to estimate
peak discharges from drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres. The Soil
Complex Method shall be used for drainage areas greater than 200 acres.
AL4293
TABLE 309-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies For
Stormwater Management Plans
METHOD METHOD DEVELOPED BY APPLICABILITY
TR-20
(or commercial
computer package based
on TR-20)
USDA NRCS
Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary.
TR-55
(or commercial
computer package based
on TR-55)
USDA NRCS
Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in TR-55.
HEC-1 / HEC-HMS
US Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary.
PSRM Penn State University
Applicable where use of a
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary; simpler
than TR-20 or HEC-1.
Rational Method
(or commercial
computer package based
on Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling(1889)
For sites less than 200 acres
and with time of concentration
less than 60 minutes (tc< 60
min), or as approved by the
Township.
Other Methods Varies
Other computation
methodologies approved by
the Township.
*Note: Successors to the above methods are also acceptable. These successors include WinTR55 for
TR-55 and WinTR20 for TR-20 and SWMM
(B) All calculations consistent with this Chapter using the soil cover
complex method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various
return period storms according to the region in which they are located as presented
in Table B-1 in Appendix B of this Chapter. If a hydrologic computer model such as
PSRM or HEC-1 / HEC-HMS is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the
duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours. The rainfall distribution should reference to
NOAA Atlas 14.
(C) For the purposes of existing conditions flow rate determination,
)0(V- 45
AL4293
undeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow" in good condition, unless the
natural ground cover generates a lower curve number or Rational 'C' value (i.e.,
forest), as listed in Table B-1 or B-2 in Section 1002 (Appendix B) of this Chapter. In
such cases, values representing the actual ground cover shall be utilized. Average
antecedent moisture conditions shall apply to existing condition calculations.
(D) All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland flow and return
periods from the NOAA Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States
(2004, revised 2006). When approved by the Township, rainfall intensities may be
based upon the current PennDOT Storm Intensity-Duration-Frequency chart for
Region 4.Times-of-concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time by NRCS). Times-ofconcentration
for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's
equation. NRCS lag equation divided by 0.6 as acceptable method for Tc in
undeveloped areas.
(E) Times of concentration shall be based on the following design
parameters:
(1) Sheet flow: The maximum length for each reach of sheet or
overland flow before shallow concentrated or open channel flow develops is
one hundred fifty (150) feet. Flow lengths greater than one hundred (100) feet
shall be justified based on the actual conditions at each development site.
The maximum construction phase and post- development sheet flow length
for unpaved surfaces shall be one hundred (100) feet for most situations (one
hundred fifty (150) feet for areas which will remain undisturbed).
(2) Shallow concentrated flow: Travel time for shallow
concentrated flow shall be determined using Figure 3-1 from TR-55, Urban
Hydrology for small watersheds, as shown in Appendix B6.
(3) Open Channel flows: At points where sheet and shallow
concentrated flows concentrate in field depressions, swales, gutters, curbs, or
pipe collection systems, the travel times and downstream end of the
development site between these design points shall be based upon
Manning's Equation and /or acceptable engineering design standards as
determined by the municipal engineer.
(F) Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed
XXV- 46
AL4293
conditions to be used in the soil cover complex method shall be obtained from Table
B-1 in Section 1002 (Appendix B) of this Chapter.
(G) Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for
use in the Rational method shall be obtained from Table B-2 in Section 1002
(Appendix B) of this Chapter.
(H) Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open channels,
pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be
consistent with Table B-3 in Section 1002 (Appendix B) of the Chapter. Full flow
shall be assumed for closed conduits.
(I) Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this Chapter using any generally
accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
(J) The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this Chapter shall be verified by routing the design storm
hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-Indication Method. This shall
be performed for both the post-development and construction phase conditions.
For drainage areas greater than 200 acres in size, the design storm hydrograph shall
be computed using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph (i.e. TR-20,
TR-55, HEC-1, PSRM). The Township may approve the use of any generally
accepted full hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full
hydrograph.
(K) During the construction progression of a project, the discharge of
stormwater runoff from the site may follow distinct patterns that will be altered
during the course of the construction. In such an event, the comparison of the
construction phase discharge rate to the predevelopment rate shall be performed for
each separate and distinct pattern. At no time throughout the construction phase of
a project shall the peak discharge rate discharging from any location along the
boundary of a site exceed the predevelopment peak discharge rate at that location.
(L) Where applicable, construction phase and post-development time of
concentration to a storage facility shall be the time of concentration in the storm
sewer to its point of discharge into the storage facility. Overland flow from the
discharge point to the outlet structure shall not be included in the time of
concentration.
AL4293
(M) When designing regional storage facilities for office parks, industrial
parks, etc., the following design criteria shall be followed:
(1) Assumed impervious, lawn, etc., coverage areas shall be noted
in the calculations for each lot which will drain to the basin. Impervious
coverage shall be assumed to be the maximum coverage allowed by Chapter
32 (the Zoning Ordinance).
(2) A six (6.0) minute time of concentration shall be used to
calculate the post-development basin inflow hydrographs (five (5.0) minutes
for rational method). Longer times of concentration shall be allowed only
where significant portions of the drainage area will remain undeveloped or
where it can be demonstrated that the longer times will occur even after the
full potential development.
(3) For lots which will have on lot detention or retention basins,
the predevelopment time of concentration for the lot shall be the same as the
predevelopment time of concentration for the entire predevelopment
drainage area in which it is located.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 310. Other Requirements.
(A) General requirements
(1) For any of the activities regulated by this Chapter, including
the preliminary or final approval of subdivision and /or land development
plans, the management of stormwater on the site, both during and upon
completion of the proposed disturbances, shall be accomplished in
accordance with the standards and criteria of this Chapter.
(2) The design of any temporary or permanent facilities and
structures and the utilization of any natural drainage systems shall be in full
compliance with these terms and the interpretations of the Township.
(3) Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts,
bridges, outfalls, or stream enclosures), water encroachments, and any work
involving wetlands governed by PaDEP Chapter 105 regulations (as
amended or replaced from time to time by PaDEP), are subject to PaDEP
Chapter 105 regulations.
AL4293
(4) Any proposed roadway drainage facilities shall be designed
according to PennDOT Design Manual Part II.
(5) The Township reserves the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the construction in or continuation of a stormwater problem
area.
(6) All stormwater management facilities shall comply with the
applicable provisions of the Township of Spring Construction Manual and
Standard Specifications.
(7) Any developer shall be responsible for the control of surface
water from his property to a point of natural disposal. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to obtain, from adjacent property owners, any
easements or other necessary property interests concerning flowage of water
from the proposed development onto private lands. The construction of
improvements necessary to control runoff and prevent property damage
may be required. Whenever practicable, the easement shall be parallel with
and conjunctive to property lines of the project site.
(8) All streets shall be so designed as to provide for the discharge
of surface water from their rights-of-way.
(9) The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall not be less
than one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot and not more than one-third (1/3) inch
per foot.
(10) Increases or decreases in the hydrology of natural wetlands or
changes to the function of wetlands shall be minimized to the maximum
extent practical. Where such changes are proposed, the impact of the
proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using standard
methods appropriate to the affected wetland.
(B) Detention and Retention Basin Design
(1) Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin,
retention basins) designed to store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen
embankment required or regulated by this Chapter shall be designed to
provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to and including the 100 -
year proposed conditions and may be subject to PaDEP Chapter 105
regulations.
A L4293
(2) No stormwater detention or retention facility shall be placed
within fifty (50) feet of a special geologic feature.
(3) Whenever a basin will be located in an area underlain by
limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be
conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of
all facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to prevent
ground water contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation. The
Township may require the installation of an impermeable liner in detention
or retention basins. A detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be required
by the Township.
(4) It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the site is
underlain by limestone. The following note shall be attached to all drainage
plans and signed and sealed by the professional responsible for confirming
the site's geologic conditions:
"I, , a registered of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that the proposed
detention basin (circle one) is/ is not underlain by limestone."
(5) Basins shall be installed prior to any earthmoving or land
disturbances which they will serve. The phasing of their construction shall
be noted in the narrative and on the plan.
(6) Energy dissipators and/ or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
(7) Interior and exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed
one (1) foot vertical for three (3) feet horizontal, and may be further reduced
if the soil has unstable characteristics. Unless otherwise required to comply
with PaDEP regulations, the minimum bottom slope shall be two (2) percent
for grass and seventy-five hundredths (0.75) percents for concrete paving.
One (1) percent may be used for grass if an underdrain system is provided.
A concrete low flow channel shall be required for all basins where the
distance from the inlet pipe to the outlet structure exceeds one hundred (100)
feet. The minimum channel width shall be four (4) feet and the design must
be approved by the Township.
(8) Detention and retention basins shall also be designed to meet
the following requirements:
(a) The minimum top of berm width shall be eight (8) feet.
)0N- 50
AL4293
(b) Outlet pipes shall have a minimum diameter of twelve
(12) inches. For pipe lengths exceeding one hundred (100) feet, the
minimum diameter shall be fifteen (15) inches.
(c) Properly spaced antiseep collars shall be installed on all
basin outlet pipes. Design calculations shall be provided.
(9) A key trench at least 2 feet deep, or extending down to stable
subgrade, whichever is deeper, of compacted relatively impervious material
(Unified Soil Classification CL or ML) shall be provided. Minimum bottom
width for the key trench shall be 4 feet. Maximum side slopes for the key
trench shall be one horizontal to one vertical. A compacted impervious core
at least 8 feet wide at the top, having a maximum side slope of one horizontal
to one vertical, shall extend for the full length of the embankment, and the
top elevation shall be set at the design year water surface elevation.
(10) All pipes and culverts through embankments shall have
properly spaced anti-seep collars (minimum 6 inch thick).
(11) Outlet structures within basins which will control peak
discharge flows and distribute the flows by plans to discharge areas shall be
constructed of reinforced concrete, and shall have childproof, nonclogging
trash racks over all design openings twelve (12) inches in diameter, except
those openings designed to carry perennial stream flows.
(12) Emergency spillways shall be constructed of concrete of
sufficient mass and structural stability to withstand the pressures of
impounded waters and outlet velocities. Precast concrete paving blocks and
sod may be used when approved by the Township. Emergency spillways
shall be designed to safely convey the one hundred (100) year basin inflow
hydrograph through the basin assuming the principal outlet is completely
blocked, and a minimum one (1) foot freeboard shall be provided. Should
any stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under
PaDEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety
which may be required to pass storms larger than the 100-year event.
(13) Inlet and outlet structures shall be located at maximum
distances from one another. The Township may require a rock filter berm or
rock-filled gabions between inlet and outlet areas when the distance is
deemed insufficient for sediment trappings.
AL4293
(14) Permanent grasses or stabilization measures shall be
established on the sides of all earthen basins by hydroseeding within five (5)
days of initial construction. The Township may require jute or erosion
control matting to be installed inside the basin or on the basin embankment.
(15) Adequate drainage courses shall be provided and maintained
for the discharge(s) from the basin. If the basin will not discharge to a
suitable natural drainage course, the Township may require the developer to
provide facilities to safely and efficiently convey the discharge to asuitable
drainage course. Securing of necessary drainage easements for this purpose
shall be the sole responsibility of the developer.
(16) When PaDEP requires facilities to have a State permit, the
designer shall submit all information to PaDEP and obtain all necessary
approval and permits. No stormwater facility shall create health or
sanitation problems. Consideration shall be given to safety standards.
(17) When deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors,
stormwater detention facilities shall be enclosed with a fence of a type
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(18) Paved surfaces that are to serve as stormwater storage areas
shall have minimum grades of 1/2% and shall be restricted to storage depths
of 1/2 feet maximum. If a portion of an area within a stormwater storage
area is to be paved for parking or recreational purposes, the paved surface
shall be placed at the highest elevation with the storage area as possible.
(19) The following additional conditions shall be complied with for
wet bottom stormwater storage areas:
(a) Water surface area shall not exceed 1/10 of the tributary
drainage area,
(b) Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent
erosion from wave action.
(c) Minimum normal water depth shall be 4 feet. If fish are
to be used to keep the pond clean, a minimum of 1/4 of the pond area
shall be a minimum of 10 feet deep.
(d) Facilities shall be provided to allow the pond level to be
lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline
maintenance.
AL4293
(e) Aeration facilities as may be required to prevent pond
stagnation shall be provided. Design calculations to substantiate the
effectiveness of these aeration facilities shall be submitted with final
engineering plans. Agreements for the perpetual operation and
maintenance of aeration facilities shall be prepared to the satisfaction
of the municipality.
(f) In the event that the water surface of the pond is to be
raised for the purposes of storing water for irrigation or in
anticipation of the evapotranspiration demands of dry weather, the
volume remaining for storage of excess stormwater runoff shall still
be sufficient to contain the design year storm runoff.
(C) Collection and Conveyance System Design
(1) Storm sewers must be able to convey proposed conditions
runoff from a 25-year design storm without flooding inlets, where
appropriate.
(2) No stormwater conveyance facility shall be constructed within
fifty (50) feet of a special geologic feature, unless it is constructed of durable
pipe utilizing watertight joints.
(3) Storm sewers, culverts, bridges and related installations shall
be provided:
(a) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
Such flow may be redirected as required, subject to the approval of
PaDEP.
(b) To insure adequate drainage of all low points along the
line of streets.
(c) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained, and to
prevent substantial flow of water across intersections or flooded
intersections during the specified design storm.
(d) To insure adequate and unimpeded flow of stormwater
under driveways in, near or across natural watercourses or drainage
swales. Suitable pipes or other waterway openings shall be provided
as necessary.
)0(V- 53
AL4293
(4) Storm sewers, as required, shall be placed under or
immediately in front of the curb, when parallel to the street within the rightof-
way. Generally, locating storm sewers under curbs in curves or at street
intersections shall be prohibited. When located in undedicated land, they
shall be placed within an easement not less than twenty (20) feet wide as
approved by the Township Engineer.
(5) Storm sewer systems shall have curb inlets located at curb
tangents on the uphill side of street intersections and at other locations as
may be required by the Township as necessary to intercept runoff'. Design
and location of curb inlets shall be in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Manual Part 2.
(6) Storm sewers shall be installed in accordance with the
following requirements:
(a) All storm sewers shall be constructed per PennDOT
Form 408 Specifications and Design Manual, Part 2, Highway Design
and Standards for Roadway Construction, unless otherwise directed
by the Township.
(b) Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of fifteen
(15) inches and a minimum slope of one-half (1/2) percent.
(c) Storm sewers at design flows shall have a minimum
velocity of 2.5 fps and a maximum velocity of 12.0 fps.
(d) Reinforced concrete pipe is acceptable for all storm
sewer construction. Corrugated polyethylene pipe will be permitted
for diameters of fifteen (15) inches to thirty-six (36) inches only. Pipe
materials shall be subject to approval by the Township.
(e) All storm sewer pipe within street cartways or other
paved areas shall be bedded and backfilled in accordance with the
provisions of the Township of Spring Construction Manual and
Standard Specification.
(7) Storm sewers shall be designed based upon the following
criteria:
(a) Any changes in alignment shall be accomplished
utilizing straight sections connected by inlets or manholes.
XXV- 54
AL4293
(b) When there is a change in pipe size through a structure,
the top inside elevation of the outlet pipe shall be at or below the
elevations of all incoming pipes.
(c) Storm sewers shall be sized to handle the flow
anticipated during the 25-year design storm. Where inlets or storm
sewers are designed to drain low points in streets or other areas, or
wherever stormwater amounts exceeding the capacity of the proposed
conveyance facilities would cause potential erosion or damage to
property, overflow facilities capable of handling the calculated 100 -
year flows are required.
(d) Storm sewer design shall be based upon PennDOT
design methods. Inlet efficiency and bypass flow shall be determined
for all inlets, and the gutter flow spread shall not exceed one-half
(1/2) the travel lane width.
(e) Where necessary, storm sewers and culverts shall be
evaluated for inlet and outlet control restrictions.
(8) Inlets shall conform to PennDOT standards. Precast concrete
inlets may be used but the Township Engineer must approve these inlets for
each project.
(a) Inlets shall generally be located at the lowest point of
street intersections to intercept the stormwater before it reaches
pedestrian crossings or at sag point of vertical curves in the street
alignment which provides a natural point of ponding of surface
stormwater.
(b) At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the
tangent and not the curved portion of the curbing.
(c) Inlets shall be designed and located to prevent hazards
to vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians.
(d) Where the Township deems it necessary because of
special land requirements, special inlets may be approved.
(e) The interval between inlets serving stormwater runoff
flow along the curb shall not exceed a maximum of one thousand
(1,000) feet when located along any one (1) continuous curb line. More
)0(V- 55
AL4293
frequent spacing shall be required when the entrance capacity of any
individual inlet warrants closer spacing as determined by calculations
which incorporate consideration of the area drained, intensity of
rainfall, slope or grade, runoff coefficient of imperviousness and
cross-sectional rear of the gutter.
(f) When inlets are used in a storm system within the rightof-
way limits of a street, in lieu of manholes, the spacing of such inlets
shall not exceed the maximum distance of four hundred fifty (450) feet
along any one (1) continuous line.
(9) Manholes shall be installed in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) The construction locations of manholes shall be as
indicated on the subdivision drainage plan or area drainage plan
approved by the governing municipal authorities.
(b) Manholes shall be located on a continuous storm sewer
system at all abrupt changes of grade, at all locations where a
transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all angle points
and at all points of convergence of two (2) or more influent storm
sewer mains.
(c) Manholes shall not be more than three (300) feet apart
on sizes up to twenty-four (24) inches and not more than four
hundred fifty (450) feet apart on larger sizes. Inlets may be
substituted for manholes on approval by the Township.
(10) The construction of endwalls shall be required at ends of all
stormwater conveyance structures.
(a) Special care shall be used by the design engineer to
select the proper endwall to fit the condition.
(b) The design engineer shall provide energy dissipators at
endwalls where the discharge velocity with pipe flowing full is more
than one (1) fps.
(11) Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly over
a sidewalk or into any sanitary sewer line.
AL4293
(12) Bridges and culverts shall have ample waterway to carry
expected flows, based on a minimum storm frequency of twenty-five (25)
years. Bridge and/or culvert construction shall be in accordance with the
PennDOT specifications and shall meet the requirements of DEP.
(a) Culverts shall be provided with wing walls and
constructed for the full width of the right-of-way. The cartway area
over the bridge shall be 24 inches wider, on either side, than the road
connecting with the bridge, or if the character of the road is expected
to change for future planning, the cartway of the bridge shall be made
to anticipate this condition. On either side of the bridge cartway, the
bridge railing must be set back from the edge of the final cartway and
this area may be used to place sidewalks, present or future.
(13) Provisions shall be made to prevent erosion within
watercourses and at points of discharge from storm drainage facilities into
watercourses. The velocity of the discharge into a watercourse shall not
exceed 0.5 feet/second perpendicular to the axis of the watercourse and 1.0
feet/ second parallel to the axis of the watercourse.
(14) Design of open channels and swales shall comply with the
following:
(a) Open ditches will not be permitted but properly
designed, graded and turfed drainage swales shall be permitted in
lieu of storm sewers, where approved by the Township,. Swales shall
be located within an easement not less than twenty (20) feet wide, but
of sufficient width to allow access for maintenance.
(b) Such swales shall be designed not only to carry the
required 25-year storm discharge completely contained within the
channel bottom and banks without excessive erosion, but also to
increase the time of concentration, reduce the peak discharge and
velocity and permit the water to percolate into the soil. The minimum
grassed swale grade shall be one (1) percent and all swales shall be
designed with a minimum six (6) inches of freeboard. For grass swales
the minimum design flow velocity shall be two (2.0) fps, and
PennDOT approved turf reinforcement mat shall be installed where
design velocities exceed four (4) fps.
(c) Swales shall be designed in accordance with the Channel
Design procedures found in the Department of Environmental
AL4293
Protection Bureau of Water Quality Protection, Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual.
(d) All open channels shall be designed to convey the 25-
year stormwater flow. In addition, open channels shall be design to
convey the 100-year stormwater flow from emergency spillways and
areas where damage to property would result.
(e) Open channels located adjacent to streets shall be
limited to a top width of 6-feet, depth of 1.5-feet, and if trapezoidal in
cross section, a minimum bottom width of 2-feet.
(D) Miscellaneous
(1) All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic minimization
controls consistent with the West Nile Guidance found in Section 1006
(Appendix F).
(2) Where pervious pavement is permitted for parking lots,
recreational facilities, non-dedicated streets, or other areas, pavement
construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.
(3) Intercepting underdrains shall be required at all locations in
which subsurface water is encountered which may permeate or endanger the
subgrade of the street. Underdrains shall be required in all cuts three (3) feet
deep and greater, and in all other locations stipulated by the Township
Engineer. Pipe foundation underdrains shall be parallel to the established
street grade to outlet in approved drainage structures. Pipe foundation
underdrain shall consist of a trench excavated to a minimum depth of
twenty-four (24) inches below the underneath elevation of the special
subgrade and to the minimum width of eighteen (18) inches in which a six (6)
inch pipe underdrain shall be laid. The trench shall be backfilled with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation 2B aggregate to its full depth
around and above the laid pipe.
(4) If the length of pipe underdrain exceeds six hundred (600) feet
in one (1) run, the minimum diameter of six (6) inches shall be increased to
eight (8) [inches] beyond that point. Pipe shall meet PennDOT, Form 408
Specifications.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
PART 4
Drainage Plan Requirements
Section 401. General Requirements. For any of the activities regulated by this
Chapter, the preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans,
the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance activity may not proceed until the Property Owner or Applicant or his /her
agent has received written approval of a Drainage Plan from the Township unless the
project qualifies for an exemption from the requirements to submit a Drainage Plan.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 402. Exemptions.
(A) General Exemptions. The following land use activities are exempt
from the drainage plan submission requirements of this Chapter:
(1) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(2) Agricultural plowing and tilling are exempt from the rate
control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this Chapter
provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 PA
Code, Chapter 102.
(3) Forest Management and timber operations are exempt from the
rate control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this Chapter
provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 PA
Code, Chapter 102 and the applicable provisions of Chapter 32 (the
Township of Spring Zoning Ordinance).
(4) Regulated activities that create disconnected Impervious Areas
smaller than 1000 sq feet are exempt from the Peak Rate Control and the
SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this Chapter.
(B) Stormwater Quantity Control Exemption. Any Regulated Activity
that meets the impervious area exemption criteria in Table 402-1 shall not be
required to implement the stormwater quantity controls, specified in Section 308 of
this Chapter. These criteria shall apply to the total development even if
development is to take place in phases. The date of the adoption of this Chapter
shall be the starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which
future subdivisions and respective impervious area computations shall be
cumulatively considered. Impervious areas existing on the "parent tract" prior to
AL4293
adoption of this Chapter shall not be considered in cumulative impervious area
calculations for exemption purposes.
TABLE 402-1
Impervious Area Exemption Criteria
Total Parcel
Size
Impervious Area
Exemption (sq.ft.)
0 to <0.125 ac 1,000 sq. ft.
0.125 to <0.5 ac 2,500 sq. ft.
0.5 to <1 ac 5,000 sq. ft.
1 to <2 ac 7,500 sq. ft.
2 to <3 ac 10,000 sq. ft.
3 to <4 ac 12,500 sq. ft.
4 ac 15,000 sq. ft.
Submissions for projects that utilize the exemption under section 402(B) shall still be
required to meet the groundwater recharge (Section 305), water quality (Section
306), and streambank erosion (Section 307) controls of this Chapter. Drainage plans
in accordance with Sections 403(A)(2), 403(B)(7), (8), (11), (15), and (22) and 403(D)(2)
must still be submitted. Any exemption must first be approved by the Township.
(C) Additional Exemption Requirement:
(1) Exemption responsibilities - An exemption shall not relieve the
Applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and property. An exemption shall not relieve the
Applicant from providing adequate stormwater management for Regulated
Activities to meet the requirements of this Chapter.
(2) HQ and EV streams - This exemption shall not relieve the
Applicant from meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining to
high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters, identified and Source
Water Protection Areas (SWPA) and requirements for nonstructural project
design sequencing (Section 304), groundwater recharge (Section 305), water
quality (Section 306), and streambank erosion (Section 307).
(3) Drainage Problems - If a drainage problem is documented or
known to exist downstream of, or expected from the proposed activity, then
the Township may require a drainage plan submittal.
AL4293
All regulated activities occurring in drainage areas tributary to waters
designated HQ/EV pursuant to 25 PA Code, Chapter 93, shall not change
any biological, chemical, or physical characteristics, including volume, rate,
velocity, course, current, cross section, or temperature of the waters, unless
the activity is specifically permitted in accordance with the environmental
laws of the Commonwealth.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 403. Drainage Plan Contents. The Drainage Plan shall consist of a general
description of the project including sequencing items described in Section 304, calculations,
maps and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and erosion
and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and
erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and date. All
Drainage Plan materials shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear,
concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the Drainage Plan shall not be
accepted for review and shall be returned to the Applicant.
The following items shall be included in the Drainage Plan:
(A) General
(1) General description of the project including those areas
described in Section 304.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials to be used
for stormwater management facilities.
(3) A description of any storm drainage problems within, adjacent
to or downstream of the project site.
(4) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations
for all stormwater management facilities.
(5) An Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Plan, including all
reviews and approvals by the Conservation District.
(6) A general description of nonpoint source pollution controls.
(B) Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on 24-inch x 36-
inch sheets and /or shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for
recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks County. If the Township
)0(V- 61
AL4293
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO) has more stringent
criteria, then the more stringent criteria shall apply. The contents of the map(s) shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities
or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other Waters of the
Commonwealth within the project area.
(4) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
stream buffers, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, potential or delineated wetland areas, areas of limestone geology,
special geologic features and the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within fifty (50) feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries, identifying
those soils which are hydric, have seasonal high water tables, or shallow
depth to bedrock.
(7) Limits of earth disturbance, proposed changes to the land
surface and vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious
area that would be added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan.
(11) The date of submission.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one (1) inch equals no more than
fifty (50) feet; for tracts of twenty (20) acres or more, the scale shall be one (1)
XXV- 62
AL4293
inch equals no more than one hundred (100) feet. Alternative scales may be
utilized if pre-approved by the Township.
(13) A north arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all off site existing man-made features
which may be affected by stormwater runoff or stormwater management
controls for the project.
(17) Location of all open channels.
(18) Overland drainage patterns and swales, flowpaths used in
calculations for time of concentration.
(19) A minimum twenty-foot wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(20) The location of all erosion and sediment pollution control
facilities.
(21) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of all stormwater management facilities, including those that
are located off-site. All facilities, whether on or off-site, shall meet the
performance standards and design criteria specified in this Chapter.
(22) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved Drainage Plan must be approved by the Township
and the Conservation District.
(23) The following signature block for the Design Engineer:
"I, (Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certify that the Drainage Plan meets all design standards and criteria
of the Township of Spring Stormwater Management Chapter."
(C) Supplemental Information. The following supplemental information
shall be provided with the Drainage Plan.
)0(V- 63
AL4293
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the
project designed in accordance with Section 304.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this
Chapter.
(c) A summary comparing peak rates of runoff at all points
of discharge from the site for the predevelopment, construction phase
and post development conditions.
(d) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both
during and after development.
(e) Expected project time schedule.
(f) Development stages (project phases) if so proposed.
(2) An operation and maintenance plan in accordance with
Sections 403(E) and 702 of this Chapter.
(3) An erosion and sediment pollution control plan, including all
reviews and approvals, as required by PaDEP and the Berks County
Conservation District.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak
flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing Township stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(5) A copy of the Highway Occupancy permit and all reviews and
approvals from PennDOT when utilization of a PennDOT drainage system or
improvements within a state right-of-way is proposed.
(D) Stormwater Management Facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When infiltration facilities such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank
infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
AL4293
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of
the stormwater management facilities must be shown.
(E) Responsibilities for Operations and Maintenance of Stormwater
Controls and BMPs.
(1) No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the Township
shall commence until approval by the Township of a Stormwater Control
and BMP Operations and Maintenance plan which describes how the
permanent (e.g., post-construction) stormwater controls and BMPs will be
properly operated and maintained.
(2) The following items shall be included in the Stormwater
Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan:
(a) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the
requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of
Berks County, and shall be submitted on 36-inch x 48-inch sheets. The
contents of the maps(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
i) Clear identification of the location and nature of
permanent stormwater controls and BMPs,
ii) The location of the project site relative to
highways, municipal boundaries or other identifiable
landmarks,
iii) Existing and final contours at intervals of two
feet, or others as appropriate,
iv) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of
water within the project site area,
v) Other physical features including flood hazard
boundaries, sinkholes or other special geologic features,
streams, existing drainage courses, potential or delineated
wetland areas, and areas of natural vegetation to be preserved,
vi) The locations of all existing and proposed
utilities, sanitary sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of
property lines of the project site,
AL4293
vii) Proposed final changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious
area that would be added,
viii) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas,
and buildings, and
ix) A fifteen-foot wide access easement around all
stormwater controls and BMPs that would provide ingress to
and egress from a public right-of-way.
(b) A description of how each permanent stormwater
control and BMP will be operated and maintained, and the identity of
the person(s) responsible for operations and maintenance,
(c) The name of the project site, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the plan, and
(d) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging
that the stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered
or removed only after approval by the Township.
(3) The Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance
Plan for the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs,
as follows:
(a) Only where stormwater controls or BMPs are deemed
by the Board of Supervisors to be regional in nature, or where the
Township determines that it is in the best interest of the general
public, shall the Township accept operations and maintenance
responsibility for stormwater controls or BMPs located outside of the
public street rights-of-way;
(b) The responsibility for operations and maintenance of all
other stormwater controls or BMPs, whether by the property owner, a
property owners association, or a private management entity, shall be
specified on the Operations and Maintenance Plan.
(4) The Township shall make the final determination on the
continuing operations and maintenance responsibilities. The Township
reserves the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
)0 V- 66
AL4293
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls and BMPs.
(F) Township Review of Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan.
(1) The Township shall review the Stormwater Control and BMP
Operations and Maintenance Plan for consistency with the purposes and
requirements of this Chapter, and any permits issued by PaDEP.
(2) The Township shall notify the Applicant in writing whether the
Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan is
approved.
(3) The Township may require a "Record As-built Drawing" of all
stormwater controls and BMPs, and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the Operations and Maintenance Plan.
(4) All agreements, easements, covenants or other similar
documents, which assign operations and maintenance responsibility for
stormwater controls or BMPs, shall be provided to the Township Solicitor for
review and approval.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 404. Plan Submission. The Township shall require receipt of a complete
plan, as specified in this Chapter.
For any activities that require an NPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from
Construction Activities, a PaDEP Joint Permit Application, a PennDOT Highway
Occupancy Permit, or any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations or are
regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106
(Floodplain Management) of PaDEP's Rules and Regulations, the proof of application for
said permit(s) or approvals shall be part of the plan. The plan shall be coordinated with the
state and federal permit process and the Township SALDO review process.
(A) For projects which require SALDO approval, the Drainage Plan shall
be submitted by the Applicant as part of the Preliminary Plan submission where
applicable for the Regulated Activity.
(B) For these regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, see
Section 401, General Requirements.
AL4293
(C) Six (6) copies of the Drainage Plan shall be submitted and distributed
as follows:
(1) Two (2) copies to the Township accompanied by the requisite
Township Review Fee, as specified in this Chapter.
(2) Two (2) copies to the Conservation District.
(3)
Department.
One (1) copy to the Township Engineering and Planning
(4) One (1) copy to the County Planning Commission, when
directed by the Township.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 405. Drainage Plan Review.
(A) The Township shall review the Drainage Plan with the standards set
forth in the Township's Stormwater Management Ordinance for consistency with
the adopted Act 167 Stormwater Management Plans and with all other applicable
provisions of this Chapter. Any found incomplete shall not be accepted for review
and shall be returned to the Applicant.
(B) For activities regulated by this Chapter, the Township shall notify the
Applicant in writing, within ninety (90) calendar days of receipt of a complete
application, whether the Drainage Plan is consistent with the applicable provisions
of this Chapter.
(1) Should the Drainage Plan be determined to be consistent with
the applicable provisions of this Chapter, the Township shall forward an
approval letter to the Applicant.
(2) Should the Drainage Plan be determined to be inconsistent with
the applicable provisions of this Chapter, the Township shall forward a
disapproval letter to the Applicant. The disapproval letter shall cite the
reason(s) and specific Chapter sections for the disapproval. Disapproval may
be due to inadequate information to make a reasonable judgment as to
compliance with the stormwater management plan. Any disapproved
Drainage Plans may be revised by the Applicant and resubmitted consistent
with this Chapter.
AL4293
(C) For Regulated Activities specified in Section 104 of this Chapter, which
require a building permit, the Township Engineering and Planning Department
shall notify the Township Building Code Official in writing, within a time frame
consistent with the Township Building Code and /or Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, whether the Drainage Plan is consistent with the
applicable provisions of this Chapter and forward a copy of the
approval/ disapproval letter to the Applicant. Any disapproved drainage plan may
be revised by the Applicant and resubmitted consistent with this Chapter.
(D) For regulated activities under this Chapter that require an NPDES
Permit Application, the Applicant shall forward a copy of the Township's letter
stating that the Drainage Plan is consistent with the applicable stormwater
management plan to the Conservation District. PaDEP and the Conservation District
may consider the Township's review comments in determining whether to issue a
permit.
(E) The Township shall not grant approval or grant preliminary approval
to any subdivision or land development for Regulated Activities specified in Section
105 of this Chapter if the Drainage Plan has been found to be inconsistent with the
applicable provisions of this Chapter, as determined by the Township. All required
permits from PaDEP must be obtained prior to approval of any subdivision or land
development.
(F) The Township Building Code Official shall not issue a building permit
for any Regulated Activity under this Chapter if the Drainage Plan has been found
to be inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter, as determined by the
Township Engineering and Planning Department, or without considering the
comments of the Township Engineering and Planning Department. All required
permits from PaDEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
(G) The Applicant shall be responsible for completing record as-built
drawings of all stormwater management facilities included in the approved
Drainage Plan. The record as-built drawings and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the Township for final
approval. The Township may withhold approval of the record as-built drawings
until the Township receives a copy of an approved Highway Occupancy Permit
from the PennDOT District Office, NPDES Permit, and any other applicable permits
or approvals, from PaDEP or the Conservation District. The above permits and
approvals must be based on the record drawings.
(H) The Township's approval of a Drainage Plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed five (5) years, commencing on the date that the Township issues an
approval letter for the Drainage Plan. For subdivisions and land developments, the
XXV- 69
AL4293
5-year time period shall commence on the date that the plan is officially approved
by the Board of Supervisors. If stormwater management facilities included in the
approved Drainage plan have not been constructed, or if constructed, and record asbuilt
drawings of these facilities have not been approved within this 5-year time
period, then the Township may consider the Drainage Plan disapproved and may
revoke any and all permits. Drainage Plans that are considered disapproved by the
Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with Section 407 of this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 406. Modification of Plans.
(A) A modification to a Drainage Plan under review by the Township for a
development site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or re-design of stormwater management
facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the
Drainage Plan as determined by the Township, shall require a resubmission of the
modified Drainage Plan consistent with Section 404 of this Chapter and be subject to
review as specified in Section 405 of this Chapter.
(B) A modification to an already approved or disapproved Drainage Plan
shall be submitted to the Township, accompanied by the applicable Township
Review and Inspection Fee. A modification to a Drainage Plan for which a formal
action has not been taken by the Township shall be submitted to the Township,
accompanied by the applicable Township Review and Inspection Fee.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 407. Resubmission of Disapproved Drainage Plans. A disapproved
Drainage Plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the Township's concerns
documented in writing and addressed to the Township Secretary in accordance with
Section 404 of this Chapter and distributed accordingly and be subject to review as
specified in Section 405 of this Chapter. The applicable Township Review and Inspection
Fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved Drainage Plan. (Ordinance No. 355,
March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
PART 5
Inspections
Section 501. Schedule of Inspections.
(A) The Township or their designee shall inspect all phases of the
installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities as deemed
appropriate by the Township.
(B) During any stage of the work, if the Township or it's designee
determines that the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved Drainage Plan, the Township shall revoke
any existing building permits and issue a cease and desist order until a revised
Drainage Plan is submitted and approved except as directed by the Township or
Conservation District, as specified in this Chapter.
(C) A final inspection of all stormwater management facilities shall be
conducted by the Township or its' designee and to confirm compliance with the
approved Drainage Plan prior to the issuance of any Occupancy Permit.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
PART 6
Fees and Expenses
Section 601. Township Drainage Plan Review and Inspection Fee. Fees shall be
established by the Township to defray plan review and construction inspection costs
incurred by the Township. All fees shall be paid by the Applicant at the time of Drainage
Plan submission. Review and Inspection Fee Schedule shall be established by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors based on the size of the Regulated Activity and based on the
Township's costs for reviewing Drainage Plans and conducting inspections pursuant to
Section 501. The Township shall periodically update the Review and Inspection Fee
Schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed. (Ordinance No. 355,
March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 602. Expenses Covered by Fees. The fees required by this Chapter shall at a
minimum cover:
(A) Administrative costs.
(B) The review of the Drainage Plan by the Township.
(C) The site inspections.
(D) The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
(E) The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the Drainage Plan.
(F) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this Chapter, correct violations, and assure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
PART 7
Maintenance Responsibilities
Section 701. Performance Guarantee.
(A) For subdivisions and land developments the Applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the Township for the timely installation and proper
construction of all stormwater management controls as: 1) Required by the
approved drainage plan equal to or greater than the full construction cost of the
required controls or 2) in the amount and method of payment provided for in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(B) For other regulated activities, the Township may require a financial
guarantee from the Applicant.
(C) At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the Applicant or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer,
architect, surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and specifications and
approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of record as-built drawings.
(D) After the Township receives the certification, a final inspection shall be
conducted by the Township or designee to certify compliance with this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 702. Adherence to Approved Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater
control and BMP required by an approved Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan, or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not
conform to an approved Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
Section 703. Operations and Maintenance Agreement for Privately Owned
Stormwater Controls and BMPs.
(A) The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the Township covering all stormwater controls and BMPs that are
to be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as the
agreement in Section 1001 (Appendix A) of this Chapter.
(B) Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 704. Stormwater Management Easements.
(A) Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Township.
(B) Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner, where required by the Township, for areas of on-site stormwater control, for
purposes of (1) access for inspections and maintenance, or (2) preservation of
stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and other
stormwater controls and BMPs, by persons other than the property owner. The
purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement under Section 703.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 705. Recording of Approved Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan and Related Agreements.
(A) The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls
and BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented, as described in the
Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan, shall record the
following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Berks County,
within 15 days of approval of the Stormwater Control and BMP Operations Plan by
the Township:
(1) The Operations and Maintenance Plan, or a summary thereof,
(2) Operations and Maintenance Agreements under Section 703,
and
AL4293
(3) Easements under Section 704.
(B) The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with this Section.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Fund.
Section 706. Township Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance
(A) Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to
pay a specified amount to the Township Stormwater Control and BMP Operation
and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance
expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
(1) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the Township for a period of ten (10) years, as estimated by the
Township. After that period of time, inspections will be performed at the
expense of the Township.
(2) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and
maintained by the Township, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for ten (10) years. The Township will establish
the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the Applicant.
(3) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to
present worth of the annual series values. The Township shall determine the
present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
(B) If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), the Township may reduce or waive the
amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the land for public
recreation purpose.
(C) If at some future time a stormwater control or BMP (whether publicly
or privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other
storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit will be applied
to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or
other facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment
are paid will be returned to the depositor.
)0(V- 75
AL4293
(D) If stormwater controls or BMPs are accepted by the Township for
dedication, the Township may require persons installing stormwater controls or
BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Township Stormwater Control and BMP
Operation and Maintenance Fund, to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and
maintained by the Township, the amount shall cover the estimated costs for
operations and maintenance for ten (10) years, as determined by the
Township.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the
annual series values.
(E) Long-Term Maintenance - The Township shall require applicants to
pay a fee to the Township Stormwater Maintenance Fund to cover long term
maintenance of stormwater control and best management practices.
(F) Stormwater Related Problems - The Township may require applicants
to pay a fee to the Township Stormwater Maintenance Fund to cover stormwater
related problems which may arise from the land development and earth
disturbance. The Township will establish the estimated cost of utilizing information
submitted by the Applicant.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
PART 8
Prohibitions
Section 801. Prohibited Discharges and Connections.
(A) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and
wash water to enter the waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.
(B) No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface
waters of this Commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except (1) as provided in Subsection (c) below, and (2) discharges allowed under a
state or federal permit.
(C) The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this Commonwealth:
- Discharges from fire fighting
activities
Flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands
- Potable water sources including
water line flushing
Uncontaminated water from
foundations or from footirig drains
- Irrigation drainage Lawn watering
Dechlorinated swimming pool
discharges
- Air conditioning condensate
- Springs Uncontaminated groundwater
Water from individual residential
car washin:
- Water from crawl space pumps
- Pavement wash waters where spills
or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless
all spill material has been removed)
and where detergents are not used
Routine external building wash
down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds)
(D) In the event that the Township or PaDEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection (c), significantly contribute to pollution of the
waters of this Commonwealth, the Township or PaDEP will notify the responsible
person(s) to cease the discharge.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
Section 802. Roof Drains. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to
vegetative BMPs, or to infiltration BMPs (where not located within geologically susceptible
areas), and to the maximum extent practicable satisfy the criteria for Disconnected
Impervious Areas. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 803. Alteration of SWM BMPs. No person shall modify, remove, fill,
landscape, or alter any Stormwater Management BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures,
without the written approval of the Township. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008,
Section 1)
AL4293
PART 9
Enforcement and Penalties
Section 901. Right-of-Entry.
(A) Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property
within the Township to inspect the implementation, condition, or operation and
maintenance of the stormwater controls or BMPs in regard to any aspect governed
by this Chapter.
(B) Stormwater control and BMP owners and operators shall allow
persons working on behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of determining compliance with this Chapter.
(C) Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater control or BMP in the Township such devices
as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/ or sampling of the discharges from
such stormwater control or BMP.
(D) Unreasonable delays (greater than 24 hrs.) in allowing the Township
access to a stormwater control or BMP is a violation of this Part.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 902. Public Nuisance.
(A) The violation of any provision of this Chapter is hereby deemed a
Public Nuisance.
(B) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 903. General Enforcement.
(A) Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this Chapter, the Township may order compliance
by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
AL4293
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
costs;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
(6) The implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
(B) Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice may further
advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within
the established deadline, the work will be done by the Township or designee and
the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(C) Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this Chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed
cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing any and all other
remedies available in law or equity.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 904. Suspension and Revocation of Permits and Approvals.
(A) Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued
by the Township may be suspended or revoked, in whole or in part, by the
Township for:
(1)
the permit;
Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of
(2) A violation of any provision of this Chapter; or
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of others.
)0(V- 80
AL4293
(B) A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the Township,
in whole or in part, when:
(1) The Township or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs, or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance, and/ or;
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation of this Chapter,
law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(C) A permit or approval which has been revoked in whole or in part, by
the Township cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit
under the procedures outlined in this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 905. Penalties.
(A) Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation, recoverable
with costs. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense
and the applicable fines are cumulative.
(B) The Township may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law in equity for the enforcement of this
Chapter with the court of competent jurisdiction to obtain restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 906. Notification. In the event that a person fails to comply with the
requirements of this Chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Township will provide notification of the violation. After notice is
provided, failure to correct violations in a timely manner may result in additional
violations. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 907. Enforcement. The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Chapter. All inspections regarding
compliance with the drainage plan shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or
other qualified persons designated by the Township.
AL4293
(A) No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any
Stormwater Management BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures, without the written
approval of the Township.
(B) Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Township may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the Township to inspect the condition of
the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this
Chapter.
(C) It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any Regulated Activity
except as provided in an approved Stormwater Management Site Plan, unless
specifically exempted from the requirement to submit such Site Plan by this
Chapter.
(D) The Developer shall be responsible for providing record as-built plans
of all Stormwater Management BMPs included in the approved Stormwater
Management Site Plan. The record as-built plans and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted by the Developer to the
Township.
(E) The record as-built submission shall include a certification of
completion signed by a Qualified Professional verifying that all permanent
Stormwater Management BMPs have been constructed according to the approved
plans and specifications. If any licensed Qualified Professionals contributed to the
construction plans, then a licensed Qualified Professional must sign the completion
certificate.
(F) After receipt of the completion certificate by the Township, the
Township may conduct a final inspection.
(G) Inspections regarding compliance with the Stormwater Management
Site Plan are a responsibility of the Township.
(H) The Township may withhold an occupancy permit until a certificate of
completion has been provided by the Developer.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
Section 908. Appeals.
(A) Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee
may appeal to Board of Supervisors within thirty (30) days of that action.
AL4293
(B) Any person aggrieved by any decision of Board of Supervisors may
appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the County where the activity has
taken place within thirty (30) days of the Township decision.
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
AL4293
Section 1001. Appendix A - Stormwater Controls and Best Management Practices
Operations and Maintenance Agreement. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
STORMWATER CONTROLS AND BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this day of ,
200_, by and between , (hereinafter the
"Landowner"), and the Township of Spring, 2800 Shillington Road, Reading, Berks County,
Pennsylvania 19608 (hereinafter "Township");
WITNESSETH
WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by deed
in the land records of County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book at
Page (hereinafter "Property").
WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and
WHEREAS, the Stormwater Controls and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan
approved by the Township (hereinafter referred to as the "Plan") for the property identified
herein, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof, as approved by the
Township, provides for management of stormwater within the confines of the Property
through the use of Best Management Practices (BMPs); and
WHEREAS, the Township, and the Landowner, his successors and assigns, agree
that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Township and the protection and
maintenance of water quality require that on-site stormwater Best Management Practices
be constructed and maintained on the Property; and
WHEREAS, for the purposes of this agreement, the following definitions shall apply:
BMP - "Best Management Practice;" activities, facilities, designs, measures or
procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from land development, to protect and
maintain water quality and groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of
the Township Stormwater Management Ordinance, including but not limited to infiltration
trenches, seepage pits, filter strips, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, rain
gardens, grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters and detention basins.
Infiltration Trench -A BMP surface structure designed, constructed, and maintained
for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of stormwater into the soil
andjor groundwater aquifer,
AL4293
Seepage Pit - An underground BMP structure designed, constructed, and maintained
for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of stormwater into the soil
and/or groundwater aquifer,
Rain Garden - A BMP overlain with appropriate mulch and suitable vegetation
designed, constructed, and maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or
recharge of stormwater into the soil and/ or underground aquifer, and
WHEREAS, the Township requires, through the implementation of the Plan, that
stormwater management BMPs as required by said Plan and the Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and maintained by the
Landowner, his successors and assigns. And
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual
covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto
agree as follows:
1. The BMPs shall be constructed by the Landowner in accordance with the plans and
specifications identified in the Plan.
2. The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the Plan in good
working order acceptable to the Township and in accordance with the specific
maintenance requirements noted on the Plan.
3. The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Township, its authorized agents and
employees, to enter upon the property, at reasonable times and upon presentation of
proper identification, to inspect the BMP(s) whenever it deems necessary. Whenever
possible, the Township shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the property.
4. In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the
Plan in good working order acceptable to the Township, the Township or its
representatives may enter upon the Property and take whatever action is deemed
necessary to maintain said BMP(s). This provision shall not be construed to allow the
Township to erect any permanent structure on the land of the Landowner. It is
expressly understood and agreed that the Township is under no obligation to
maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed
to impose any such obligation on the Township.
5. In the event the Township, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any
nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of
equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the
Township for all expenses (direct and indirect) incurred within 10 days of receipt of
invoice from the Township.
AL4293
6. The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance of the
onsite BMP(s) by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not
be deemed to create or effect any additional liability of any party for damage alleged
to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.
7. The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other successors in
interests, shall release the Township's employees and designated representatives
from all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences or claims which might arise or be
asserted against said employees and representatives from the construction, presence,
existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) by the Landowner or Township. In the
event that a claim is asserted against the Township, its designated representatives or
employees, the Township shall promptly notify the Landowner and the Landowner
shall defend, at his own expense, any suit based on the claim. If any judgment or
claims against the Township's employees or designated representatives shall be
allowed, the Landowner shall pay all costs and expenses regarding said judgment or
claim.
8. The Township shall inspect the BMP(s) at a minimum of once every three years to
ensure their continued functioning.
This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks
County, Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property and /or
equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner, his administrators, executors,
assigns, heirs and any other successors in interests, in perpetuity.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Agreement to be duly
executed on the date first indicated hereinabove.
(Landowner)
INC.
By:
President (Vice)
Attest:
Secretary
SPRING TOWNSHIP
By:
Chairman (Vice)
Attest:
Secretary
)0(V- 86
AL4293
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA :
: SS.
COUNTY OF BERKS
On this day of , 2008, before me, a Notary Public in and for
the County and State aforesaid, personally appeared and
who acknowledged themselves to be the President and Secretary
of , a Pennsylvania corporation, and that as such officers and being
authorized to do so, executed the foregoing STORMWATER CONTROLS AND BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT for
the purposes therein contained by signing the name of the Corporation by themselves as
such officers.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and official seal.
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA :
: SS.
COUNTY OF BERKS
Notary Public
On this day of , 2008, before me, a Notary Public in and for the
County and State aforesaid, personally appeared and
, who acknowledged themselves to be the Chairman and Secretary
(Assistant) of the Board of Supervisors of Spring Township, a Pennsylvania second class
township, and that as such officers and being authorized to do so, executed the foregoing
STORMWATER CONTROLS AND BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OPERATIONS
AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT for the purposes therein contained by signing the
name of the Township by themselves as such officers.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and official seal.
Notary Public
AL4293
Section 1002. Appendix B - Stormwater Management Design Criteria. (Ordinance
No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
TABLE B-1
RUNOFF CURVE NUMBERS
Source: NRCS (SCS) TR-55
TABLE B-2
RATIONAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
TABLE B-3
MANNING ROUGHNESS COEFFICIENTS
FIGURE B-1
RECOMMENDATION CHART FOR INFILTRATION STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT BMPS IN CARBONATE AREAS
TABLE B-1
Runoff Curve Numbers (From NRCS (SCS) TR-55)
LAND USE DESCRIPTION HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP
A B C
Open Space 44 65 77 82
Meadow / Orchard 30 58 71 78
Agricultural 59 71 79 83
Forest 36 60 73 79
Commercial (85% Impervious) 89 92 94 95
Industrial (72% Impervious) 81 88 91 93
Institutional (50% Impervious) 71 82 88 90
Residential
Average Lot Size % impervious
1/8 acre or less* 65 77 85 90 92
1/8 - 1/3 acre 34 59 74 82 87
1/3 -1 acre 23 53 69 80 85
1- 4 acres 12 46 66 78 82
Farmstead 59 74 82 86
Smooth Surfaces (Concrete, Asphalt, 98 98 98 98
Gravel or Bare Compacted Soil)
Water 98 98 98 98
Mining/ Newly Graded Areas 77 86 91 94
(Pervious Areas Only)
* Includes Multi-Family Housing unless justified lower density can be provided.
Note: Existing site conditions of bare earth or fallow ground shall be considered as meadow when
choosing a CN value.
XXV- 89
TABLE B-2
RATIONAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
By Hydrologic Soils Group and Overland Slope (%)
A D
Land Use 0-2% 2-6% 6%+ 0-2% 2-6% 6%+ 0-2% 2-6% 6%+ 0-2% 2-6% 6%+
Cultivated Land 0.08a 0.13 0.16 0.11 0.15 0.21 0.14 0.19 0.26 0.18 0.23 0.31
0.14b 0.18 0.22 0.16 0.21 0.28 0.20 0.25 0.34 0.24 0.29 0.41
Pasture 0.12
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.37
0.18
0.23
0.28
0.34
0.37
0.45
0.24
0.30
0.34
0.42
0.44
0.52
0.30
0.37
0.40
0.50
0.50
0.62
Meadow 0.10 0.16 0.25 0.14 0.22 0.30 0.20 0.28 0.36 0.24 0.30 0.40
0.14 0.22 0.30 0.20 0.28 0.37 0.26 0.35 0.44 0.30 0.40 0.50
Forest 0.05 0.08 0.11 0.08 0.11 0.14 0.10 0.13 0.16 0.12 0.16 0.20
0.08 0.11 0.14 0.10 0.14 0.18 0.12 0.16 0.20 0.15 0.20 0.25
Residential
Lot Size 1 /8 Acre 0.25 0.28 0.31 0.27 0.30 0.25 0.30 0.33 0.38 0.33 0.36 0.42
0.33 0.37 0.40 0.35 0.39 0.44 0.38 0.42 0.49 0.41 0.45 0.54
lot Size 1 /4 Acre 0.22 0.26 0.29 0.24 0.29 0.33 0.27 0.31 0.36 0.30 0.34 0.40
0.30 0.34 0.37 0.33 0.37 0.42 0.36 0.40 0.47 0.38 0.42 0.52
T ,ot Size 1 /3 Acre 0.19 0.23 0.26 0.22 0.26 0.30 0.25 0.29 0.34 0.28 0.32 0.39
0.28 0.32 0.35 0.30 0.35 0.39 0.33 0.38 0.45 0.36 0.40 0.50
Lot Size 1 /2 Acre 0.16 0.20 0.24 0.19 0.23 0.28 0.22 0.27 0.32 0.26 0.30 0.37
0.25 0.29 0.32 0.28 0.32 0.36 0.31 0.35 0.42 0.34 0.38 0.48
I ,ot Size 1 Acre 0.14 0.19 0.22 0.17 0.21 0.26 0.20 0.25 0.31 0.24 0.29 0.35
0.22 0.26 0.29 0.24 0.28 0.34 0.28 0.32 0.40 0.31 (135 0.46
Industrial 0.67 0.68 0.68 0.68 0.68 0.69 0.68 0.69 0.69 0.69 0.69 0.70
0.85 0.85 0.86 0.85 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.87 0.86 0.86 0.88
Commercial 0.71 0.71 0.72 0.71 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72
0.88 0.88 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.90 0.89 0.89 0.90
Streets 0.70 0.71 0.71 0.71 0.72 0.74 0.72 0.73 0.76 0.73 0.75 0.78
0.76 0.77 0.79 0.80 0.82 0.84 0.84 0.85 0.89 0.89 0.91 0.95
Onen Snare 0.05 0.10 0.14 0.08 0.13 0.19 0.12 0.17 0.24 0.16 0.21 0.28
0.11 0.16 0.20 0.14 0.19 0.26 0.18 0.23 0.32 0.22 0.27 0.39
Parkinv 0.85 0.86 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.87
0.95 0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.97
a Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence
b Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence
intervals less than 25 years.
intervals of 25 years or more.
XXV- 90
Source : Rawls. WI. S.T.. Won(' and R.H. McCuen.19R1. "Comnarison of Urban Flood Freauencv Procedures". Preliminary
of A crriculture. Soil Conservation Service. Baltimore. MD.
XXV- 91
TABLE B-3
Roughness Coefficients (Manning's "n") For Overland Flow
(U.S. Army Corps Of Engineers, HEC-1 Users Manual)
Surface Description n
Dense Growth 0.4 0.5
Pasture 0.3 0.4
Lawns 0.2 0.3
Bluegrass Sod 0.2 0.5
Short Grass Prairie 0.1 0.2
Sparse Vegetation 0.05 0.13
Bare Clay-Loam Soil (eroded) 0.01 0.03
Concrete/Asphalt - very shallow depths
(less than 1/4 inch) 0.10 - 0.15
- small depths
(1/4 inch to several inches) 0.05 - 0.10
Roughness Coefficients (Manning's "n") For Channel Flow
Reach Description n
Natural stream, clean, straight, no rifts or pools 0.03
Natural stream, clean, winding, some pools or shoals 0.04
Natural stream, winding, pools, shoals, stony with some weeds 0.05
Natural stream, sluggish deep pools and weeds 0.07
Natural stream or swale, very weedy or with timber underbrush 0.10
Concrete pipe, culvert or channel 0.012
Corrugated metal pipe 0.012-0.027(1)
High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Pipe
Corrugated 0.021-0.029(2)
Smooth Lined 0.012-0.020(2)
(1) Depending upon type, coating and diameter
(2) Values recommended by the American Concrete Pipe Association, check
Manufacturer's recommended value.
XXV- 92
FIGURE B-1
Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock
O
Geareqy Type CARBONATE BEDROCK
Media sod
Maness Leis than 2 Feel 2 to 4 Feed Oars Feet to 0 VW Over II Fall
Specbl Cemaegie
Faelunre*
anger:GINO Bugs taw Suffer Medium ihrifer NiO auger Leer %Nee thedaarn Buffo NO SON Lew Buffet Medium Saga Nigh Sugar
HITE eivtlitiosnoN
RccommERDED al raccepUb ID) Preleninery Preliminary Preliminary Prelminary Preimemry Preliminary Preiminary Preliminary Preliminary
Or
PROGRAM
GUIDANCE
Intestabon Loading
Rates t% Inc Mewl
SUMMARY "
(Urmareplable) 0.10D%
103.
200%
303
WO%
C4100% 106-
300%
700.
S00%
C4100% 400"
300%
300.
DM tr.
1E0
300%
300
000%
0. TOO-
300%
MO
MO% Ch
100.
MO%
300
WOK
0-100%
100-
300%
300.
S00%
0.100% an-
300%
300
G00%
0400% TOO.
300%
300 -
100%
RECOMMENDED
Special Geologic Feature Buffer widths are as follows:
Low Buffer Is lose than 50 feet
Medium Buffer Is 50 feet to looted
High Buffer is greater then 100 feet
NOT RECOMM DICED
Rates greater than 500% not recommended.
Assumes adequately permeable soils and lack of natural constraints as required for all Infiltration systems.
MRItratlen systems may be allowed at the determination of the Engineer and/or Geologist, provided that a Detailed She investigation is undertaken which cordimis
nature of reek, location of Special Geologic Features. and adequacy of the buffer between the SGF and the proposed storrnwater systamisk
2 In these Spode! Geologic Features: Low Buffer situations, Infiltration systems may be allowed at the derenrilnation cr the Engineer anctior Geologist, provided that a
Detailed Site investigation Is undertaken and a 25 foot buffer from SG Fs to maintained.
Source: Little Lehigh Creek Watershed ACT 167 - Stormwater Management Ordinance. May 2004
XXV- 93
Section 1003. Appendix C -Drainage Plan Application. (Ordinance No. 355, March
24, 2008, Section 1)
(To be attached to the "land subdivision plan or development plan review application or
"minor land subdivision plan review application")
Application is hereby made for review of the Stormwater Management and Erosion and
Sedimentation Pollution Control Plan and related data as submitted herewith in
accordance with the Spring Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
Final Plan Preliminary Plan Sketch Plan
Date of Submission Submission No.
1. Name of subdivision or development
2. Name of Applicant Telephone No.
(if corporation, list the corporation's name and the names of two officers of the
corporation)
Officer 1
Officer 2
Address
Zip
Applicants interest in subdivision or development
(if other than property owner give owners name and address)
3. Name of property owner Telephone No.
Address
Zip
4. Name of engineer or surveyor Telephone No.
Address
Zip
5. Type of subdivision or development proposed:
Single-Family Lots
Two Family Lots
Multi-Family Lots
Cluster Type Lots
Planned Residential
Development
Townhouses
Garden Apartments
Mobile-Home Park
Campground
Other (
Commercial(Multi-Lot)
Commercial (One-Lot)
Industrial (Multi-Lot)
Industrial (One-Lot)
6. Lineal feet of new road proposed L.F.
7. Area of proposed and existing impervious area on entire tract.
a. Existing (to remain) S.F. % of Property
b. Proposed S.F. % of Property
8. Stormwater
a. Does the peak rate of runoff from proposed conditions exceed that flow which
occurred for existing conditions for the designated design storm?
b. Design storm utilized (on-site conveyance systems) (24 hr.)
No. of Subarea
Watershed Name
Explain:
c. Does the submission and/or district meet the release rate criteria for the applicable
subarea?
d. Number of subarea(s) from Chapter Appendix D of the applicable Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan.
e. Type of proposed runoff control
f. Does the proposed stormwater control criteria meet the requirement / guidelines of
the Stormwater Ordinance?
If not, what variances/ waivers are requested?
Reasons
f. Does the plan meet the requirements of Part 3 of the Stormwater Ordinance?_
If not, what variances/waivers are requested?
Reasons Why
g. Was TR-55, June 1986 utilized in determining the time of concentration?
h. What hydrologic method was used in the stormwater computations?
i. Is a hydraulic routing through the stormwater control structure submitted?
j. Is a construction schedule or staging attached?
k. Is a recommended maintenance program attached?
9. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control (E&SPC):
a. Has the stormwater management and E&SPC plan, supporting documentation and
narrative been submitted to the Berks County Conservation District?
b. Total area of earth disturbance S.F.
10. Wetlands
a. Have the wetlands been delineated by someone trained in wetland delineation?_
b. Have the wetland lines been verified by a state or federal permitting authority?_
c. Have the wetland lines been surveyed?
d. Total acreage of wetland within the property
e. Total acreage of wetland disturbed
f. Supporting documentation
11. Filing
a. Has the required fee been submitted?
Amount
b. Has the proposed schedule of construction inspection to be performed by the
Applicant's engineer been submitted?
c. Name of individual who will be making the inspections
d. General comments about stormwater management at the development
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF APPLICATION:
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
COUNTY OF [County Name] .
On this the day of , 20 before me, the undersigned officer,
personally appeared who being duly sworn, according to law,
deposes and says that owners of the property described in
this application and that the application was made with
knowledge and/or direction and does hereby agree with the said application and to the
submission of the same.
Property Owner
My Commission Expires 20
Notary Public
THE UNDERSIGNED HEREBY CERTIFIES THAT TO THE BEST OF HIS KNOWLEDGE
AND BELIEF THE INFORMATION AND STATEMENTS GIVEN ABOVE ARE TRUE
AND CORRECT.
SIGNATURE OF APPLICANT
////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////// //
(Information Below This Line To Be Completed By The Township)
Spring Township official submission receipt:
Date complete application received Plan Number
Fees date fees paid received by
Official submission receipt date
Received by
Spring Township
Section 1004. Appendix D - Stormwater Management District Watershed Map(s).
(Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
TRIPUMA "E SOFEJYLKILL RIVER IN B.ERKS,COUNITY
PHASE I - ACT 167 STORM/MATER MANIAGE1',IENT PLAN
SCHUYLKILL
COUNTY / ....,. -..: -.. -, --, . ,,
.....,,v .....\
.WINDSOR
N'
"..) cf
. 1, %.... ....... - -Q..27,
-..-, ,,:.,. 1,...p. ti _..,14. -zsc
452
icat
"Ire -.,:i ,L,--T---%17 C.+ r-lk . X.
941 -:4.11."1::1'. . ?
r re" tp,462.
..-
a
AS .
1 AiaLS 1?-'
,..,_.-,,,,,,
-. _SHOEVIAKEFILLE476';''11
.L
1.,.
411i4"e--"."8"E-Th''TE-±N"...'"%;ORIC't
.... \ s's. ,,,---..\
, -A6,:(7.---
1
,..
UPPE
tIck_ 4 2
District
LOCATION MAP
Management District Legend
lfi r!"
MAiDENCREEK ,
s"--
a
K.6!
re'
.9..6
s1
113
-S 481
-
PENN t
ft
ft
ORT CCC
1 .-' , '"'
.., W.ORGAN -C., st,_,.........
a
ON:TELAUNEE.
Au;a:lak
,c, ..4$34.afie.1
%
7.."M...0%.,:, i '-I) 492) cURLDA.I.:5-
; 0 r Ole
e
RUS002.1EL/A.NOF:
BERKS
COUNTY
%.".
; - %
""
487.
Design Storm
Proposed
Conditions
2-Year
5-Year
10-Year
25-Year
50-Year
100-Year
2-Year
5-Year
10-Year
25-Year
50-Year
100-Year
Reclucc
To
Rem.
To
100% Release Rate
Design Storm
Existing
Conditions
1-Year
5-Year
10-Year
25-Ycar
50-Year
100-Year
1-Year.
2-Year
5-Year
10-Year
25-Year
50-Year
CLEY
'EkhilING
..0. 4'
,i,
'- ...kJ va.v...,, ,
.-. Luau,- :y9,.....01,,,s:73iREAriplrn
.LAW
...
1
c..
,A, N
--- .... :4
; - e iri, .4..
..... .. --.0w.?.
ear. SHILLING:OM:0
MOHNTOH
LIUI
IsENKII IAVVR6ferito
1..Sittra 511..
'509
SPRING
AMITY
.5294
iBIRDSBORp
/7 DOUGLASS//
9)4'.k.v
\.
2 1 0
1
Scale in Miles
57.0
SRECKNOCK.
LANCASTER
COUNTY
UNION
NORTH
COVENTRY
1- CHESTER
COUNTY
ft
17'. r r....
:AERNARVOR9'
---..__,...
-s..,...
11
WARWICK
ORDINANCE
APPENDiX D
MANAGEMENT
DISTRICTS
Prepared For: *0141./.
Boats County
Planning Commission 1:44t, ./.
County Services Center Ikt k -..
633 Court Street
Reading, PA 19601
610-478-6300
Legend
03 WATERSHED BOUNDARY
SUBAREAS
, tAATER BODIES
COUNTY BOUNDARIES " e MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES
Roads
INTERSTATE - - HIGHWAYS OTHER ROADS
RAILROADS
NOTE:
Portions of this map were generated from existing data sources as listed
below. These data are shown on the map for spatial reference only.
These data did not enter into any computations or affect the reliability of the
hydrologic analysis. Borten-Lawson Engineering has found some inaccuracies
in some of these data and has corrected the data in locations where discrepancies
were obvious, however, it was not a part of this ACT 167 Plan to correct
all of the mapping data.
DATA SOURCES:
Watershed Boundary - PADEP (Modified by BLE)
Roads - Berk.; County
Counties- Penn DOT
Municipalities - Berks County
Streams - PADEP
Water Bodies - USFWS (Derived from NWI Wetlands)
Management Districts and Subareas - Delineated by BLE
/7
*.e
V
AL;
Bor.-Con Lawson
Stic:CSICIN
Lehigh Valley
3893 Adler Place
Bethlehem, PA 18017
Tel: 434-821-0470
Northeast Pennsylvania
613 Baltimore Drive
VVinces-Barre, PA 18702
Tel: 570-821-1999
PREPARED BY: WEB CHECKED BY: SJD
DATE: 511412007 PROJECT 4: 2004-1680-00
0
Ar---etrN a kV
Adwp
WI dab
__, ..
-f-
A Hrotim. ovviihr,
24,1
Coneslo4a Creek
31 A ./
111114tt 13) '1 lin\MP., Wg It
msiga 0111
Map Features
Ratkoads
Streams
Briog55
Lakes and Ponds
Ltunts,pal Boundaries
501 Release Rate
5T,5 Relate ee Rate
75'1, Rcle ase Rale
1001, Reles.si, Rate
Conestoga Creek
Drainage In
Lancaster County
71
r
,
....
midrib WEI*
w%oIofsn. i Ali"' "I 4V4 Zs MAN; "I'lr
District Legend:
Post To
Dev. Pre.Day.
FiON Flow
. 11,
- N
.
_ 2
It
2 Year 1 . Year ii,
A 1 5-ear 5 -ear
I 10- Yeer 10-Year
l;i k,
III 1 l. 414411,
I 4 :,, 11,Vee". -."7.
V.P) \ 11;V ,
' 1 11.
f, 0
14, \ R. 3 -.4.-,
-ci. -, ..1Loilihrat
r- flirt ,- P 11111A411: 104,11.1'...,
ir A
"111/1 i4 .
i it
'8
, /
Management Districts
TiiipPhno-krm Creek Watershed
Berks, Lancaster and Lebanon
Counties, PA
25- Ye er 25- Year
2 - Year 1 - Year
L -' I 5 - Year 2 -Year
10-Year 5 -Year
25-Year 10- Year
2 -Year 1 - Year
B-4 5 - Year 2 -Year
25-Year 10-Yeat
100- Year 100-Year
ACT 167
Stormwater Management Han
Phase II
i C 2 - Year 1- VEar
5 Year 2 -Year
' If storms greater than tha 2 year atoms cannot
La conveyed to a stream or watercou,,e in a sate
manor (ordnance cectlons 303F, G, H), then
Ustrict A re quYernants sha'l apply.
In Edition to the criteria above the ground
water recharge (section 305), water gu stay
(section 307) and strearnbank erosion
(section 309) shatl also epp:y. Appendix D
Map Legend
A/ 171,17!, R.:alt
N Cc:4 E-7,-.217
A/ US Trin P.:.!as
A/ Ett2,-.1 A/ SU'. R2-tis
A/ LenIRL-111
)1. 411: j
,
__. ___ f N / i
% rt . -I- - c-----pc- ---t.--1 ---1-%. - _ vu -....k, - _ . ., -
.._
111111
-.ere"
t t1 .,, / I. k 4-4.
;',
-<J9r1.-..... 441111.
- 411 .x..,Aill ., N V
...k.iciftwrirmiwija ' 1 1 imlej, ". 8-5
.
. _
I iiiir.,,, , , &R., -,....
..;
._
NIMIta+ - Prepared For:
Berks County Planning Commission
Berks County Services Center
633 Court Street, 14th Floor
Reading, Pennsylvania 19601 - 3591
Telephone: (610) 478-6300
. . .
- ,:.... ,- _,---,- ty
, IP .', , ...,...... 28 ),4141 --1 .--.:--- .,k/
4
_,--..,;-- ,,, ,-
.
:41 I i - . 10 , --.... >,i
Alt
)
Si-
1 \ 2 1 t I 6 _; 4 t
?Ail f.'
0"
'
....
.. ' , - lid .
4 -.."
.t.....!I
. .
..- ..
. -ti _ ler% 0 it. 't'
'11. .."-t'"
0
"see 114.-..- T '' 4,--04I- ....,
141,M
''" ' 4,-ealF
.....-
, ---,
-A Pe"
i fe
lir
'4..,
Holes:
Portions of ClaSS maps %sere generated from
exlstlng date a oorces as Isted below. Th's esisrog
ad n'T isv's.s hscrugzcend tfh°; b2risa.pasTorrs9;nagtiaPturrf a rse'r5,ce
On:y. Trs rlaU dd not enter Into a ny.corrotatons
or affect the reratift7 of the trAlrolog.c. analysis.
Bodon-Landon Eng, nearing has foond soma
Inaccuraeash soma of thls deta and has
cocrected the data in locallons v.tvere these
ifs:regencies su.ire obsdous, honcver, it was not a
part of tills Act 167 Plan to =real al the base
Da'a Sources:
Roads - PennCOT
Streams, Wei 2 PC onDOT
Lturicipal Dalndaries - Pe nnDOT
-1-- "' -- ff... Mil 6 1,
IF" .
6 3 . ..I 9.V40i.t,'2"''
-
livt
,....,.. i it
- 41r N., 41V Vivil/b.-_- - 4air,
NCASTER A'11Fa', --C' eliiiiii
4
il .,',11. BORTCIRI 0 iLpws ®w
COUNTY I \ 4';', .4 ENGINEERING
,
5000 0 5000 10000 15000 Feel
i:o16:57oPWATER ROM
SUBAREAS FICYN D;RECTLY Cao
DEEP OUARRY prrs AND DO NOT OLITtET
NoR CiXtilREUTE TO THE SURFACE Fl-CWS
c: hiE TLYI_PD:,,XY.E:: CREEK WATER:4.HED.
613 Baltimore Drive
Suite 300
Wilkes-Barre, PA 18702-7903
Telephone : (570) 821-1999 Fax : (570) 821-1990
World Wide Web : httkAvaborton-lawson.com
I
Prepared Sy. KC Checked By.
Pro,:scl Humber 03514.00 Dales November 2000
Svi
It
74ZCIS "'
I I 'LE r ,
,r
I
"4
142s, anurla ay or MEP VI.Inlii
[ LifiCAVER4Catirf i.,CT 107
i SIMI 'OMER .14#11.41311ENT PLAN
I RIME II 44111EllEtil r11 ME Mad
. L .thi-- va.----- --5.,7za 1
.1C:raw , t 1
Section 1005. Appendix E - Low Impact Development (LID) Practices. (Ordinance
No. 355, March 24, 2008, Section 1)
ALTERNATIVE APPROACH FOR
MANAGING STORMWATER RUNOFF
Natural hydrologic conditions may be altered radically by poorly planned development
practices, such as introducing unneeded impervious surfaces, destroying existing drainage
swales, constructing unnecessary storm sewers, and changing local topography. A
traditional drainage approach of development has been to remove runoff from a site as
quickly as possible and capture it in a detention basin. This approach leads ultimately to
the degradation of water quality as well as expenditure of additional resources for
detaining and managing concentrated runoff at some downstream location.
The recommended alternative approach is to promote practices that will minimize
proposed conditions runoff rates and volumes, which will minimize needs for artificial
conveyance and storage facilities. To simulate pre-development hydrologic conditions,
infiltration is often necessary to offset the loss of infiltration by creation of impervious
surfaces. The ability of the ground to infiltrate depends upon the soil types and its
conditions.
Preserving natural hydrologic conditions requires careful alternative site design
considerations. Site design practices include preserving natural drainage features,
minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious
surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage. A well-designed site will contain a
mix of all those features. The following describes various techniques to achieve the
alternative approach:
Preserving Natural Drainage Features. Protecting natural drainage features,
particularly vegetated drainage swales and channels, is desirable because of their
ability to infiltrate and attenuate flows and to filter pollutants. However, this
objective is often not accomplished in land development. In fact, commonly held
drainage philosophy encourages just the opposite pattern -- streets and adjacent
storm sewers typically are located in the natural headwater valleys and swales,
thereby replacing natural drainage functions with a completely impervious system.
As a result, runoff and pollutants generated from impervious surfaces flow directly
into storm sewers with no opportunity for attenuation, infiltration, or filtration.
Developments designed to fit site topography also minimizes the amount of grading
on site.
Protecting Natural Depression Storage Areas. Depressional storage areas have no
surface outlet, or drain very slowly following a storm event. They can be commonly
XXV- 105
seen as ponded areas in farm fields during the wet season or after large runoff
events. Traditional development practices eliminate these depressions by filling or
draining, thereby obliterating their ability to reduce surface runoff volumes and trap
pollutants. The volume and release-rate characteristics of depressions should be
protected in the design of the development site. The depressions can be protected
by simply avoiding the depression or by incorporating its storage as additional
capacity in required detention facilities.
Avoiding introduction of impervious areas. Careful site planning should consider
reducing impervious coverage to the maximum extent possible. Building footprints,
sidewalks, driveways and other features producing impervious surfaces should be
evaluated to minimize impacts on runoff.
Reducing the Hydraulic Connectivity of Impervious Surfaces. Impervious surfaces
are significantly less of a problem if they are not directly connected to an
impervious conveyance system (such as storm sewer). Two basic ways to reduce
hydraulic connectivity are routing of roof runoff over lawns and reducing the use of
storm sewers. Site grading should promote increasing travel time of stormwater
runoff, and should help reduce concentration of runoff to a single point in the
development.
Routing Roof Runoff Over Lawns. Roof runoff can be easily routed over lawns in
most site designs. The practice discourages direct connections of downspouts to
storm sewers or parking lots. The practice also discourages sloping driveways and
parking lots to the street. By routing roof drains and crowning the driveway to run
off to the lawn, the lawn is essentially used as a filter strip.
Using Permeable Paving Materials. These materials include permeable interlocking
concrete paving blocks or porous bituminous concrete. Such materials should be
considered as alternatives to conventional pavement surfaces in privately owned
and maintained areas, especially for low use surfaces such as driveways, overflow
parking lots, and emergency access roads.
The following describes additional techniques that may be acceptable under certain
conditions to achieve the alternative approach. Their use is dependent upon additional
factors such as Zoning and Subdivision and Land Development regulations and these
techniques are to be employed only upon approval of the appropriate Township entity:
Reducing the Use of Storm Sewers. By reducing use of storm sewers for draining
streets, parking lots, and back yards, the potential for accelerating runoff from the
development can be greatly reduced. The practice requires greater use of swales
and may not be practical for some development sites, especially if there are concerns
for areas that do not drain in a "reasonable" time. The practice requires educating
XXV- 106
local citizens and public works officials, who expect runoff to disappear shortly after
a rainfall event.
Reducing Street Widths. Street widths can be reduced by either eliminating onstreet
parking or by reducing roadway widths. Township planners and traffic
designers may give consideration to narrower neighborhood streets which
ultimately could lower maintenance.
Limiting Sidewalks to One Side of the Street. A sidewalk on one side of the street
may suffice in low-traffic neighborhoods. The lost sidewalk could be replaced with
bicycle/recreational trails that follow back-of-lot lines. Where appropriate,
backyard trails should be constructed using pervious materials.
Constructing Open Space Developments. Open Space developments can also
reduce the amount of impervious area for a given number of lots. The biggest
savings is in street length, which also will reduce costs of the development. Open
Space development clusters the construction activity onto less-sensitive areas
without substantially affecting the gross density of development.
In summary, a careful consideration of the existing topography and implementation of a
combination of the above mentioned techniques may avoid construction of costly
stormwater control measures. Other benefits include reduced potential of downstream
flooding, water quality degradation of receiving streams/ water bodies and enhancement of
aesthetics and reduction of development costs. Beneficial results include more stable
baseflows in receiving streams, improved groundwater recharge, reduced flood flows,
reduced pollutant loads, and reduced costs for conveyance and storage.
Section 1006. Appendix F - West Nile Virus Guide. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24,
2008, Section 1)
(This source is from the Monroe County, PA Conservation District who researched the
potential of West Nile Virus problems from BMPs due to a number of calls they were
receiving)
Monroe County Conservation District Guidance:
Stormwater Management and West Nile Virus
Source: Brodhead Mc Michaels Creeks Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management
Ordinance 2/23/04
The Monroe County Conservation District recognizes the need to address the
problem of non-point source pollution impacts caused by runoff from impervious surfaces.
The new stormwater policy being integrated into Act 167 Stormwater Management
regulations by the PA Department of Environmental Protection (PaDEP) will make nonpoint
pollution controls an important component of all future plans and updates to existing
plans. In addition, to meet post-construction anti-degradation standards under the state
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting program, applicants
will be required to employ Best Management Practices (BMPs) to address non-point
pollution concerns.
Studies conducted throughout the United States have shown that wet basins and in
particular constructed wetlands are effective in traditional stormwater management areas
such as channel stability and flood control, and are one of the most effective ways to
remove stormwater pollutants (United States Environmental Protection Agency 1991,
Center for Watershed Protection 2000). From Maryland to Oregon, studies have shown that
as urbanization and impervious surface increase in a watershed, the streams in those
watersheds become degraded (CWP 2000). Although there is debate over the threshold of
impervious cover when degradation becomes apparent (some studies show as little as 6%
while others show closer to 20%), there is agreement that impervious surfaces cause nonpoint
pollution in urban and urbanizing watersheds, and that degradation is ensured if
stormwater BMPs are not implemented.
Although constructed wetlands and ponds are desirable from a water quality
perspective there may be concerns about the possibility of these stormwater management
structures becoming breeding grounds for mosquitoes. The Conservation District feels that
although it may be a valid concern, municipalities should not adopt ordinance provisions
prohibiting wet basins for stormwater management.
Mosquitoes
The questions surrounding mosquito production in wetlands and ponds have
intensified in recent years by the outbreak of the mosquito-borne West Nile Virus. As is the
case with all vector-borne maladies, the life cycle of West Nile Virus is complicated,
traveling from mosquito to bird, back to mosquito and then to other animals including
)0(V- 108
humans. Cu lex pipiens was identified as the vector species in the first documented cases
from New York in 1999. This species is still considered the primary transmitter of the
disease across its range. Today there are some 60 species of mosquitoes that inhabit
Pennsylvania. Along with C. pipiens, three other species have been identified as vectors of
West Nile Virus while four more have been identified as potential vectors.
The four known vectors in NE Pennsylvania are Cu lex pipiens, C. restuans, C.
salinarius and Ochlerotatus japonicus. All four of these species prefer, and almost exclusively
use, artificial containers (old tires, rain gutters, birdbaths, etc.) as larval habitats. In the case
of C. pipiens, the most notorious of the vector mosquitoes, the dirtier the water the better
they like it. The important factor is that these species do not thrive in functioning wetlands
where competition for resources and predation by larger aquatic and terrestrial organisms
is high.
The remaining four species, Aedes vexans, Ochlerotatus Canadensis, 0. triseriatus and
0. trivittatus are currently considered potential vectors due to laboratory tests (except the
0. trivittatus, which did have one confirmed vector pool for West Nile Virus in PA during
2002). All four of these species prefer vernal habitats and ponded woodland areas
following heavy summer rains. These species may be the greatest threat of disease
transmission around stormwater basins that pond water for more than four days. This can
be mitigated however by establishing ecologically functioning wetlands.
Stormwater Facilities
If a stormwater wetland or pond is constructed properly and a diverse ecological
community develops, mosquitoes should not become a problem. Wet basins and wetlands
constructed as stormwater management facilities, should be designed to attract a diverse
wildlife community. If a wetland is planned, proper hydrologic soil conditions and the
establishment of hydrophytic vegetation will promote the population of the wetland by
amphibians and other mosquito predators. In natural wetlands, predatory insects and
amphibians are effective at keeping mosquito populations in check during the larval stage
of development while birds and bats prey on adult mosquitoes.
The design of a stormwater wetland must include the selection of hydrophytic plant
species for their pollutant uptake capabilities and for not contributing to the potential for
vector mosquito breeding. In particular, species of emergent vegetation with little
submerged growth are preferable. By limiting the vegetation growing below the water
surface, larvae lose protective cover and there is less chance of anaerobic conditions
occurring in the water.
Stormwater ponds can be designed for multiple purposes. When incorporated into
an open space design a pond can serve as a stormwater management facility and a
community amenity. Aeration fountains and stocked fish should be added to keep larval
mosquito populations in check.
Publications from the PA Department of Health and the Penn State Cooperative
Extension concerning West Nile Virus identify aggressive public education about the risks
posed by standing water in artificial containers (tires, trash cans, rain gutters, bird baths) as
the most effective method to control vector mosquitoes.
)0(V- 109
Conclusion
The Conservation District understands the pressure faced by municipalities when
dealing with multifaceted issues such as stormwater management and encourages the
incorporation of water quality management techniques into stormwater designs. As
Monroe County continues to grow, conservation design, groundwater recharge and
constructed wetlands and ponds should be among the preferred design options to reduce
the impacts of increases in impervious surfaces. When designed and constructed
appropriately, the runoff mitigation benefits to the community from these design options
will far out weigh their potential to become breeding grounds for mosquitoes.
Section 1007. Appendix G - References. (Ordinance No. 355, March 24, 2008,
Section 1)
BMP Manuals
California
California Stormwater BMP Handbook: New Development and Redevelopment
(January 2003) - separate file available at
http:/ /www.cabmphandbooks.org/Development.asp
Georgia
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volume 2: Technical Handbook (August
2001) separate file ( http : / /www.georgiastormwater.com /)
Maryland
2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual -
http:/ /www.mde.state.md.us/ Programs/ Waterprograms/ SedimentandStor mwater/ s
tormwater design/ index.asp
Massachusetts
Stormwater Management, Volume Two: Stormwater Technical Handbook
(Massachusetts, 1997) - separate file available at
http:/ www.state.ma.us/ del)/ brp/ stormwtr /stormpub.htm
Minnesota
Minnesota Urban Small Sites BMP Manual: Stormwater Best Management Practices for
Cold Climates (July 2001) -
http: / / www.metrocouncil.org/ environment/ Watershed / BMP/ manual.htm
New Jersey
Revised Manual for New Jersey: Best Management Practices for Control of Non-point
Source Pollution from Stormwater (Fifth Draft May 2000) -
http:/ www.state.nj.us/ dep/ watershedmgt/ bmpmanual. htm
New York
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (2001) -
http:/ / www.dec.state.ny.us/ website/ dow/ swmanual /swmanual.html
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts, Pennsylvania Handbook of Best
Management Practices for Developing Areas, November 14, 1997.
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, December 30, 2006 -
http: / / www.depweb.state.pa.us/ watershedmgmt/ cwp/ view.asp?a=1437&Q=518682&
XXV- 111
PM=1
Washington
Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington (August 2001) -
http:/ / www.ecy.wa.gov / programs/ wq/ stormwater/ manual.html
Federal
Stormwater Best Management Practices in an Ultra-Urban Setting: Selection and
Monitoring (FHWA) - http: / / www.fhwa.dot.gov / environment/ ultraurb/ 3fs1.htm
USEPA Infiltration Trench Fact Sheet (September 1999) -
http:/ / cfpub.epa.gov / npdes/ stormwater/ menuofbmps/ post.cfm
Riparian Buffer References
Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, September 2000. Forest Buffer Toolkit, Stream ReLeaf Program.
Penn State College of Agricultural Sciences, 1996. Establishing Vegetative Buffer Strips
Along Streams to Improve Water Quality. Publication # AGRS-67.
Fike, Jean, June 1999. Terrestrial & Palustrine Plant Communities of Pennsylvania,
Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory, The Nature Conservancy, Western
Pennsylvania Conservancy, and Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources.
Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts, Inc., Keystone Chapter, Soil and
Water Conservation Society, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Natural Resources Conservation Service, 1998. Pennsylvania Handbook of
Best Management Practices for Developing Areas. Prepared by CH2MHi1l.
Palone, R. S. and A. H. Todd (eds), 1997. Chesapeake Bay Riparian Handbook: A Guide for
Establishing and Maintaining Riparian Forest Buffers. Chesapeake Bay Program and
Northeastern Area State and Private Forestry. Natural Resources Conservation
Service Cooperative State Research Education and Extension Services.
The Federal Interagency Stream Restoration Working Group (FISRWG, 10/1998).
Stream Corridor Restoration Principles, Processes, and Practices. GPO Item No.
0120-A; SuDocs No. A57.6/2:EN3/PT.653. ISBN-0-934213-59-3. Published October
1998. Revised August 2000.
AM1748
CHAPTER XXVI
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND CURBS
Part 1
Streets
Subpart A. Street Occupancy and Excavations
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Permit Required to Break Pavement or Surface of Public Streets
Permit Form
Permit Fee Schedule
Computation of Area of Street Pavement or Surface to be Charged
Additional Permit Fees
Compliance with Other Ordinances and Laws
Penalty Provisions
Subpart B. Prohibition and Removal of Obstructions Upon Streets and Roads
Section 121.
Section 122.
Section 123.
Section 124.
Section 125.
Section 126.
Definitions
Restrictions on Obstructions within the Street or Road
Authority to Remove Obstructions
Fines and Penalty for Violation
Enforcement of Fines
Severability
Part 2
Sidewalks
Subpart A. Sidewalks, Curb and Gutter Construction and Repair
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204.
Section 205.
Section 206.
Section 207.
Section 208.
Section 209.
Section 210.
General Purposes
Grades
Inspection
Public Safety
Planting of Trees and /or Shrubs Prohibited and/or Limited in
Certain Areas.
Open Gutters - Rain Conductors
Permits
Fees
Specifications
Improvement Costs
)0(VI -1
AM1748
Section 211. Penalties, Violations
Section 212. Unconstitutionality, etc. of this Part
Subpart B. Snow and Ice Removal from Sidewalks
Section 221. Responsibility for Removing Snow and Ice
Section 222 Township may Remove Snow and Ice and Collect Cost Plus
Additional Amount
Section 223 Enforcement
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Part 3
Prohibition and Removal of Dumpsters
Upon the Public Streets and Sidewalks
Findings and Purpose
Definitions
Dumpsters in General
Prohibition about Placement of Dumpsters
Permit Fees
Hold Harmless Agreement and Property and Liability Insurance
Penalties
AM1748
Part 1
Streets
Subpart A. Street Occupancy and Excavations.
Section 101. Permit Required to Break Pavement or Surface of Public Streets. No
person, firm, corporation or other entity shall break the pavement or surface of any
public street of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, between the
right-of-way lines thereof, until a permit to do so is obtained from the Township of
Spring. (Ordinance No. 238, March 28,1994, Section 1)
Section 102. Permit Form. Applications to break the pavement or surface of any
public street of the Township of Spring shall be made on the form provided by the
Township of Spring, shall include all information requested and shall be signed by the
permittee. (Ordinance No. 238, March 28, 1994, Section 2)
Section 103. Permit Fee Schedule. Applications shall also be accompanied by the
permit fee according to the currently adopted schedule of fees for permit issuance and
inspection for each requested street break and a payment to defray the cost of street
restoration by the Township of Spring in accordance with the following listing unless
otherwise stipulated:
Bituminous material on stone base:
Not to exceed five (5) square yards $135.00 per square yard
Each additional square yard $100.00 per square yard
The aforementioned scheduled of fees may from time to time be amended by the
adoption of a resolution by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring.
(Ordinance No. 238, March 28, 1994, Section 3)
Section 104. Computation of Area of Street Pavement or Surface to be Charged.
In computing the square yards of the pavement or surface to be charged, twelve (12)
inches shall be added to all sides of the proposed street cut. All fees and charges shall
be paid by the permittee or a legally binding letter of agreement accepted by the
Township of Spring before an issuance of the requested permit. (Ordinance No. 238,
March 28, 1994, Section 4)
Section 105. Additional Permit Fees.
(A) Permits for pavements or surface cuts on streets paved within five
(5) years preceding the date of application for the cut shall be issued at the
following additional costs; one hundred (100) percent for the first year after
)0W1 -3
AM1748
paving; eighty (80) percent additional for the second year; sixty (60) percent
additional for the third year; forty (40) percent additional for the fourth year; and
twenty (20) percent additional for the fifth year. These additional costs are
percentages of the street restoration costs listed in Section 103.
(B) Where, in the opinion of the Engineer of the Township of Spring
and at his sole discretion, site conditions are such that additional effort is
required to protect the integrity of the street(s) of the Township of Spring, the
permittee may be required to perform additional work and pay additional costs.
This option could include permanent restoration of the street surface by the
permittee along with payment of all above stipulated fees and charges; or the
reconstruction and/or resurfacing of an area of street exceeding the area directly
affected by the street break or cut at the permittees expense. Where additional
work is required, a legally binding "letter of agreement" acceptable to the
Township of Spring shall be provided by the applicant before issuance of the
permit.
(C) Upon inspection, if it be determined that the permittee actually
removed, disturbed or damaged, either in the initial or subsequent restoration,
an area of yardage greater than that set forth, in his/ her application, the
permittee shall forthwith pay a proportionate amount to be fixed by the Engineer
of the Township of Spring within three (3) days after demand therefor shall be
made in writing.
(Ordinance No. 238, March 28, 1994, Section 5)
Section 106. Compliance with Other Ordinances and Laws. No permit shall be
issued to any person, firm, corporation or other entities indebted to the Township of
Spring because of any previous application or permit. Any permit is issued subject to
all ordinances of the Township of Spring, all State and Federal laws and to the
following conditions:
(A) Bore Holes. Bore holes will be considered street cuts and a
restoration charge of five dollars ($5.00) will be levied for each bore hole made.
A permit will be required for each bore hole grouping. The permittee shall plug
or seal bore holes in a manner and with materials approved by the Engineer of
the Township of Spring, to the street surface within thirty (30) days of boring. If
the applicant does not plug or seal these holes within the given time, the
Township of Spring reserves the right to take any steps deemed necessary to
repair the street, and the associated costs shall then be paid by the permittee.
(B) Emergency Cuts. Emergency street cuts and excavation required to
access leaking utility mains or other installations that pose a potential hazard, or
bore holes required to search out threatening conditions, may be made in
)0W1 -4
AM1748
advance of a permit at the discretion of the party or parties conducting the
investigation and repairs. If the investigation indicates an emergency condition
exists, the Township of Spring Police Department shall be notified immediately
at telephone #911; otherwise, an authorized representative of the responsible
party(s) shall notify the Engineer of the Township of Spring, at telephone
number (610) 678-5393 the next business day and proper application
accompanied by appropriate fees or a legally binding letter of agreement shall be
submitted to the Township within seven (7) days of commencing the work.
(C) Ahead of Paving Permit. Permits for street cuts performed in
advance of Township of Spring scheduled street improvements at the same
location, where the required work is completed in accordance with a schedule
approved by the Engineer of the Township of Spring, will be issued at no charge.
A detailed construction plan must accompany each application for an "ahead of
paving permit." Excavation, backfilling and temporary street cut restoration will
be performed by the permittee at his/her cost as directed by the Engineer of the
Township of Spring. By June 30 of each year the Engineer of the Township of
Spring shall provide all utilities operating in the Township of Spring with a list
of all road projects proposed by the Board of Supervisors during the succeeding
calendar year.
(D) Subsurface Plans. Upon completion of work, the permittee shall
furnish to the Engineer of the Township of Spring completely dimensioned plans
showing accurately and distinctly, and in such detail as required, the size, the
shape and kind of structure he/ she has installed or altered and its location with
reference to the street surface and the nearest curb line and curb intersection. No
refunds will be allowed until such plans have been furnished and accepted.
(E) Time Limit. In case the work has not been completed on or before
the date as shown on the permit, the Engineer of the Township of Spring may, if
he deems it advisable, take steps to backfill the trench and replace a permanent
pavement over the opening for which the permit had been issued. If an
extension of time beyond said date is necessary for the completion of the work, a
written application therefor must be filed.
(F) Excavation Notice. Act of Assembly No. 1986-172 requires those
who intend to excavate, demolish or blast to file certain notices (one-call, etc.)
before commencing work. Permittees for permits to break the pavement or
surface of any public street of the Township of Spring shall comply with all the
requirements of this Act. Permits issued in the Township of Spring shall be
deemed null and void unless the requirements of the Act have been met.
Trenches in paved areas shall be cut to a neat edge using an asphalt/concrete
saw or jack hammer.
XXVI -5
AM1 748
(G) Barricade Cover, Lighting and Traffic Control. All street openings
shall be completely barricaded and protected by the permittee. Excavations left
open or incompletely repaired after dark shall be marked by PennDOT approved
flashing lights. Where work is interrupted, the person(s) responsible for the
opening shall secure and cover the excavation with an appropriate metal plate.
All required traffic control shall be provided by the permittee in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 203 (Work Zone Traffic Control).
Nothing contained in this Part or other legislation of the Township of Spring
shall release the person, firm, corporation or other entity opening the street from
all liability associated with claims for injury or damage resulting therefrom.
(H) Backfilling. All openings made in the improved area shall be
backfilled by the permittee in accordance with the following minimum
standards:
(1) The opening shall first be backfilled with material suitable
for insulation to a height not to exceed one (1) foot over the top of the
facility, compacted in not more than four (4) inch layers.
(2) The opening shall then be backfilled with either No. 2 RC
aggregate, or other material specified in the permit, and compacted
throughout its full width in layers not to exceed four (4) inches if a tamper
or wacker is used, in layers not to exceed eight (8) inches if approved
vibratory compaction equipment is used.
(3) Where the existing pavement structure includes a course of
subbase material, it shall be replaced to a depth equal to the existing
course depth with material meeting the requirements of §350, PennDOT
Form '4 08.
(I) Paving Restoration. Immediately following backfilling and
compaction the permittee shall apply ID-2 bituminous binder course (or cold
patch if hot mix is not available) to a minimum depth of two (2) inches and
compacted to the level of the abutting surface. The surface material shall be
tamped with a gravity roller or vibrating compactor subject to the approval of
the Engineer of the Township of Spring. The permittee shall maintain the
restoration by re-excavating and/or applying additional surface material in
order to provide a smooth riding surface for a period of one (1) year after
temporary restoration or until the Township provides a permanent surface
repair. Repairs shall be made by the permittee within twenty-four (24) hours of
notice by the Township, and, by accepting a street cut whether or not he/she is
notified by the Township of Spring to perform additional work.
)O(VI -6
AM1748
(J) Shoulder Restoration.
(1) Paved and Stabilized Shoulders. Paved and stabilized
shoulders shall be reconstructed and restored to a serviceable condition, of
the same type as existed before the start of work.
(2) Other Shoulders. Other shoulders shall be restored
according to the following:
(a) Suitable material shall be used for backfill of openings
in shoulders.
(b) If the length of the facility exceeds fifty (50) feet, the
shoulder shall be graded, rolled and penetrated with RT-2C or MC-
30 bituminous material at a minimum rate of twenty-five
hundredths (.25) gallon per square yard and chipped or lightly
sanded to prevent tracking of oil onto the pavement.
(3) All shoulder restoration shall be the responsibility of the
permittee.
(K) Restoration at Appurtenances. The top of every manhole, valve
box or other access to the facility shall be of the same elevation as the surface in
which it is located.
The surface surrounding manholes or valve covers located in shoulders shall be
paved in such a manner as to prevent washouts.
All manholes, including those cast-in-place, shall be constructed in compliance
with current industry standards and PennDOT Form 408, §713.2(c).
(L) Additional Restoration. All disturbed portions of the street,
including all appurtenances and structures such as guiderails or drain pipes,
shall be restored to a condition equal to that which existed before the start of any
work authorized by the permit.
(1) If the permittee opens any street pavement having a
bituminous concrete surface, whether to install a new facility or to modify
an existing facility, the permittee shall, in addition to the restoration
conditions outlined in the permit and in this Part, overlay the street
pavement in accordance with the following conditions:
AM1748
(a) When a longitudinal opening longer than ten (10) feet
and wider than three (3) feet is made in the street pavement, the
permittee shall overlay the traffic lanes in which the opening was
made, for the entire length of street that was opened as directed by
the Engineer of the Township of Spring.
(b) When two (2) or more transverse trench openings are
made in the street pavement less than two hundred (200) feet apart,
the permittee shall overlay all traffic lanes in which the openings
were made, for the entire length of street between such openings as
directed by the Engineer of the Township of Spring.
(c) When five (5) or more emergency openings have been
made by the same permittee in the street pavement less than two
hundred (200) feet apart within five (5) years of the last resurfacing
by the Township of Spring, the permittee shall overlay all traffic
lanes in which the openings were made, in accordance with the
PennDOT "Maintenance Manual," for the entire length of street
between such openings.
(d) Where disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are
overlaid, the shoulder shall be raised so that the overlaid pavement
and shoulder edges are at the same elevation
(2) Regardless of the age of the wearing course:
(a) When both longitudinal and transverse trench
openings are made in the street pavement the Engineer of the
Township of Spring may require the permittee to overlay all traffic
lanes in which such openings were made for the entire length of
street that was opened, if the Engineer of the Township of Spring
determines that the present serviceability index of the street - as
discussed in Chapter 3 of the PennDOT "Maintenance Manual" -
has been impaired by the opening; or,
(b) When five (5) or more openings are made by the same
permittee in the street highway pavement less that one hundred
(100) feet apart, the Engineer of the Township of Spring may
require the permittee to overlay the entire disturbed area.
(M) Notice to Township Engineer. The Township Engineer at
telephone number (610) 678-5393 shall be notified when the opening in the
pavement is to be made, and shall be further notified when a cut is to be
)0CVI -8
AM1748
backfilled and completed, so that the proper instructions may be issued for
permanent pavement replacement.
(N) Work for Township of Spring. No permit will be required of
contractors doing work of this nature for the Township. Contractors doing work
of this nature for the Township of Spring shall be required to obtain a permit
therefor; however, said permits shall be issued without charge.
(0) Work to Conform to Township of Spring Standards. The work
shall be done at such time and in such manner as shall be consistent with the
safety of the public and shall conform to all requirements and standards of the
Township. If the Township discovers that the work has been discontinued or has
not been properly performed, the permittee, upon being notified thereof in
writing by the Township of Spring, shall immediately take all necessary steps, at
his or her own expense, to place the work in such condition as to conform to the
Township of Spring's requirements or standards. If a dispute arises between the
permittee and the Township of Spring's Inspector, the Inspector shall have the
authority to suspend work until the matter can be referred to and be decided by
the Engineer of the Township of Spring.
(P) Additional Inspection Fees. If the Township of Spring determines
that the permitted work is of sufficient magnitude or importance to warrant
assignment of one (1) or more employees to inspect the permitted work on a
more than spot inspection basis, the permit will so indicate and the permittee
shall be charged for all salary, overhead and expenses incurred by the Township
of Spring for inspection.
(Ordinance No. 238, March 28, 1994, Section 6)
Section 107. Penalty Provisions. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity
who breaks or cuts in any manner the payment or surface of any public street of the
Township of Spring without first having obtained the proper permit and paid the
application fees and charges hereinbef ore set forth, including any extension fee, or who
violates any of the other provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.00) for each
offense, plus costs; and in default of the payment of such fine and costs, said person
and/or the responsible agents or officers of firms or corporations violating the
provisions of this Part shall be imprisoned in the Berks County Prison for a period not
exceed thirty (30) days. (Ordinance 238, March 28, 1994, Section 7)
AM1748
Subpart B. Prohibition and Removal of Obstructions Upon Streets and Roads.
Section 121. Definitions.
(A) For purpose of this Part, the word "person" shall mean natural
person, partnership, corporation, association or any other legal entity.
(B) Public Way shall mean any federal, state or township street, road or
right-of-way.
(Ordinance No. 316, March 3, 2005, Section 1)
Section 122. Restrictions on Obstructions within the Street or Road.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct and /or
maintain any obstruction to the convenient use of any street, road, alley or other
Public Way in the Township; provided however, that traffic signs, traffic signals,
fire hydrants, utility poles, lighting fixtures, sanitary sewer vent pipes and
mailboxes may be erected and constructed within and upon that portion of any
street, road, alley or other Public Way in the Township, excluding the cartway
thereof, unless approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(B) In order to keep any street, road, alley or other public way within
the physical and/or corporate boundaries of the Township, both the traveled
portion as well as any other portion free and clear of all obstructions and debris
of any type or kind as set forth in this Part, it is hereby prohibited for any person
to deposit, dump, throw, shovel, cast, plow and/or allow the migrate or filter
onto any said street, road, alley or other Public Way, the following substances:
ice, snow, soil, grass clippings, ash, stone, trash, refuse, rubbish, junk or any
other debris or like substance, both natural and artificial, in such a manner, so as
to hinder or interfere with the use of, block or obstruct the street, road, alley or
other Public Way.
(Ordinance No. 316, March 3, 2005, Section 1)
Section 123. Authority to Remove Obstructions. In addition to the penalties
imposed by this Part for the violation of any provision thereof, the Person, upon notice
of the violation, shall immediately cause the removal of the offending obstruction and
upon failure to do so, the Township may cause the removal of the same at the expense
of the owner, owners or lessees or such obstruction and collect the cost thereof in any
manner provided by law. (Ordinance No. 316, March 3, 2005, Section 1)
AM1748
Section 124. Fines and Penalty for Violation.
(A) Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall upon
conviction therefore be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) per offense and costs of prosecution and in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than five (5) days.
(B) In addition to the foregoing, the Township may impose a civil
penalty not to exceed Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) and not less than One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each violation.
(C) A separate offense and violation shall arise for each day or part
thereof in which a violation is found to exist or for each Section of this Part which
is found to have be violated.
(Ordinance No. 316, March 3, 2005, Section 1)
Section 125. Enforcement of Fines. The Township hereby designates any State or
Township Police Officer and the Codes Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, as
having the authority to initially determine a violation and to effect service of notice of
violation as required by this Part or other process of law. (Ordinance No. 316, March 3,
2005, Section 1)
Section 126. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section, article or part of this
Part is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sentences, causes, sections articles or parts of this Part. If is
hereby declared as the intent of the Township Board of Supervisors that this Part would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause,
section, article or part thereof not been included herein. (Ordinance No. 316, March 3,
2005, Section 1)
AM1748
Part 2
Sidewalks
Subpart A. Sidewalks, Curb and Gutter Construction and Repair.
Section 201. General Purposes. The grading, paving, construction and repairing
of all sidewalks and the construction and repairing of all curbs and gutters in the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall be performed in conformity
with the following specifications, regulations and provisions. (Ordinance No. 129, July
26, 1976, Section 31)
Section 202. Grades. The grade to which every curb, gutter or sidewalk shall be
hereafter laid, constructed or repaired shall be that designated and established by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, or as
designated on Township approved and recorded subdivision plans. (Ordinance
No. 129, July 26, 1976, Section 32)
Section 203. Inspection. All work performed hereunder shall be inspected by the
Township Engineer of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 129, July 26, 1976, Section 32)
Section 204. Public Safety. It shall be the duty of the owner or owners of the
land abutting on any curbs, gutters and/or sidewalks to keep them in such repair and
condition that they may not be or become dangerous to the welfare and safety of the
traveling public. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby empowered to notify property owners when sidewalks, curbs
and gutters are in need of repair or renewal thereof shall be made by the property
owner within thirty (30) days after said written notice is given to said property
owner(s), or other time limit as set forth in written notice. (Ordinance No. 129, July 26,
1976, Section 34)
Section 205. Planting of Trees and/or Shrubs Prohibited and/or Limited in
Certain Areas. It shall be unlawful to plant any tree, trees and/or shrub or shrubs
within any of the street rights-of-way of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania. The phrase "street right-of-way" as herein used shall mean any area
designated and /or used for public vehicular purposes together with the abutting area
or areas designated and/ or used for public pedestrian purposes. Each new tree and/ or
shrub shall be planted on the private property side of the street right-of-way and if
located within the 100-feet sight triangle of any street corner the same shall be
maintained by the owner thereof so as not to exceed two (2) feet six (6) inches in height.
(Ordinance No. 129, July 26, 1976, Section 35)
)0(VI -12
AM1748
Section 206. Open Gutters - Rain Conductors. No open gutters for conducting
rain water or drainage of any kind whatsoever will be permitted within sidewalks or
curbs. (Ordinance No. 129, July 29,1976, Section 36)
Section 207. Permits. No person or persons, firms or corporation shall construct
or repair any sidewalk, curb or gutters without first applying for and obtaining from
the Township Engineer of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, a
permit for same. The application for such permit shall set forth:
(A) The full name and address of the owners of the land affected;
(B) The name and address of the contractor, or the person to perform
the work;
(C) The precise location of the property upon which the work is to be
performed;
(D) The length of the proposed project; and
(E) Such other pertinent information as may be considered necessary.
(Ordinance No. 129, July 26, 1976, Section 37)
Section 208. Fees. The cost of obtaining the sidewalk, curb or gutter permit
referred to in Section 207 of this Part shall be designated and established by appropriate
resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania. (Ordinance No. 129, July 26, 1976, Section 38)
Section 209. Specifications.
(A) All curbs, gutters, sidewalks and driveway entrances within street,
road or alley areas shall be constructed of ready-mixed concrete with a minimum
ultimate compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) psi at twenty-eight (28)
days. All concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by suitable means during the
placing, and shall be thoroughly worked in the corners of the forms. Exposed
concrete surfaces shall be true and even, free from open or rough areas,
depressions or projections. The finish shall be steel troweled with soft brush
finish. No patching will be permitted. Forms shall be of wood or metal and
constructed of materials sufficient in strength to hold the concrete without
deforming. Forms shall be used at grade points in all cases.
(B) Curbs shall be made to the following specifications. The curb shall
have a depth of not less than twenty-four (24) inches and shall be constructed on
a well-tamped four (4) inch broken stone base. (2A modified slag may be
)0W1 -13
AM1748
substituted for the broken stone, and said curb shall be eight (8) inches thick at
the top and ten (10) inches thick at the bottom. The height of the curb above the
gutter lines shall be eight (8) inches.)
(C) Sidewalks shall be not less than four (4) inches in thickness, and
shall rest on a compact bed for broken stone (or 2A modified slag) a depth of at
least four (4) inches.
(D) In cold weather, adequate equipment shall be provided for heating
the concrete materials and protecting the concrete during freezing or
near-freezing weather. All concrete materials and all forms, fillers and ground
with which the concrete is to come in contact, shall be free from frost. No frozen
materials containing ice shall be used.
(E) Sidewalks, curbs, and gutters shall have scored joints every five (5)
linear feet of work. Approved expansion joints shall be placed every thirty (30)
linear feet or less of work.
(F) The radii of corners at street intersections shall not be less than the
distance between the outside face of the curbing and the street line. The radii of
corners at intersecting alleys of a width of more than fifteen (15) feet shall be ten
(10) feet, unless the Engineer authorizes conformance to existing conditions.
(G) Driveway entrances over sidewalk at residential properties shall be
at least eight (8) inches thick, and twelve (12) feet wide for a single driveway and
sixteen (16) feet wide for a double driveway. Curb radii at the driveways shall
be determined as the distance from the outside face of the curbing to the inside
edge of the pavement. The curbing shall be eight (8) inches thick and
twenty-four (24) inches in depth. Driveway and curbing are to be constructed on
a well-tamped four (4) inch thick base of broken stone or slag. Driveway
entrances over sidewalk entrances at commercial and industrial properties shall
comply with the foregoing and such additional requirements as may be
prescribed from time to time by the Supervisors.
(H) Rain Conductors: All rain conductors shall be service weight cast
iron soil pipe within the street right-of-way.
(I) Drawings: Curbs, sidewalks, and driveways shall be constructed as
shown on Drawings 4-0050 and 4-0050A, latest revision.
(J) Existing Curb: Where existing curb has moved out of vertical and
horizontal alignment of one (1) inch or more, the property owner shall be
notified in writing to replace, or realign the curb. Deterioration or fractured
curbs also shall require replacement upon written notification.
XXVI - 14
AM1748
(K) All sidewalks, curbs, gutters and/ or driveway entrances heretofore
installed within the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, having a
form of construction in deviation of the within specifications may be repaired
and/ or replaced, in kind, upon obtaining the written approval of the Township
Engineer of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
In existing areas where the space between the sidewalk and curb is deemed to be
narrow by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, the sloping portion of the driveway may extend into the sidewalk area in
accordance with certain standards designated and established by the said Board of
Supervisors.
(Ordinance No. 129, July 29, 1976, Section 39; as amended by Ordinance No. 196, July
13, 1987, Section 1)
Section 210. Improvement Costs. The costs and expenses of the construction
and/or repair of sidewalks, curbs and gutters in the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, shall be determined and assessed by the Board of Supervisors of said
Township, and shall be payable as set forth herein.
(A) Any property owner assessed with improvement costs shall
have the following payment options available to them for repayment of the costs
to the Township:
(1) Payment may be made immediately consisting of a lump
sum amount of the total amount due; or
(2) Payments may be made on a monthly basis for a total of
twenty-four (24) months which payments shall include interest at the rate
of six percent (6%) per annum, pursuant to an agreement between the
homeowner and the Township, such agreement being to the satisfaction of
the Township Solicitor. Such agreement will include property owner's
consent to placing a lien against the property for the principal amount,
interest, and penalty, as allowed by law. Upon payment in full of the
outstanding amount, said lien shall be released by the Township.
(B) If there is a default in the payment of any installment and interest
for a period of sixty (60) days after it becomes due, the entire assessment and
accrued interest shall become due and the Township Solicitor shall proceed to
collect the assessment, and all interest, penalties and costs, under the general
laws relating to the collection of municipal claims.
AM1748
(C) Any owner of property against whom assessment is made may pay
the assessment, in full, at any time, together with interest and costs owing
thereon through the due date of the next installment and that payment shall
discharge the lien. There shall be no penalty for any such prepayment.
(D) The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring does hereby
approve, adopt and authorize the execution of Agreements between the
Township and the affected homeowners, in accordance with the provisions of
this Section, without further Board action.
(Ordinance No. 129, July 26, 1976, Section 40; Amended by No. 372, August 10, 2009,
Section 1)
Section 211. Penalties, Violations. Any person or persons, firm or corporation
constructing or repairing sidewalks, curbs or gutters or planting trees or shrubs in
violation of any of the provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, before a
District Justice, be subject to a penalty of not less than ten ($10.00) dollars nor more then
fifty ($50.00) dollars, for each and every offense, and cost of prosecution to be recovered
as penalties are by law recovered; or to a fine of not less then ten ($10.00) dollars nor
more than fifty ($50.00) dollars, for each and every offense, and cost of prosecution; and
upon default in the payment of said fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding thirty (30) days in the Berks County Prison. (Ordinance No. 129, July 26,
1976, Section 41)
Section 212. Unconstitutionality, etc. of this Part. If any sentence, clause, section
or part of this Part is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid,
such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania that this Part would have been adopted and such
unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof should not
be included herein. (Ordinance No. 129, July 26, 1976, Section 43)
AM1748
Subpart B. Snow and Ice Removal from Sidewalks.
Section 221. Responsibility for Removing Snow and Ice. The owner, occupant or
tenant of every property fronting upon or alongside of any of the streets in the
Township of Spring is hereby required to remove or cause to be removed from all of the
sidewalks in front or alongside of such property all snow or ice thereon fallen, drifted,
and/or formed, within twenty-four (24) hours after the same shall have ceased to fall,
drift, and/or form. The owner of the property shall be responsible for conforming to
the requirements of this section where such property is occupied by such owner or is
unoccupied; the tenant or occupier thereof, where such property is occupied by such
tenant or occupier only; and the owner thereof where the property is a
multiple-business or multiple-dwelling property, occupied by more than one tenant or
occupier. (Ordinance No. 55, February 10,1964, Section 1)
Section 222 Township May Remove Snow and Ice and Collect Cost Plus
Additional Amount. In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, as aforesaid,
shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of the Section 220 of
this Part within the time limit prescribed therein, the Township authorities may proceed
immediately to clear all snow and/or ice from the sidewalk of such delinquents, and to
collect the expenses thereof, with any additional amount allowed by law, from such
owner, occupant or tenant, as the case may be, which may be in addition to any fine or
penalty imposed under Section 773 of this Part. (Ordinance No. 55, February 10, 1964,
Section 2)
Section 773. Enforcement.
(a) Authorized officials of the Township of Spring engaged in the
enforcement of the Township Code of Ordinances shall have the authority to
notify, by first class mail or by hand delivery, any owner, occupant or tenant
violating any provision of this Part that if he or she shall pay a penalty in the sum
of Thirty-Five Dollars ($35.00) at the administrative office of the Township of
Spring, 2850 Windmill Road, Sinking Spring, PA 19608, within ten (10) business
days from the time of the issuance of the notice, such amount shall be deemed as
and shall constitute the full penalty for that violation. Notification by hand
delivery shall include, among other things, affixing a notice to the front door of
the office or residence of any owner, occupant or tenant violating any provision
of this Part. Provided: failure to issue such notice shall not in itself be a defense
to a citation as set forth below.
(b) If such payment shall not be made at the administrative office
within the ten (10) business day period, upon citation duly issued, regardless of
whether notification as set forth above was received, any owner, occupant, or
tenant violating any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereon, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00), plus the costs of
)0CVI - 17
AM1748
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment
for not more than ten (10) days. Provided: each violation of any provision of this
Part, and each day the same is continued, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ordinance No. 55, February 10, 1964, Section 3; as amended by Ordinance No. 117,
August 25, 1975, Section 1; as further amended by Ordinance No. 350, December 27,
2007, Section 1; as further amended by Ordinance No. 378, February 28, 2011, Section 1)
AM1748
Part 3
Prohibition and Removal of Dumpsters
Upon the Public Streets and Sidewalks
Section 301. Findings and Purpose. The Board of Supervisors finds:
(A) That certain public streets and sidewalks in the Township are
subject to periodic obstruction by the placement thereon of dumpsters as herein
defined.
(B) That reasonable regulation of congestion and obstructions on
public streets and sidewalks in the Township is necessary to protect the safety of
persons or property.
(Ordinance No. 235, December 13,1993, Section 1)
Section 302. Definitions.
DUMPSTER - any container used for the purpose of temporarily holding
materials. All containers used for the purpose of holding garbage or any other
form of plant matter are excluded from the terms of this Part.
LESSOR - one who rents a dumpster or dumpsters to another.
LESSEE -a property owner or agent thereof who leases a dumpster.
PERSON - any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
similar entity.
PUBLIC STREET - a street which is a part of the general road and street
system of the Township.
SIDEWALK - a sidewalk parallel to a street forming a part of the public
road or street system of the Township.
TOWNSHIP - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 235, December 13, 1993, Section 2)
Section 303. Dumpsters in General. Dumpsters shall be of a size not wider than
eight (8) feet nor longer than twenty-three (23) feet. All dumpsters shall be well
painted, be in a good state of repair and shall be clean and free of offensive odors. The
dumpster owner and/ or lessor shall place and maintain on the outside of each
)0(VI -19
AM1748
dumpster flashing devices or reflectors or reflective tape, or sufficient size and location
to warn vehicular and pedestrian traffic of the location of such dumpster. Further, the
dumpster owner and/or lessor shall place and maintain on the outside of each
dumpster, in legible letters not less than one (1) inch in height, its name or logo,
telephone number and the current Township dumpster permit number.
(Ordinance No. 235, December 13,1993, Section 3)
Section 304. Prohibition about Placement of Dumpsters. No person shall put,
place, maintain, erect or cause or allow it to be put, placed or erected any dumpster
upon the public streets and/ or sidewalks in the Township, except that dumpsters
incidental to construction, rehabilitation or demolition work may be put, placed or
erected upon any public street or sidewalk; provided, that a hold harmless agreement is
executed and that adequate proof of liability insurance is established as required in
Section 306 of this Part; and, provided that, the location of such dumpster is approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township who shall issue a permit for a period
of time not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. (Ordinance No. 235, December 13,
1993, Section 4)
Section 305. Permit Fees. The price for a Township dumpster permit shall be
thirty dollars ($30.00) for the first thirty (30) consecutive days. Permits may be renewed
for thirty (30) day increments at the sole discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer of
the Township if, in his opinion, the work has not been completed or abandoned or if it
is deemed to be in the best interests of the public. The cost of a renewed dumpster
permit shall be equal to the cost of the initial dumpster permit. (Ordinance No. 235,
December 13, 1993, Section 5)
Section 306. Hold Harmless Agreement and Property and Liability Insurance.
Prior to the issuance by the Township of any permit or other authority to put, place or
erect a dumpster upon a public street or public sidewalk in the Township, the dumpster
owner and/ or lessor shall execute a hold harmless agreement in such form as the
Township shall provide, guaranteeing to defend, protect and compensate the Township
as the result of any cause of action which may be brought or perfected against the
Township in connection therewith; or shall deposit with the office of the Manager of the
Township a certificate of insurance acceptable to the Township Solicitor covering such
owner and/ or lessor of the dumpster. (Ordinance No. 236, December 13, 1993,
Section 6)
Section 307. Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall
violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.00) and in default of payment to
undergo imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days. (Ordinance No. 235,
December 13, 1993, Section 7)
A03427
CHAPTER XXVII
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Part 1
General Provisions
Section 101. Title
Section 102. Short Title
Section 103. Purpose
Section 104. Applicability
Section 105. Exemptions
Section 106. Interpretation
Section 107. Modifications and Exceptions
Section 108. Fees
Section 109. Revised Plans, Alternative Plans and Resubdivisions
Section 110. Township Records
Section 111. Amendments
Section 112. Appeals to Courts
Section 113. Enforcement
Section 114. Penalties
Section 115. Liability
Section 116. State Planning Code Amendments
Section 117. Land Development Requirements
Part 2
Definitions
Section 201. General Interpretation
Section 202. Definitions
Part 3
Overview of General Procedures
Section 301. Purpose
Section 302. General Procedure for Subdivisions and Land Developments
Section 303. General Plan Submission Procedures
A03427
Part 4
Sketch Plan
Section 401. Preplan Consultation
Section 402. Sketch Plan Submission and Drawing Requirements
Section 403. Review Procedures
Section 501.
Section 502.
Section 503.
Section 504.
Section 505.
Section 506.
Section 507.
Section 508.
Section 601.
Section 602.
Section 603.
Section 604
Section 701.
Section 702.
Section 703.
Section 704.
Section 705.
Part 5
Preliminary Plan
Purpose
Submission and Review Procedure
Preliminary Plan Requirements and Checklist
Certification
Traffic Impact Study
Community Impact Studies; Developments of 500+ Units
Water Quantity Impact Study
Sanitary Sewer Impact Study
Part 6
Final Plan
Applicability
Submission and Review Procedure
Final Plan Submission Requirements and Checklist
Certification
Part 7
Minor Subdivisions and Lot Line Adjustments
Purpose
Submission and Review Procedure
Minor Subdivision Submission Requirements and Checklist
Lot Line Adjustments, Annexations and Other Plans Exempt from
Normal Submission
Recording of Plans
A03427
Section 801.
Section 802.
Section 803.
Section 804.
Section 805.
Section 806.
Section 807.
Section 808.
Part 8
Improvements Guarantees
Guarantee of Improvements Installation Required
Improvements to be Provided by the Applicant
Development Agreement
Performance Guarantee
Approval of Improvements
Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements
Maintenance Agreement
Maintenance Guarantee
Part 9
Recording of Final Plan
Section 901. Recording of Final Plan
Section 902. Record Plan
Section 903. Effect of Recording
Part 10
Design Standards and Required Improvements
Section 1001. Application
Section 1002. Required improvements
Section 1003. Overall Requirements
Section 1004. Streets
Section 1005. Lots
Section 1006. Open Space and Recreation Areas and Fees
Section 1007. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
Section 1008. Sanitary Sewage Disposal Systems
Section 1009. Water Supply Systems and Fire Hydrants
Section 1010. Refuse Collection and Utilities Other Than Water and Sewer
Section 1011. Access Drives and Driveways
Section 1012. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Section 1013. Sidewalks, Pathways and Driveway Aprons
Section 1014. Street Lighting
Section 1015. Identification Signs and Street Names
Section 1016. Regulatory Signs
Section 1017. Landscaping, Trees and Historic Buildings
Section 1018. Monuments and Lot Pins
XXVII-3
A03427
Section 1019. Curbs
Section 1101.
Section 1102.
Section 1103.
Section 1104.
Section 1105.
Part 11
Manufactured/ Mobile home Park Standards
Application
Exemptions
Contents, Submission, and Review of Plans
General Standards and Requirements
Design Standards
Part 12.
Appendices
Section 1201. Application Form
Section 1202. Plan Preparer and Owner's Statement and Approval Blocks
Section B.1 Plan Preparer's Statement
Section B.2 Owner's Statement
Section B.3 Approval/review Block
Section 1203. Drainage Covenant Agreement
Section C.1 Drainage Covenant Agreement
Section 1204. Recreation Fee Districts Map
Section 1205. General Process for Sewage Facility Plan Reviews
A03427
Part 1
General Provisions
Section 101. Title. An Ordinance providing for the regulation and control of the
subdivision of lots and the development of land; the approval of plans, plots or replots
of land laid out in building lots; standards for the design of streets, lots, easements,
blocks and other improvements; certain minimum improvements and construction
standards on all streets and required dedications; the administration of this Chapter by
the Township of Spring Planning Commission and the Township of Spring Board of
Supervisors; and penalties for the violation of this Chapter. (Ordinance No. 240, May
23, 1994, Section 101)
Section 102. Short Title. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Township of Spring Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance." (Ordinance No.
240, May 23, 1984, Section 102)
Section 103. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to create conditions
favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens by:
(A) Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions.
(B) Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans with the public
improvements plans of the Township.
(C) Ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human
habitation.
(D) Facilitating the efficient movement of traffic and avoiding traffic
hazards and congestion.
(E) Securing equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform procedures and standards.
(F) Improving land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plans.
(G) Safeguarding the interests of the public, the homeowner, the
subdivider and all municipalities.
Preserving natural and historic features.
Carrying out the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan.
XXVII-5
A03427
(J) Carrying out such other purposes stated in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 103)
Section 104. Applicability.
(A) No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of
land shall be made, and no street, sanitary sewer, water main, gas, oil or electric
transmission line, or other improvements in connection therewith, shall be laid
out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the common
use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in accordance with this
Chapter.
(13) No lot in a proposed subdivision or land development may be sold,
and no final permit to erect any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development may be issued unless and until:
(1) A final plan has been approved and recorded; and,
(2) Either:
(a) The Township has been assured by means of a
development agreement acceptable to the Board of Supervisors that
the improvements will subsequently be installed; or,
(b) The required improvements in connection therewith
have been entirely completed.
(C) The regulations of this Chapter shall apply to any subdivision or
land development.
(D) Landowner. No subdivision or land development shall be
submitted to the Township for review except by the landowner of such land or
his /her specifically authorized agent (see definition of "landowner" in Part 2).
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 104)
Section 105. Exemptions.
(A) Agriculture. The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or
XXVII-6
A03427
easement of access or residential dwelling, shall be exempted from the
regulations of this Chapter.
(B) Approved Subdivisions (under State Law). (As of 1994, §508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code generally provided for the
following:
(1) From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether
preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided in this Part, and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or amendment
of the Zoning Ordinance, this Chapter, or other governing ordinance shall
affect the decision on such application adversely to the applicant and the
applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions
of the governing ordinance or plans as they stood at the time the
application was duly filed.
(2) When an application for approval of a plat, whether
preliminary or final, has been approved without conditions or approved
by the applicant's acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or
amendment in the Zoning Ordinance, this Chapter or any other governing
ordinance shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five (5) years from
such approval.
(3) If final plan approval is preceded by preliminary plan approval,
the five (5) year period shall be counted from the preliminary plan
approval date.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 105)
Section 106. Interpretation.
(A) The provisions of this Chapter shall be interpreted and applied as
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare.
(B) Where provisions, standards and specifications of this Chapter
conflict with those of any State statute, other ordinance or regulations, the more
restrictive requirement shall apply, regardless of its source, unless specified to
the contrary.
A03427
(C) Illustrations. The illustrations in this Chapter are for general
illustrative purposes and are not part of the regulations of this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 106)
Section 107. Modifications and Exceptions. The Board of Supervisors, after
receiving a written request for a modification, including the grounds for it, and after
providing the Planning Commission with an opportunity to provide a
recommendation, shall have the power to pass a written resolution to grant a waiver or
modifications to the specific requirements of this Chapter, where the applicant proves
to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that, owing to special conditions, a waiver
or modification is needed to:
(A) Avoid an undue hardship that was not self-created and that would
result because of the peculiar and uncommon conditions pertaining to the land in
question.
(B) Avoid the imposition of a clearly unreasonable requirement that
would not serve any valid public purpose.
(C) Allow an alternative standard that is clearly proven by the
applicant to provide equal or better results.
(D) Allow a layout or improvements that would clearly be more in the
public interest than what would occur if the modification were not granted.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 107)
Section 108. Fees.
(A) The Board of Supervisors has established by resolution a schedule
of fees and a collection procedure for all applications and other matters
pertaining to this Chapter.
(B) The applicant is also required to pay any review fees required by
the County Planning Commission and the County Conservation District.
(C) Plans shall not be considered filed until all fees are paid and the
applications are properly signed as required.
(D) If the Township expenses associated with reviewing a subdivision
or land development exceed the total fees that have been paid or placed in
A03427
escrow by an applicant, the applicant shall pay such excess expenses prior to
release of the final plans by the Township for recording.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 108)
Section 109. Alternate Plans and Resubdivisions.
(A) Multiple Plans. Only one (1) plan concerning any one (1) specific
area of land shall be actively and officially before the Township for review at any
one moment in time, unless the Planning Commission specifically permits
otherwise in advance.
(B) Resubdivisions. A revision or resubdivision of a recorded plan or a
final plan approved by the Board of Supervisors shall be considered as a new
subdivision and shall comply with all of the regulations of this Chapter, except:
(1) If the Planning Commission determines that a revision is
only to correct erroneous data or minor omissions, it shall not be
considered a resubdivision, but still shall require approval by the Board of
Supervisors.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 109)
Section 110. Township Records.
(A) The Township staff shall keep a record of the findings, decisions
and recommendations relative to all subdivision or land development plans filed
for action by the Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors.
(B) Such records shall be open to the public for review.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 110)
Section 111. Amendments.
(A) The regulations set forth in this Chapter may, from time to time, be
amended by the Board of Supervisors. A public hearing (held pursuant to public
notice) on the proposed amendment shall be held by the Board of Supervisors,
within the requirements of the State Planning Code.
(B) The Township staff shall submit each proposed amendment (other
than an amendment prepared by the Planning Commission) to the Commission
A03427
for recommendations at least thirty (30) days prior to the date set for the public
hearing on such proposed amendment.
(C) The Board of Supervisors shall submit any proposed amendment to
the County Planning Commission. The proposed action shall not be taken until
the County Planning Commission recommendation is made or until 30 days
have passed from such submission.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 111)
Section 112. Appeals to Courts. Decisions of the Board of Supervisors may be
appealed in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 112)
Section 113. Enforcement.
(A) Inspectors. The Board of Supervisors shall authorize one (1) or
more persons, which may include the Township Engineer and his
representatives, to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and the accompanying
design standards and improvement specifications.
(B) Inspection. Any action under this Chapter shall be subject to onsite
inspection by the Township or its authorized representatives to ensure that there
is compliance with this Chapter, other Township ordinances and the approved
plans.
(C) Remedies. Any action inconsistent with the provisions of this
Chapter shall be subject to a cease and desist order and other appropriate
measures by the Board of Supervisors, or their authorized representatives.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 113)
Section 114. Penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which
has violated the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence to be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines
that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
)OW11-10
A03427
ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall
be deemed to have been only one (1) such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23,
1994, Section 114)
Section 115. Liability. Neither the approval nor the granting of any building
permit, floodplain permit, site plan review, subdivision approval, land development
approval, zoning permit, erosion review, stormwater runoff review, steep slope review
or any other review or permit of this Chapter, involving any land governed by the
provisions of this Chapter, by an officer, employee or agency of the Township, shall
constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Township, or its
employees, officials or agencies, of the practicality or safety of any structure, use or
subdivision, and shall create no liability upon, nor a cause of action against such public
body, official nor employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 115)
Section 116. Severability. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
(A) If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this
Chapter to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision
shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to
be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of this Chapter shall continue
to be separately and fully effective.
(B) The Governing Body hereby declares that it would have passed this
Chapter and each section or part thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections or parts thereof be declared invalid.
Section 117. State Planning Code Amendments. The provisions of this Chapter
that only repeat, summarize or reference provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code shall be deemed to be automatically superseded and replaced by any
applicable amendments to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. (Ordinance
No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 116)
Section 118. Land Development Requirements. A "land development" shall be
required to follow all of the same submission requirements, review procedures and
other requirements of this Chapter as a "major subdivision," unless such land
development only would involve the development of a maximum of three (3) dwelling
units, in which case only a final plan submission and approval is required and not a
preliminary plan submission or approval. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section
117)
A03427
Part 2
Definitions
Section 201. General Interpretation.
(A) For the purposes of this Chapter, words and terms used herein
shall be interpreted as listed in §202 of this Part.
(B) If a word is not defined by this Part, but is defined by the Zoning
Ordinance of the Township of Spring, as amended, the Zoning Ordinance
definition shall apply.
(C) The word "includes" shall mean to specifically include an item but
not necessarily limited to such items.
(D) Any word or term not defined in this Chapter or the Zoning
Ordinance shall have a meaning of standard usage within the context of the
word's use within the applicable Section of this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 201)
Section 202. Definitions. When used in this Chapter, the following words, terms
and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT - a landowner or developer who has filed an application for
a subdivision or land development, including his heirs, successors and assignees.
BLOCK - a tract of land or a lot or group of lots, bounded by streets,
public parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies of water, boundary
lines of the Township or by any combination of the above.
BLOCK FRONTAGE - that distance of a block that abuts a single street.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT - see "lot line adjustment."
BUFFER - a strip of land at least twenty (20) feet in width which may be a
part of the minimum setback distance and which is free of any principal or
accessory building, parking, outdoor storage or any other use than open space.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE - a line, established by the Zoning Ordinance,
within a property, defining the minimum distance between any building or
XXVII-12
A03427
structure or portion thereof to be erected or altered, and an adjacent right-of-way
or street line. Such line shall be measured at right angles from the street right-ofline
and shall be parallel to said right-of-way line.
CARTWAY - the paved portion of a street or highway designed for
vehicular traffic and paved areas intended for on-street parking.
COMMISSION - the Planning Commission of the Township of Spring.
DAYS - calendar days.
DER - the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
DEVELOPER (SUBDIVIDER) - any landowner, agent of such landowner
or tenant with permission from a landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development.
DWELLING TYPES - see definitions in the Township Zoning Ordinance.
EASEMENT - a grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, a
person, or group of persons, or another tract of land of a use of land for specified
purposes.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL - a person licensed to practice as a
professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP - the registered professional engineer
designated by the Board of Supervisors to perform all duties required of the
Engineer by the provisions of this Chapter.
FLOODPLAIN - see §507 of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
GOVERNING BODY - the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring.
GRADE - the elevation of ground or paving.
IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT - an agreement (in a form and manner
acceptable to Township) requiring a developer to install the improvements
required by this Chapter and any improvements or amenities which appear on
the plan in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
A03427
LAND DEVELOPMENT - as defined by the State Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended. (As of 1994, this definition included the following: The
improvement of one (1) or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any
purpose involving either or both of the following:
(1) A group of two (2) or more residential or nonresidential
[principal] buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively; or,
(2) A single nonresidential [principal] building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or,
(3) The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two (2) or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common
areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.)
In addition, "land development" shall specifically exclude the following:
(1) The construction of only one (1) accessory agricultural
building that is not intended for the storage of animal wastes or the
storage or feeding of animals.
(2) The conversion of an existing single family detached
dwelling or an existing single family semidetached dwelling (twin) into
only three (3) total dwelling units.
LANDOWNER - the owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of a formal option or contract to purchase (whether or not
such option or contract is subject to any condition), a leasee (if he is authorized
under the lease to exercise the right of the landowner) or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LOT - a tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint
ownership, not necessarily a lot or lots shown on a duly recorded map, which is
occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures and accessory
buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required.
The term lot shall also mean parcel, plot, site or any similar term.
LOT AREA - the space contained within the lot lines, excluding space
within all existing and future or ultimate street rights-of-way.
A03427
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE - a lot that abuts a public street on one (1)
side of the lot, but has vehicular access only from a public street on the opposite
side of the lot.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT - the revision of a lotline in such a way that(a)
no additional numbers of lots will be created other than lots previously
approved, (b) no additional segments or significantly changed alignments of
streets are proposed from what was previously approved and (c) no additional
nonconformities will be created under the Township Zoning Ordinance.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT - an agreement in a form and manner
accept- able to the Board of Supervisors requiring the developer of required
improvements to make any repairs or reconstructions and to maintain such
improvements for a certain period.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE - financial security which is acceptable to
the Township to secure the promise made by a developer in the maintenance
agreement that required improvements shall be maintained by the developer.
(Note: These guarantees typically include acceptable letters of credit,
performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety
agreements).
MEETING - a regular meeting of the Township of Spring Planning
Commission.
MOBILE HOME SPACE - an area of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances
necessary for the placement thereon of a single mobile home, with the land
leased or rented by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home placed
on the lot.
MONUMENT - a reinforced concrete monument complying with the
specifications of the United States Geological Survey.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE - the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as may be
further amended, or its successor legislation.
OPEN SPACE - the area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory
structures, streets, driveways, parking areas; but may include areas occupied by
walkways, patios, porches without roofs, gardens, picnic pavilions, play
equipment and other areas occupied by noncommercial outdoor recreation
facilities.
XXVII-15
A03427
OPEN SPACE, COMMON - a parcel or parcels of land, or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within a development site which is
open space designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development or the Township.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC - common open space owned by a government
agency or the Township for public recreation.
ORDINANCE, THIS - the Township of Spring Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and any provisions or amendments thereof, enacted by
the Board of Supervisors.
OWNER(S) OF LAND - the owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such
option or contract is subject to any condition) or a leasee (if he is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner), or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
PARCEL - a tract, lot or area of land.
PARKING - outdoor areas or specially designed buildings or garages used
for the storage of vehicles. Unless otherwise stated, parking shall mean off-street
parking.
PATHWAY - a pedestrian accessway which is not adjacent to a street or
access drive and conforms with this Chapter.
PENNDOT - the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE - financial security which is acceptable to
the Board of Supervisors to secure the promise made by a developer in the
improvements agreement that certain improvements shall be made by the
developer. (Note: This typically includes acceptable letters of credit,
performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety
agreements).
PLAN (OR PLAT) - a map of a land development or subdivision of land.
A "layout plan" is a portion of the one of the following plans that includes the
proposed lot and street layout:
(1) Sketch Plan. An informal plan, identified as such with the
title "Sketch Plan" on the map, indicating the general layout of the
proposed subdivision.
(2) Preliminary Plan. A complete plan, identified as such with
the title "Preliminary Plan," accurately showing proposed streets and lot
layout and such other information as required by this Chapter.
(3) Final Plan. A complete and exact plan, identified as such
with the title "Final Plan," including the plan prepared for official
recording as required by this Chapter to define property rights and
proposed streets and other improvements.
PLANNING COMMISSION - see "Commission."
PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION (PUC) - the Public Utility Commission
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - a system designed to collect, treat and
dispose of sewage from users in compliance with regulations of DER and
the Township.
(1) Centralized Sewage Disposal System. A sewage disposal
system which collects, treats and disposes sewage from more than one (1)
dwelling, principal use or lot. Public sewage service shall mean service by
a municipally-owned sewage system.
(2) On lot Sewage Disposal System. A sewage disposal system
which collects, treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only
one (1) dwelling unit, principal use or lot.
SIDEWALK -a pedestrian accessway which is adjacent to a street or
access drive and conforms to the regulations of this Chapter.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT - the Berks County Conservation
District, or its successor agency.
SOIL SURVEY - the latest version of the official Soil Survey of Berks
County, published by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, or its successor
reference.
STATE - the government of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its
relevant subparts.
XXVII-17
A03427
STATE PLANNING CODE - the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as may be further
amended.
STREET - a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property, or that is an expressway, but not including
an alley or a driveway.
STREET CLASSIFICATION - see the Official Street Classification Map,
which was adopted as part of the Township Zoning Ordinance. This map
classifies streets as expressway, arterial, minor arterial, urban collector, rural
collector or local streets.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC -a type of street which is terminated at one end by
a turn-around and which intersects another street at the other end.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS - a type of local street which is parallel
and adjacent to collector or arterial streets and provides access to abutting
properties.
SUBDIVIDER - see "developer."
SUBDIVISION - as defined by the State Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended. (As of 1994, this definition was as follows:
(1) The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of
land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
(2) The division by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or
easement of access or residential dwelling is not a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR - any subdivision of land which does not qualify
as a minor subdivision.
A03427
SUBDIVISION, MINOR - either of the following, other than a land
development:
(1) A subdivision:
(a) Into:
i) Two (2) or three (3) single family detached
residential lots; or,
ii) Two (2) or three (3) clearly agricultural lots of
more than ten (10) acres each; and,
(b)
street; and,
Which involves no extension or new segments of a
(c) Which has not involved the subdivision approval of
at least three (3) lots on the tract within the five (5) previous years;
or,
(2) Any subdivision which only is:
(a) For the purpose of joining or annexing a lot to an
existing lot, parcel or tract of land; and,
(b) That provides a covenant in the deed of the lot to be
conveyed which joins it with and makes it an inseparable part of
the parcel to which it is joined.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE - the Township of Spring Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, as amended.
TOWNSHIP - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
Unless otherwise stated, this shall mean the Board of Supervisors and their
authorized agents.
TRACT - One (1) or more abutting or adjacent lots proposed to be
subdivided or developed following an overall coordinated plan.
TRACT SIZE or TRACT AREA - see definition in the Zoning Ordinance.
USGS - United States Geological Survey, or its successor agency.
A03427
WALKWAY - a strip of land including a right-of-way dedicated to public
use in order to facilitate pedestrian access through or into a block.
WATERCOURSE - any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek,
ditch, channel, millrace, canal, conduit, gully, ravine or wash in which water
flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and
which has a definite channel and bed and shall include any area adjacent thereto
subject to inundation by reason of overflow of floodwaters.
WATER, CENTRAL SYSTEM or SERVICE - service by a water system
which transmits water from a common source to more than one (1) dwelling,
principal use or lot.
WATER, ONLOT SYSTEM or SERVICE - service by a water system which
transmits water from a source on the lot to only one (1) dwelling, principal use or
lot.
WATER, PUBLIC SYSTEM or SERVICE - central water service that is
owned and/or operated by a municipal authority or a Pennsylvania PUC
regulated water company and that serves more than fifty (50) dwelling units or
principal uses.
ZONING ORDINANCE - the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of
Spring, as amended.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 202)
A03427
Part 3
Overview of General Procedures
Section 301. Purpose. This Part provides an overview of the general procedure
for the Township review of proposed subdivisions and land developments (Section 302)
and of the general procedures for submitting plans to the Township (Section 303). This
Part is intended to be instructional and explanatory only and does not set forth
mandatory requirements which are binding on the Township or an applicant. See the
actual provisions of the other Parts of this Chapter. Two (2) flowcharts are included at
the end of this Part to show the general subdivision process for major and minor
subdivisions. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 301)
Section 302. General Procedure for Subdivisions and Land Developments.
(A) Review and Approval Stages.
(1) Three (3) types of plan submission are included in the
procedure for filing and approval of subdivision and land development
plans: sketch, preliminary and final.
(2) The table below outlines the stages for the different types of
proposed subdivision or land development.
A03427
Stage Subdivision
Ordinance
Part
Type of Proposed Subdivision or Land Development*
Minor Subdivision
Land Major or Boundary Line
Development Subdivision Adjustment
Sketch Plan 4 Recommended Recommended Recommended
Preliminary Plan 5 Required"' Required Not Required
Final Plan 6 Required Required Required'
Guarantee of 8 Required Required Required
Improvements
Installation
Recording of 9 Required Required Required
Final Plan
* See definitions in Part 2.
#* See Part 7 for minor subdivision final plan filing and review requirements. See
Section 705 for submission requirements for a boundary line adjustment.
*** A land development that only involves up to three (3) dwelling units shall only be
required to submit a final plan and not a preliminary plan.
(B) Sketch Plan.
(1) While a sketch plan is not required, it is strongly
recommended that it be filed to allow the applicant to consult early and
informally with the Planning Commission before preparing a preliminary
plan. This will often avoid expensive redesign and delay to the applicant.
(2) Comments made by the Township on the sketch plan are not
by themselves binding upon the Township.
(C) Preliminary Plan.
(1) The initial plan required to be filed to the Commission for
formal review of a major subdivision or land development shall be the
official preliminary plan.
(2) Minor subdivisions, land developments of a maximum of
three (3) dwelling units and boundary line adjustments are not required to
file a preliminary plan.
A03427
(3) The purpose of the preliminary plan is to achieve formal
approval of the overall development scheme proposed in order to
minimize the need for any revisions of final plans.
(D) Final Plan.
(1) After approval of the preliminary plan of a major
subdivision or land development, the applicant files a final plan.
(2) Minor subdivisions and lot line adjustments require the
filing of a final plan.
(3) The purpose of the final plan is to obtain formal approval
from the Board of Supervisors before plans for all subdivisions and land
developments are recorded.
(E) Guarantee of Improvements Installation. Where improvements are
required by this Chapter, the Township and applicant shall enter into an
improvements agreement and the applicant shall post financial security
acceptable to the Township in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of any
improvements which may be required. See Part 8.
(F) Recording of Final Plan (see Part 9). All final plans shall be
officially recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds prior to the sale
of any lots within a subdivision or the construction of any building.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 302)
Section 303. General Plan Submission Procedures.
(A) Submission. Applicants shall have all sketch, preliminary and final
plans and all required accompanying information submitted to the Township
Staff by delivery by person.
(B) Receipt by Commission. The Planning Commission shall have the
authority to recommend rejection by the Board of Supervisors or to table an
application that the Commission determines is significantly incomplete.
(C) Attendance.
(1) The applicant or his duly authorized representative should
endeavor to attend the Commission meeting to discuss the filed plans.
A03427
(2) The Commission may request such attendance. If the
applicant fails to appear when so requested at a meeting where the plans
will be considered, it may result in plan disapproval, if the Township
determines that it resulted in insufficient information to render a decision.
(D) Action by the Commission and the Board of Supervisors. Within
ninety (90) days following the date of the first regular meeting (not including a
workshop meeting) of the Commission after a proper and timely submission, the
Commission shall make a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors, and the
Board of Supervisors shall act to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove
the plan. The ninety (90) day time limit shall apply unless the applicant grants
an extension or unless other provisions of this Chapter are not complied with by
the applicant.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 303)
GEMEMLIZE PROCESS FOR A AAJOR SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVEIOMSNT
PennDOT Review.]
polo vended)
EDEVELOPER
aroma]. Discussion With
aelos Officcg ar.d/ot floosies
Commission (optional)
Sketch Plan Review
(Strongly Recommended)
I& I MB
1.111MO
ReVdew by
To:-c11119 Stef,
and Coumcy
...111.=1
Disapproved
Preliminary Plan
Submission
Planning Commission
Review
Review by Township
Engineer
Zoning, lie Atins
Board Decision
(if required)
Governing Body
Action
Review by
Township Staff, Cotnry
Planning Goomission
()Chars
Cranring of Any
rwoded Ovtside
Permits 4,Approvals
UseriGOI. PomoDER, etc,)
Trelimitary approval
7,fai plan Submission
Planning COMtLISSOn
Review
Ooverning Body
Action
4
RelridW by Tovoship
Engineer & Resolution
of ?ethnical issues
Final Approval
Recording of Plan 1
XXVII-25
Review by Township
Engineer S leffiluti4n
of Tecbmical issues
EACOUt10 Of
Impwovermauts ASreelgot
CCSERALIZED PROCESS Tga n MMOO SUSDIViS:PN LOD DEVELOPMENT
I Edmore*
Sketch Plan Review 4,
(Serongly Reeerietnded)
Review -ow 7ownakip
Engineer
PerinDOT Roviaw
(Recommended)
Zoning Hearing
Board Decision
(if rewired)
Final Plan Submission
2owiaw by
Township Stet.
Co. Planning Conmiation
Review by Iownsh;lp
A Planning ConmisSion Engineer 6 Resolution
Review
Greeting of A.fty
t(oodod 4:Ittida
Pert & eeprevals
IPennEGT, PennDER. etc.)
1111=3=111111111
"we
Governing gbdy
Accion
Final. Approval
.-1Execution 40
Inplovements Aucomenc
Recording of Plan
A03427
Part 4
Sketch Plan
Section 401. Preplan Consultation. Prior to submission of a sketch plan,
applicants for larger developments are encouraged to informally discuss their intent
with the Zoning Officer, Township staff and/or Planning Commission. (Ordinance No.
240, May 23, 1994, Section 401)
Section 402. Sketch Plan Submission and Drawing Requirements. Prior to the
submission of a preliminary plan (or a final plan where a preliminary plan is not
required), applicants are very strongly encouraged to submit a sketch plan. A sketch
plan review often allows an applicant to save substantial time and engineering costs,
because many concerns about layout and issues concerning Township ordinances can
be resolved prior to detailed engineering, thereby reducing the need for future redesign
at a more detailed stage. When submitted, sketch plans shall include the following
information:
(A) Submission Requirement. If submitted, eight (8) print copies of the
sketch plan and the accompanying application shall be submitted to the
Township staff at least twenty-one (21) days prior to a regular Township
Planning Commission meeting in accordance with the provisions of this Part,
except that a sketch plan for a minor subdivision or a boundary line adjustment
shall be submitted at least ten (10) days prior to such meeting.
(B) Drawing Requirements. The sketch plan shall be drafted to scale
and is recommended to include the following, as applicable:
(1) Property boundaries.
(2) Significant topographic and physical features (such as
quarries, waterways and steep slopes).
(3)
lots.
Proposed lot and street layout with approximate areas of
(4) Site data including:
(a) Acres of entire tract.
(b) Number of lots and types of dwelling units (if
residential).
A03427
(5)
(c) Zoning district and major applicable requirements.
North point and scale.
(6) Approximate proposed locations of any nonresidential
buildings (if known) and proposed types of any nonresidential uses.
(7) Name of project (which shall be distinct from any other
existing or proposed project).
(8) A location map showing the general location of the project in
relation to adjacent lots, streets and waterways.
(9) Approximate location of any area within the one hundred
(100) year floodplain (from Federal Emergency Management Agency
map).
(10) General provisions for any stormwater management.
(11) For residential developments, whether the applicant
proposes to dedicate common open space or fees-in-lieu of land, if
required.
(12) General methods of providing water and sewer service,
including sufficient information to show general feasibility of any
proposed central water and sewer service.
(13) Land uses of adjacent lots, and any zoning district
boundaries in the area.
(14) Name and address of person responsible for the preparation
of the plan and the date of preparation.
(15) Approximate general locations of possible wetlands (may be
"hydric soil" locations from the County Soil Survey).
(C) County Planning Commission Review. If a subdivision or land
development would be expected by the Township staff to have regional impact,
one (1) copy of the sketch plan should be submitted to the County Planning
Commission for an informal review.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 402)
A03427
Section 403. Review Procedures. No official action shall be taken on a sketch
plan. The Township shall not be bound by comments made or not made as part of a
sketch plan review. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 403)
A03427
Part 5
Preliminary Plan
Section 501. Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to achieve formal
approval of the overall development scheme proposed in order to minimize the need
for any revisions of final plans. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 501)
Section 502. Submission and Review Procedure.
(A) Preliminary Plan Submission Required. A preliminary plan
submission for a major subdivision or land development (other than a project
involving a maximum of three (3) dwelling units) meeting all of the requirements
of this Part shall be filed by the applicant and reviewed in accordance with the
provisions of this Part.
(B) A preliminary plan submission is not required for:
(1) A minor subdivision; or,
(2) A submission that only involves a lot line adjustment (see
Part 7); or,
(3) A project involving a maximum of three (3) dwelling units.
(C) Required Submission.
(1) The applicant shall file with the staff at least twenty-one (21)
days prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting (not including a
workshop meeting):
(a) The required fees, including the County Planning
Commission fee.
(b) The required submission materials, numbers of
applications, numbers of plans and other materials and information
required under §503.
(2) The staff shall forward plans to the following agencies to
seek their comments prior to preliminary plan approval:
(a) Township (previously Municipal Authority) or
Sewage Enforcement Officer (if applicable).
XXVII-30
A03427
(b) Fire Chief and Police Chief (layout and utility plan if
deemed appropriate by the Township).
(c) Township Codes Enforcement staff and Township
Secretary.
(d) Township Engineer and/or Township Consulting
Engineer.
(e) Township Parks and Recreation Director (if common
open space is proposed, or if deemed appropriate by the
Township).
(f) County Planning Commission.
(3) Applicant's Distribution. The applicant is fully responsible
for the following:
(a) Contacting the appropriate utility companies, as
appropriate, including the water supplier.
(b) Encouraged to seek at least an informal review by
PennDOT of any proposed access onto a State road, and providing
PennDOT with sufficient information for such a review.
(c) Providing a copy of the sedimentation and erosion
control plans to the County Conservation District, together with
their required review fees, if any earth disturbance is proposed.
(d) Determining whether any permits or approvals are
needed from any agency outside of the Township, including DER
(including any obstruction to a waterway) and the Army Corps of
Engineers (including determining whether any "wetland" will be
disturbed).
(4) Preliminary Plans.
(a) Each preliminary plan filed:
i) Shall provide the information required by
§503; and,
ii) Should conform to any changes recommended
by the Planning Commission, the Township Engineer or
other Township officials during the sketch plan review.
(b) All sheets should be folded to approximately nine
inches by twelve inches (9"x12") size or rolled in such a manner that
the title of the sheet faces out.
(5) Each set of supportive documents shall provide the
information required by §503.
(6) Colored Layout Plan. It is recommended that the applicant
provide at least one (1) copy of the layout plan that is lightly colored in
such a way that it will allow clearer understanding by the general public
at public meetings.
(D) Initial Actions by the Staff.
(1) The Township staff shall forward a copy of the preliminary
plan and supportive documents, including the application and checklist,
to the Township Engineer for review prior to the Township Planning
Commission's next regularly scheduled meeting.
(2) The staff shall retain in the Township's files one (1) copy of
all materials submitted by the applicant, including the application form
and the preliminary plan checklist.
(3) The staff shall forward to the Commission at or before the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission the following:
(a) Seven (7) copies of the application form.
(b) One (1) copy of the preliminary plan checklist.
(c) Copies of the preliminary plan.
(d) Copies of the supportive documents.
(4) Adjacent Municipalities. If any portion of a major
subdivision or land development under this Section would occur within
two hundred (200) feet of the boundary of another municipality or would
clearly have a regional impact upon a municipality, the staff should
A03427
require an applicant to provide a copy of the layout plan that can be
forwarded to that municipality for an advisory review.
(E) Determination of Completeness by Commission.
(1) Based upon the initial review of the Township staff and/ or
the Township Engineer, the Commission shall have authority, at its first
regularly scheduled meeting after the submission is timely filed, to
determine that a submission is significantly incomplete and therefore to
refuse to review the submission further and to do one (1) of the following:
(a) Not accept the submission, indicating the deficiencies,
and return the fee (minus the costs of any Township review) to the
applicant.
(b) Accept the submission as being filed for review on the
condition that the applicant shall file such additional required
materials and information to the staff or appropriate agency or
person within a certain number of days from the date of such
acceptance.
(c) Table the acceptance of the submission until the next
Planning Commission meeting where the applicant has met all of
the submittal requirements, and has filed such materials within the
required twenty-one (21) days prior to the meeting. The ninety (90)
day time limit for action shall begin when the plan is accepted as
complete.
(d) Recommend that the Board of Supervisors reject the
plan for just cause.
(2) If the Commission determines that the submission is
significantly complete, as filed and as required, the Commission shall
accept the plans and may begin its review.
(3) Zoning Variances. An application under this Chapter shall
not be considered to be complete if one (1) or more zoning variances will
be required for the subdivision or land development to legally occur as
submitted, until such time as the needed zoning variances have been
granted. If the Planning Commission becomes aware that the zoning
variance has been lawfully appealed, the Planning Commission may table
a submission until that appeal is resolved if they determine that the
variance is needed for the feasibility of the proposal as submitted.
XXVII-33
A03427
(F) Review by Township Engineer.
(1) Within forty-five (45) days from the date the plans are duly
submitted for review (unless granted an extension by the Commission or
unless the plans are significantly incomplete), the Township Engineer
should review the engineering considerations of the preliminary plan and
prepare an initial report on such considerations to the Commission.
(2) The Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Commission and the Board of Supervisors during
review of the plan. Matters that should be dealt with directly by the
Planning Commission and/ or the Board of Supervisors should be listed
separately from technical engineering considerations. These non-technical
concerns should be made available to the Planning Commission at least
five (5) days prior to each meeting.
(3) The applicant and/or his engineer shall make reasonable
efforts to resolve technical engineering considerations outside of and prior
to Planning Commission meetings. The Township Engineer may require
the applicant or his engineer to meet with him for this purpose.
(4) A copy of findings of the Township Engineer should be sent
or handed in person to the applicant or his representative.
(G) Review by Commission. The Planning Commission shall
accomplish the following within the time limitations of the State Planning Code
(unless the applicant grants a written time extension), while allowing a sufficient
number of days within this deadline for a decision by the Board of Supervisors:
(1) Review all applicable reports received from any official
reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the preliminary plan submission meets
the objectives and requirements of this Chapter and other applicable
ordinances.
(3) Review the preliminary plan submission with the applicant,
his/her agent or representative (if present) and recommend needed
revisions so that the submission will conform to this Chapter, other
ordinances and statutes.
(4) Recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval
of the preliminary plan submission in a written report to the Board of
Supervisors specifying any recommended conditions for approval,
identifying defects found in the application, describing requirements
which have not been met, citing the provisions of the ordinance relied
upon.
(H)
of §503(C).
DER Sewage Module. See the "Supplemental Information" section
(I) Review by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) Review the report of the Commission [and] any reports of
official reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the preliminary plan submission meets
the objectives and requirements of this Chapter and other ordinances.
(3) Approve or reject the preliminary plan submission within
the time required by the Municipalities Planning Code. (As of 1991, this
law requires:
(J)
(a) The Board of Supervisors to act not later than ninety
(90) days following the date of the first regular meeting of the
Commission held after it has been properly filed for review; but in
no case shall the Board of Supervisors' decision be made later than
one hundred twenty (120) days following the date the submission
was accepted as being filed for review, unless the applicant grants a
written extension of time; and,
(b) That no subdivision or land development shall be
granted final approval until a report is received from the County
Planning Commission or until the expiration of thirty (30) days
from the date the application was forwarded to the County
Planning Commission.)
Decision by Board of Supervisors.
(1) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing
and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or by mail at his
last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision.
A03427
(2) Approval of the preliminary plan submission shall constitute
conditional approval of the subdivision or land development as to the
character and intensity, but shall not constitute approval of the final plan
or authorize sale of lots or construction of buildings.
(3) If the preliminary plan submission is disapproved, the
decision shall specify defects found in the submission, shall describe
requirements which have not been met, and shall cite the provisions of the
statute or ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) Combined Preliminary/ Final Approval. If, based upon
advice of the Township Engineer and the Planning Commission, the
Board of Supervisors determines that a preliminary plan awaiting
preliminary plan approval would also meet all of the final plan
requirements and has satisfied all significant concerns of the Township,
the Board of Supervisors may grant final plan approval at the same time
as granting preliminary plan approval.
(K) Final Plan Submission Deadline An applicant shall file a final plan
within five (5) years from the date of the approval of the preliminary plan by the
Board of Supervisors, unless an extension in writing has been granted by the
Board of Supervisors. Failure to comply with this requirement shall render the
preliminary plan null and void, and a new preliminary plan shall be submitted.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23,1994, Section 502)
Section 503. Preliminary Plan Requirements.
(A) All of the following information and materials listed in this Section
are required as part of all preliminary plans for any land development (other
than one (1) of three (3) or less dwelling units) and for any major subdivision.
This list of requirements shall serve both to establish the requirements, and as a
checklist for the applicant and the Township to ensure completeness of
submissions. The applicant shall submit completed photocopies of this Section
as part of the application.
(B) The required information listed in this Section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly readable.
A03427
(C) TOWNSHIP OF SPRING
PRELIMINARY PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT
CHECKLIST AND LIST OF SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
(To Be Completed By The Applicant)
Applicant's Name:
Applicant's Address:
Applicant's Phone No.:
Applicant's Signature: Date:
*Insert "NA" in the "Not Submitted" column if not applicable. Insert "W" in the "Not
Submitted" column if a waiver is requested from the requirement.
NOT
SUBMITTED SUBMITTED*
A. GENERAL SUBMISSION ITEMS:*
1. Township application/ review fee(s)/ escrow.
2. 2 copies of the Completed Application (see Section 1201)
3. 2 copies of the Preliminary Plan Checklist (using the
photocopies of the pages in this Section).
4. 8 print copies of the complete Preliminary Plans.
5. 5 print copies of only the Layout Plans.
6. 3 sets of Supportive Documents (Not applicable for Lot
Line Adjustments).
7. A completed County Subdivision and Land Development
Review Application with any review fee charged by the
County (unless the Township staff permits the applicant
to deliver directly to the County).
* Note- The Township may require the Applicant to file additional copies.
B. DRAFTING REQUIREMENTS: All information shall be
legibly and accurately presented.
1. Plans prepared on a standard sized sheet (such as 18"x24",
24"x36", 30"x42" or 36"x48").
A03427
2. Plans drawn at a scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet or other
scale preapproved by the Town-ship Engineer or
Township Staff.
3. All dimensions set in feet and decimal parts thereof, and
bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.
4. Differentiation between existing and proposed features.
5. Boundary line of the tract, shown as a heavy line.
6. If layout plans involve more than one sheet, a map of the
layout of the entire project at an appropriate scale on one
sheet, with a key map showing how the layout sheets
connect.
7. If the tract(s) crosses a municipal boundary, a map
showing both the portions in Spring Township and the
other municipality, in sufficient detail for the Township
to determine how the parts will interrelate.
8. Required profiles shown at a scale of 1"=50' horizontal
and 1"=5' vertical, or other scale preapproved by the
Township Engineer or Township Staff.
9. All sheets numbered and listed on the layout plan.
10. Words "Preliminary Plan" and sheet title (such as "Layout
Plan") on each sheet.
C. GENERAL INFORMATION:
1. Name of project on each sheet.
2. Name of landowner and developer (with addresses).
3. Names of adjacent property owners and the deed book
volume and page number for these owners, including
those across adjacent streets and alleys.
4. Names of adjacent subdivisions and the plan book
volume and page number for these subdivisions,
including those across adjacent streets and alleys.
5. Lot lines of adjacent lots, and approximate locations of
any buildings, common open spaces, detention basins or
drainage channels existing or approved within 100 feet of
the boundaries of the proposed project.
6. Surveyor and plan preparer's statement (See Section
1202).
7. Approval/review signature blocks for: Township
Governing Body, Township Planning Commission and
County Planning Commission (see Section 1202).
8. Location map at a standard scale (1"= 800') showing the
location of the project in relation to the following
)0C VII-38
features within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the tract:
existing and proposed streets, waterways, zoning district
boundaries, and municipal boundaries.
9. North arrow, graphic scale, written scale.
10. Date of plan and all subsequent revision dates and
submission dates (especially noting if is revision of a
previously approved plan) with space for future revision
dates.
11. Source of title, including date and grantor.
12. Tax map number (if available) and block and lot for the
tract being subdivided.
13. A statement indicating if the proposed development will
result in 10 or more lots from the tract as of 1976.
14. All record information if property was previously
subdivided.
D. NATURAL FEATURES:
1. Existing contour lines as follows:
a. shall be based on a field survey or
photogrametric procedure at a scale of 1" =100'
or larger. Contours shall be based upon
U.S.G.S. datum.
b. The contour interval shall be sufficient to
determine compliance with Township
ordinances. An interval of 2 feet for slopes of
less than 15% and 5 feet for slopes of 15% or
greater is generally recommended.
c. Note- Contours are not required to be shown
within lots of 10 acres or more that are clearly
not intended to be altered as a result of this
proposed subdivision or land development.
2. Identification of any slopes of 15 to 25 percent, and
greater than 25 percent.
3. Areas within any hydric soils (see County Soil Survey),
with a notation that there are none if that is the case.
4. Watercourses (with any name), natural springs, lakes and
wetlands. Detailed delineations of wetlands are not
required if there is clearly no alteration proposed of any
areas that could be reasonably suspected of being
wetlands.
Note- A qualified professional shall delineate any
wetlands prior to preliminary plan approval. However,
XXVII-39
A03427
the applicant is not required to have received all required
Federal and State permits prior to Preliminary Plan
approval.
5. Rock outcrops, stone fields and sinkholes.
6. Location of any areas within the 100 year floodplain
(with differentiation between floodway and floodfringe if
available from official Federal floodplain maps).
7. Approximate locations and names of soil types, with
identification according to the County Soil Survey or
more detailed professional study of those that are
alluvial, have a depth to bedrock of less than 3 feet or a
seasonally high water table of less than 3 feet.
E. MAN-MADE FEATURES:
1. Existing and proposed lot lines.
a. The boundaries of lots (other than a residual lot
of at least 10 acres) shall be determined by
accurate field survey.
b. The boundaries of any residual tract which is
greater than 10 acres may be determined by
deed.
2. Location and elevation of existing monuments.
3. Sufficient bearings, lengths of lines, radii, arc lengths,
street widths, right-of-way and easement widths of all
lots, streets, rights-of-way, easements and community or
public areas to accurately and completely reproduce each
and every course on the ground.
4. Buildings estimated to be 80 years or older that are
proposed to be impacted by the subdivision, with name
and description.
5. Existing and proposed utility easements and restrictive
covenants and easements for purposes which might
affect development (stating which easements and rightsof-
ways proposed for dedication to the municipality).
6. Existing building locations and land uses.
7. Overhead electrical high-voltage lines and rights-ofways/
easements.
F. ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
1. Applicable zoning district and the applicable lot area,
width, building coverage, height regulations and
minimum yard requirements.
2. Minimum building setback line requirements will be
shown for each lot.
3. Area and location of any proposed common open space
(if none proposed, place "W" in Not Submitted Column).
4. If any common open space proposed: method of
ownership and entity proposed to be responsible for
maintenance.
5. If any common open space proposed: description of
intended purposes, proposed improvements (such as
rough grading) and any proposed recreation facilities.
6. Statement of type of water and sewer service proposed
(such as "municipal water and municipal sewer").
7. Linear feet of proposed streets.
8. Required and proposed building coverage and impervious
coverage (may be stated as "typical proposed" for single
family detached or twin homes).
G. PROPOSED LAYOUT:
1. Total acreage of site and total proposed number of lots
and dwelling units.
2. Identification number for each lot.
3. Approximate lot area for each lot.
4. Approximate dimensions of each lot.
5. Existing rights-of-way and cartway widths and locations
of existing streets, including existing streets within 100
feet of boundaries of tract.
6. Proposed rights-of-way and cartway widths and locations
of existing and proposed streets, including streets
proposed as part of other projects within 100 feet of the
boundaries of tract.
7. Street centerline information, with horizontal curve data,
bearings, distances and stations corresponding to the
profile.
8. Right-of-way and curb lines with horizontal curve radii at
intersections.
9. Beginning and end of proposed street construction.
A03427
V A
A
10. Street improvements proposed by the applicant,
including any acceleration/deceleration lanes, traffic
signals, street realignment or construction improvement.
11. Any proposed curbing.
12. Any proposed sidewalks with proposed handicapped
ramps at intersections.
13. Any proposed bicycle paths.
14. Names of existing streets and initial proposed names of
new streets.
15. Designation of streets proposed to be dedicated to the
Township or to remain private.
16. Clear site triangles.
H. UTILITY PLAN:
1. As applicable, the following existing and proposed items
for each lot, using the following symbols (or other
symbols preapproved by the Township staff):
Well (if not connected to central water system) with required
separation distance shown from septic drain fields, and with
dimensions from lotlines
Primary drain field (with dimensions from lotlines)
Secondary drain field
Soil probe location (located with dimensions)
Percolation test location (located with dimensions)
2. If on-lot sewage disposal systems are proposed:
a. proposed contour lines on same sheet as utility layout.
b. location of existing and proposed wells within 100 feet of
the boundaries of the project.
c. proposed or typical location of dwelling/building.
d. locations of soils with a seasonally high water table
averaging less than 3 feet (see County Soil Survey).
3. If a centralized sewage system is proposed:
a. proposed contour lines on same sheet as utility layout.
b. location and size of lines and laterals, with stations of lines
corresponding to the profile, and extensions to reach
existing sewer lines.
c. locations of manholes, with invert elevation of flow line
and grade at top of each manhole.
d. proposed lot lines and any proposed easements or rightsof-
ways needed for the utilities.
e. location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities
in the vicinity of sanitary sewer lines.
f. manhole numbers assigned by the Municipal Authority.
g. separation distances from water lines and locations of
concrete encasements.
4. If centralized water service is proposed:
a. location and size of existing and proposed waterlines.
b. existing and proposed fire hydrant locations.
c. distance noted that water lines will have to be extended to
reach existing lines (if not already abutting the tract).
5. As applicable, existing and proposed underground
natural gas, electrical, telephone, cable TV and any other
utility lines, with any easements shown that will affect
development.
6. List of contacts for underground utilities in the area, with
phone numbers stated on the grading plans.
I. GRADING AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PLAN AND CALCULATIONS:
The following information shall be shown on the Plan or in
calculations:
1. Existing and proposed storm drainage facilities or
structures, including detention basins (with capacity),
swales, pipes (with sizes), culverts and inlets.
2. Capacity, depth and locations of detention basins.
3. Watershed areas for each drainage structure or swale.
4. Locations of any proposed or existing stormwater
easements.
5. Intended design year standards for culverts, bridge
structures and/or other stormwater
6. Location of all underground utilities.
7. Entity responsible to maintain/ own any detention basin.
8. See also requirements of Section 1008.
9. Existing contour lines (see description under"Natural
Features").
10. Proposed contour lines.
11. Stationing of any storm sewers, with stationing
corresponding to profiles.
J. FOR USES OTHER THAN SINGLE FAMILY, TWO
FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED OR TWO FAMILY
DETACHED:
1. For townhouses or apartments, evidence that the project
meets the density requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
2. Evidence that the project will meet the off-street parking
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Identification numbers for proposed buildings if more
than one building proposed per lot.
4. Arrangement of off-street parking spaces, parking aisles,
paved areas and off-street loading areas.
5. For townhouses, any proposed methods to ensure privacy
between outdoor semi -private areas (such as fences
between rear yard).
6. Illustrative sketches of proposed buildings (encouraged
not required).
7. Proposed building locations and land uses (if known).
8. Major types and locations of outdoor lighting.
9. Location of any proposed outdoor storage areas.
10. Square feet of paved area, including areas covered by
gravel.
K. LANDSCAPE PLAN:
1. Locations of treelines and existing forested areas.
2. Locations of individual mature trees of greater than 6
inches trunk diameter measured at a height of 3 feet
above the surrounding average ground level, other than
trees within wooded areas and treelines.
3. Any proposed evergreen screening, buffer yards or
earthen berming (if required by the Township Zoning
Ordinance).
4. Areas of existing mature woods that are proposed to be
protected and preserved or removed.
5. Types, sizes and locations of any required trees (see
Section 1017), paved area landscaping (see Section 705 of
XXVII-44
the Township Zoning Ordinance) and any other major
proposed landscaping.
6. Any proposed fencing (including height and type) and/ or
landscaping around any stormwater detention basin (see
Section 1007).
L. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION PLAN:
1. Drawings showing locations and types of proposed
measures, complying with the regulations and standards
of the County Conservation District and DER.
2. Narrative describing proposed soil erosion and
sedimentation control methods.
M. ROAD PROFILES:
1. Profile of existing and proposed ground surface along
centerline of street.
2. Proposed centerline grade with percent on tangents and
elevations at 50 feet intervals.
3. All vertical curve data including length, elevations and
minimum sight distance as required by Part 10.
N. WATER MAIN, SANITARY SEWER AND STORM
DRAIN PROFILES:
1. Profile of proposed ground surface with elevations at top
of manholes or inlets.
2. Profile of water main, storm sewer and sanitary sewer
lines, with stationing, elevations, lengths, slopes,
material, sizes, etc.
3. All line crossings of other utilities.
0. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS AND ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION:
1. Residual Lands Sketch. If the submitted plans do not
include all undeveloped or underdeveloped adjacent or
abutting lands owned by the same landowner or under
control of the same developer (or closely related
corporations), then a sketch shall be submitted at an
appropriate scale if deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission, on one sheet, covering all such land
XXVII-45
A03427
holdings together with a sketch of a reasonable future
street system to demonstrate that the proposed
subdivision provides for the orderly development of any
residual lands and/ or does not adversely affect the
potential development of residual lands.
2. If applicable, 2 copies of the DER Sewage Planning
Module application as completed by the applicant,
together with evidence that the application has been
forwarded by the applicant to the required review
agencies. Approval of such Planning Module shall be a
condition of preliminary approval under this Chapter.
3. If central water service is proposed by an existing water
company or authority, the applicant shall provide a letter
from such water company or authority which states that
the company or authority expects to be able to
adequately serve the development, that the proposed
water system is generally acceptable in concept and that
references any conditions required by the company or
authority for the provision of services.
4. If service is proposed by an existing sewage authority,
the developer shall submit a copy of a letter from the
authority which states that the company or authority can
adequately serve the subdivision, that the proposed
sanitary sewage system is generally acceptable and that
references any conditions required by the company or
authority for the provision of services.
5. If service is proposed by a sewage disposal system other
than one operated by an existing sewage authority, the
developer shall provide sufficient information to show
that the proposed system would be reasonably feasible,
within DER regulations, and that an acceptable system
would be put into place for the operation and
maintenance of the system.
6. Copy of any information submitted to PennDOT and any
correspondence from PennDOT regarding the proposed
access to State roads. (This requirement applies
throughout the entire approval process).
7. If the project would include any area within the 100 year
floodplain or any watercourse, a Statement from the
Zoning Officer indicating that the proposed subdivision
or land development would be in compliance with the
Floodplain regulations of the Township.
A03427
8. A statement shall describe the nature of the landowner's
and the developer's involvement in the proposed
development, and the names of the primary partners or
officers of any corporate developer.
9. Method of ensuring maintenance of any private street.
10. List of any Modifications or Waivers requested to this
Chapter.
11. Traffic Study - If required by Section 505 of this Chapter.
12. Copies of the decisions of any zoning variances that are
relevant to the proposal.
13. Preliminary Stormwater Calculations, in sufficient detail
to show that any proposed stormwater facilities would
be sufficient in size. See the requirements of Section
1008.
14. Commercial and Industrial Operations (if the uses are
known). A written description of any proposed
commercial, industrial or storage operations in sufficient
detail to indicate any noise, glare, smoke and fumes
nuisances and to allow a general determination of
possible fire or other hazards from the use of highly toxic
or hazardous substances or other public health or safety
hazards. An estimate of the amount, direction and times
of truck traffic that is expected.
15. Community Impact Study. If required by §506 of this
Chapter.
16. If to be served by on-lot septic service, a copy of septic
percolation test and soil probe results.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 503)
Section 504. Certification. All certification shall comply with the State
professional licensing laws. All subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a
registered land surveyor. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 504)
Section 505. Traffic Impact Study.
(A) Intent. To allow the Township to determine the safety and
congestion impacts, and related costs, of proposed major traffic generating uses.
To require that applicants respond with reasonable proposals to resolve the
negative traffic impacts that their proposed uses will cause on the public. To
recognize that sufficient Federal, State and municipal funds are not available to
resolve traffic problems caused by private development.
A03427
(B) Uses Requiring a Traffic Impact Study. Any application for any of
the following uses shall be required to complete a traffic study and include the
findings in a written report:
(1) Residential. Sixty (60) or more dwelling units.
(2) Commercial. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more
of total floor area.
(3) Office. Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more of total
floor area.
(4) Industrial. Sixty thousand (60,000) square feet or more of
total floor area or any truck terminal.
(5) Institutional. Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more of
total floor area.
(6) Any use or combination of uses that would generally result
in greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) trips per day.
(7) Where the Township Engineer certifies that there is a clear
existing severe traffic problem within close proximity to the proposed
project which will likely be significantly worsened by the proposed
project.
(C) Timing. Any required traffic impact study shall be submitted at the
same time or earlier as any preliminary plan, special exception, conditional use
or construction permit application, whichever is submitted earliest.
(D) Costs. The full costs of completing the study and of a review by the
Township Engineer or other Township representative shall be born by the
applicant.
(E) The traffic impact study shall be prepared and signed by a
professional traffic engineer with verified experience in prepare such studies and
submitted as follows:
(1) Joint Studies. Joint traffic studies between different
applicants are strongly encouraged.
(2) The Traffic Impact Study shall be prepared by a qualified
professional traffic engineer with verified experience in preparing such
studies.
(3) The study area boundary and identification of the roadways
included within the study area.
(4) A general site description, including:
(a) Size and location of existing and proposed land uses
and dwelling types.
(b) Construction staging, and completion date of the
proposed development.
(c) EXisting land uses, approved and recorded
subdivision and land developments and subdivisions and land
developments proposed but not yet approved and recorded in the
study area that are determined by the Township Board of
Supervisors as having bearing on the development's likely impact.
(d) Within the study area, the applicant must describe
existing roadways and intersections (geometries and traffic signal
control) as well as improvements contemplated by government
agencies or private parties.
(5) Analysis of existing conditions, including:
(a) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes. Schematic
diagrams depicting daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes shall be
presented for roadways within the study area. Turning movement
and mainline volumes shall be presented for the three peak hour
conditions (AM, PM and site generated) while only mainline
volumes are required to reflect daily traffic volumes. The source
and/or method of computation for all traffic volumes shall be
included.
(b) Volume/Capacity Analyses at Critical Points
Utilizing techniques described in derivative Highway Capacity
Manual, latest edition or derivative nomographs, an assessment of
the relative balance between roadway volumes and capacity are to
be described. The analysis shall be performed for existing
conditions (roadway geometry and traffic signal control) for the
appropriate peak hours.
XXVII-49
(c) Level of Service at Critical Points. Based on the
results obtained in the previous section, levels of service (A
through F) shall be computed and presented for all movements.
Included in this section shall also be a description of typical
operating conditions at each level of service.
(d) A tabulation of accident locations during the most
recent three-year period shall be provided.
(6) Analysis of future conditions without the proposed
development. The future year(s) for which projections are made will be
specified by the Township and will be dependent on the timing of the
proposed development. The following information shall be included:
(a) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes. This section
shall clearly indicate the method and assumptions used to forecast
future traffic volumes. The schematic diagrams depicting future
traffic volumes shall be similar to those described in Section
505(E)(5)(a) in terms of location and times (daily and peak hours).
(b) Volume/Capacity Analyses at Critical Locations. The
ability of the existing roadway system to accommodate future
traffic (without site development) shall be described in this section.
If roadway improvements or modifications are committed for
implementation the volume/capacity analysis shall be presented
for these conditions.
In the case of existing signalized intersections, Traffic signal timing
shall be optimized to determine the best possible levels of service
that can be obtained utilizing existing roadway geometry and
traffic signal equipment.
(c) Levels of Service at Critical Points. Based on the
results obtained in the previous section, levels of service (A
through F) shall be determined.
(7) Trip Generation. The amount of traffic generated by the
development shall be presented in this section for daily and the three peak
hour conditions. The trip generation rates used in this phase of the
analysis shall be justified and documented to the satisfaction of the
Township Board of Supervisors. Trip Generation (latest edition)
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers shall be used
unless the Township Board of Supervisors approves other studies.
(8) Trip Distribution. The direction of approach for site
generated traffic shall be presented in this section for the appropriate time
periods. As with all technical analysis steps, the basic method and
assumptions used in this work shall be clearly stated in order that the
Township can replicate these results.
(9) Traffic Assignment. This section shall describe the
utilization of study area roadways by site generated traffic. The proposed
traffic volumes shall then be combined with anticipated traffic volumes
from Section 505(E)(6) to describe mainline and turning movement
volumes for future conditions with the site developed as the applicant
proposes.
(10) Analysis of Future Conditions with Development. This
section shall describe the adequacy of the roadway system to
accommodate future traffic with development of the site.
Any unique characteristics of the site or within the study are (e.g.,
weekend tourists, antique sales, or holiday shopping) affecting traffic shall
be considered. If staging of the proposed development is anticipated,
analysis for each stage of completion shall be made.
The following information shall be included:
(a) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes, Mainline
and turning movement volumes shall be presented for the highway
network in the study area as well as driveways and internal
circulation roadways for the appropriate time periods.
(b) Volume/Capacity Analysis at Critical Points. Similar
to Sections 505(E)(5)(b) and 505(E)(6)(b), a volume/capacity
analysis shall be performed for the appropriate peak hours for
future conditions with the site developed as proposed.
(c) Levels of Service at Critical Points. As a result of the
volume/capacity analysis, the level of service on the study area
roadway system shall be computed and described in this section for
all movements.
A03427
(11) Recommended Improvements. In the event that the analysis
indicates a decrease in the level of service for any movements will occur
on study area roadways, a description of proposed improvements to
remedy deficiencies shall be included in this section. These proposals
would not include committed projects by the Township and State which
were described in Section 505(E)(4)(c) and reflected in the analysis
contained in Sections 505(E)(5) and 505(E)(6).
The following information shall be included:
(a) Proposed Recommended Improvements. This section
shall describe the location, nature and extent of proposed
improvements to assure sufficient roadway capacity.
Accompanying this list of improvements shall be preliminary cost
estimates.
(b) Volume/Capacity Analysis at Critical Points. An
iteration of the volume/capacity analysis shall be described which
demonstrates the anticipated results of making these
improvements.
(c) Levels of Service at Critical Points. As a result of the
revised volume/capacity analysis presented in the previous Sub-
Section, levels of service for the highway system with
improvements shall be presented.
(12) Conclusion. The last section of the report shall be a clear,
concise description of the study findings.
(F) Applicant's Response. The applicant shall respond to the traffic
impact study with proposals on what traffic improvements, right-of-way
dedications or commitments of financing for specific projects the applicant
proposes to commit to resolve the negative traffic impacts of the proposed
development. Such improvements or financing may be staged in relation to the
stages of the development. Upon request by the Township, the applicant shall
respond to the Township's comments on the traffic impact study.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 505; as amended by Ordinance No. 332,
October 23, 2006, Section 1; as further amended by Ordinance No. 342, July 9, 2007,
Section 1)
A03427
Section 506. Community Impact Studies for Developments of Fifty (50) or More
Dwellings.
(A) A community impact study shall be required to be submitted by
any applicant for a preliminary approval of any subdivision or land
development that is intended to include fifty (50) or more dwelling units.
(B) The impact study shall include estimates of the following impacts:
(1) The number of public school students.
(2) The effect of the new school students on projected
enrollments and capacities of public schools.
(3) The effect of the additional students on school district costs,
compared to expected revenues.
(4) The effects on the costs and revenues of the Township
government.
(5) The effects on Township services.
(6) The adequacy of the fire protection services to serve the
proposed development.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 506)
Section 507. Water Quantity Impact Study. Based upon the recommendation of
the Township Engineer, the Planning Commission may require an applicant to provide
a study to determine whether a proposed project would have significant negative
impact upon groundwater quantity. Such study shall be completed by a qualified
engineer or hydrogeologist. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 507)
Section 508. Sanitary Sewer Impact Study. Based upon the recommendation of
the Township Engineer, the Planning Commission may require an applicant to provide
a study to determine whether there will be sufficient capacity in transmission lines and
treatment to handle the expected wastewater from a proposed development. Such
study shall be completed by a qualified engineer. Such study shall be reviewed by the
Municipal Authority of the Township of Spring prior to any recommendation for final
plan approval by the Planning Commission. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section
508)
A03427
Part 6
Final Plan
Section 601. Applicability. This Part lists the requirements for final plans for a
major subdivision or any land development. See the requirements of Part 7 for a project
that only involves a minor subdivision or only a boundary line adjustment. (Ordinance
No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 601)
Section 602. Submission and Review Procedure.
(A) Final Plan Submission Required.
(1) A final plan submission for each major subdivision or land
development must be filed by the applicant and reviewed in accordance
with the provisions of this Part.
(2) A final plan for a minor subdivision shall be filed by the
applicant and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Part 7.
(B) Submission Deadline.
(1) An applicant shall file a final plan submission within five (5)
years from the date of the approval of the preliminary plan by the Board
of Supervisors, unless an extension in writing has been granted by the
Board of Supervisors.
(2) Failure to comply with this requirement shall render the
preliminary plan submission null and void, and a new preliminary plan
submission must be filed.
(C) Required Submission.
(1) The applicant shall file to the Township staff at least twentyone
(21) days prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting (not
including workshop meetings):
(a) The required fees, including the County Planning
Commission review fees.
(b) The required materials, numbers of applications and
plans and other materials and information required by §603 of this
Part.
XXVII -54
(2) The Township Staff shall forward plans to the following
agencies and seek their comments prior to final plan approval. (where
applicable):
to:
(a) Municipal Authority or Sewage Enforcement Officer
(if applicable).
(b) Township Engineer and /or consulting engineer.
(c) Fire Chief and Police Chief (layout and utility plan, if
deemed appropriate by the Township staff).
(d) Township Codes Enforcement staff and Township
Secretary.
(e) Berks County Planning Commission.
(3) Applicant's Distribution. It is the applicant's responsibility
(a) Make agreements with the appropriate utility
companies.
(b) Provide information to PennDOT that is required for
any access to a State road.
(c) Provide information to DER or other agencies for any
permits that might be required.
(d) Submit a copy of the soil erosion and sedimentation
plan to the County Conservation District, and pay their required
review fees.
(4) The filing of the final plan shall conform with the approved
preliminary plan and any changes recommended by the Township during
the preliminary plan review.
(5) All sheets should be folded or rolled so that the title of the
sheet faces out.
(D) Initial Actions by the Staff.
(1) The staff shall review the submission items for completeness
and shall report such review to the Commission at its next regularly
scheduled meeting.
(2) The staff shall forward a copy of the final plan and
supportive documents to the Township Engineer for review, prior to the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Township Planning Commission.
(3) The staff shall retain in the Township's files one (1) copy of
all materials submitted by the applicant, including the application form
and the final plan checklist.
(4) The staff shall forward to the Commission at or before the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission the following:
(a) Copies of the application form.
(b) Copy of the final plan checklist.
(c) Copies of the final plan.
(d) Copies of the supportive documents.
(5) Adjacent Municipalities. If any portion of a major
subdivision or land development would occur within two hundred (200)
feet of the boundary of another municipality or would clearly have a
regional impact upon a municipality, the staff should require an applicant
to provide a copy of the layout plan that can be forwarded to that
municipality for an advisory review.
(E) Determination of Completeness by Commission.
(1) Based upon the initial review of the Township staff and /or
the Township Engineer, the Commission shall have authority, at its first
regularly scheduled meeting after the submission is timely filed, to
determine that a submission is significantly incomplete and therefore to
refuse to review the submission further and to do one (1) of the following:
(a) Not accept the submission, indicating the deficiencies,
and return the fee (minus the costs of any Township review) to the
applicant.
)0(VII-56
(b) Accept the submission as being filed for review on the
condition that the applicant shall file such additional required
materials and information to the staff or appropriate agency or
person within a certain number of days from the date of such
acceptance.
(c) Table the acceptance of the submission until the next
Planning Commission meeting where the applicant has met all of
the submittal requirements, and has filed such materials within the
required twenty-one (21) days prior to the meeting. The ninety (90)
day time limit for action shall not begin until such acceptance.
(d) Recommend that the plan be rejected by the Board of
Supervisors for just cause.
(2) If the Commission determines that the submission is
significantly complete, as filed and as required, the Commission shall
accept the plans and may begin its review.
(3) If the Commission determines that the final plan submission,
as filed, departs substantially from the approved preliminary plan,
the Commission may classify the submission as a revised preliminary plan
(with the applicable review fees required) and process the application as
such.
(F) Review by Township Engineer.
(1) Within forty-five (45) days from the date the plans are duly
submitted for review (unless granted an extension by the Commission or
unless the plans are significantly incomplete), the Township Engineer
should review the engineering considerations of the preliminary plan and
prepare an initial report on such considerations to the Commission.
(2) The Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Commission and the Board of Supervisors during
review of the plan.
(G) Review by Commission. The Planning Commission shall
accomplish the following within the time limitations of State Planning Code
(unless the applicant grants a written time extension).
A03427
(1) Review all applicable reports received from appropriate
review agencies and officers.
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
objectives and requirements of this Chapter, other ordinances and
statutes.
(3) Review the final plan submission with the applicant, his
agent or representative (if present) and recommend any needed revisions
so that the submission will conform to this Chapter, other ordinances and
statutes.
(4) Recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval
of the final plan submission in a written report to the Board of
Supervisors, specifying any recommended conditions for approval,
identifying defects found by the application, describing requirements
which have not been met, citing the provisions of the ordinance or statute
relied upon.
(H) Review by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) Review the report of the Commission.
(2) Review any reports received from any official reviewing
agencies.
(3) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
objectives and requirements of this Chapter, other ordinances and
statutes.
(4) Approve or reject the final plan submission within the time
required by the Municipalities Planning Code.
(I) Decision by Board of Supervisors.
(1) Notice to Applicant. The decision of the Board of
Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the
applicant personal- ly or mailed to him at his last known address not later
than fifteen (15) days following the decision.
(2) Dedications.
A03427
(a) The approval of the final plan by the Board of
Supervisors shall not by itself constitute an acceptance of the
dedication of any street or other proposed public way, space or
area, unless such acceptance is specified at such time.
(b) Any such acceptance of dedication shall be
specifically stated along with the signatures required for approval.
(3) Disapproval. When a final plan submission is disapproved,
the decision shall specify defects found in the submission, shall describe
requirements which have not been met and shall cite the provisions of the
statute or ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) Conditions. The Board of Supervisors may attach reasonable
conditions to an approval to ensure the carrying out of the
Comprehensive Plan, this Chapter, other Township ordinances and State
laws and regulations.
Development in Stages.
(1) If requested by the applicant, the Board of Supervisors may
permit the undertaking of the required improvements and the preparation
of the final plan to be completed in a series of sections or stages, each
covering a portion of the proposed subdivision as shown on the
preliminary plan.
(2) If the final plan is to be filed in sections or stages, each
section or stage shall relate logically to provide adequate vehicle access,
well-functioning extension of utilities and sufficient amounts of any
approved common open space.
(3) Both the boundaries and configuration of stages or sections
of a development shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 602)
Section 603. Final Plan Requirements. All of the information and materials
listed in this section are required as part of all final plans for a major subdivision or a
land development submission. This list of requirements shall serve as both a list of
requirements, and as a checklist for the applicant and the Township to ensure
completion of submissions. The applicant shall submit completed photocopies of this
Section as part of the application. The required information listed in this Section may
)0W11-59
A03427
be combined or separated onto different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly
readable. Supplemental written reports submitted at the time of the preliminary plan
are not required to be resubmitted unless they need to be revised to reflect changes
between the preliminary and the final plans.
TOWNSHIP OF SPRING
FINAL PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT
CHECKLIST AND LIST OF SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
(To Be Completed By Applicant)
Applicant's Name:
Applicant's Address:
Applicant's Phone No.:
Applicant's Signature:
Date:
* Insert "NA" in the "Not Submitted" column if not applicable. Insert "W" the "Not
Submitted" column if a waiver is requested from the requirement.
NOT
SUBMITTED SUBMITTED*
A. GENERAL SUBMISSION ITEMS:*
1. Township application/ review fee (s)/ escrow
2. 2 copies of the Completed Application (see
Section 1201)
3. 2 copies of the Final Plan Checklist (using the
photocopies of the pages in this Section)
4. 8 print copies of the complete Final Plans
5. 5 print copies of only the Layout Plans
6. 3 sets of Supportive Documents (Not applicable
for Lot Line Adjustments)
7. A completed County Subdivision and Land
Development Review Application with any
review fee charged by the County (unless the
Township staff permit the applicant to deliver
directly to the County)
* Note- The Township may require the Applicant to
file additional copies.
B. DRAFTING REQUIREMENTS: All information shall
be legibly and accurately presented.
1. Plans prepared on a standard sized sheet (such
as 18"x24", 24"x36", 30"x42" or 36"x48")
2. Plans drawn at a scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet or
other scale preapproved by the Township
Engineer or Township Staff
3. All dimensions set in feet and decimal parts
thereof, and bearings in degrees, minutes and
seconds.
4. Differentiation between existing and proposed
features
5. Boundary line of the tract, shown as a heavy
line
6. If layout plans involve more than one sheet, a
map of the layout of the entire project at an
appropriate scale on one sheet, with a key map
showing how the layout sheets connect.
7. If the tract(s) crosses a municipal boundary, a
map showing both the portions in Spring
Township and the other municipality, in
sufficient detail for the Township to determine
how the parts will interrelate.
8. Required profiles shown at a scale of 1"=50'
horizontal and 1"=5' vertical, or other scale
preapproved by the Township Engineer or
Township Staff.
9. All sheets numbered and listed on the Layout
Plan or Title Sheet.
10. Words "Final Plan" and sheet title (such as
"Layout Plan") on each sheet
C. GENERAL INFORMATION:
1. Name of project on each sheet
2. Name of landowner and developer (with
addresses)
3. Names, deed book volumes and page numbers
of adjacent property owners, including those
across adjacent streets and alleys
4. Lot lines of adjacent lots, and approximate
locations of any buildings, common open
spaces, detention basins or drainage channels
existing or approved within 100 feet of the
boundaries of the proposed project
5. Notarized Owners Statement - see Section 1202
6. Surveyor and plan preparer's statement (See
Section 1202)
7. Approval/ review signature blocks for:
Township Governing Body, Township Planning
Commission and County Planning Commission
(see Section 1202)
8. Location map at a standard scale (of 1"=800'
showing the location of the project in relation to
the following features within 1000 feet of the
boundaries of the tract: existing and proposed
streets, waterways, zoning district boundaries,
and municipal boundaries
9. North arrow, graphic scale, written scale
10. Date of plan and all subsequent revision dates
and submission dates (especially noting if is
revision of a previously approved plan) with
space for future revision dates
11. Source of title, including date, grantor and
grantee
12. Tax map number (if available) and block and lot
for the tract being subdivided
13. Space for Recorder of Deeds
D. NATURAL FEATURES:
1. Existing contour lines as follows:
a. shall be based on a field survey or
photogrammetric procedure at a scale of
1"= 100' or larger.
b. The contour interval shall be sufficient to
determine compliance with Township
ordinances. An interval of 2 feet for
slopes of less than 15% and 5 feet for
slopes of 15% or greater is generally
recommended.
c. Note- Contours are not required to be
shown within lots of 10 acres or more that
are clearly not intended to be altered as a
result of this proposed subdivision
2. Identification of any slopes of 15 to 25 percent,
and greater than 25 percent
3. Areas within any hydric soils (see County Soil
Survey), with a notation that there are none if
that is the case
4. Watercourses (with any name), natural springs,
lakes and wetlands. Detailed delineations of
wetlands are not required if there is clearly no
alteration proposed of any areas that could be
reasonably suspected of being wetlands.
Note- A qualified professional shall delineate
any wetlands prior to final plan approval.
However, the applicant is required to have
received all required Federal and State permits
prior to Final Plan approval.
5. Rock outcrops, stone fields and sinkholes
6. Location of any areas within the 100 year
floodplain (with differentiation between
floodway and floodfringe if available from
official Federal floodplain maps)
7. Approximate locations and names of soil types,
with identification according to the County Soil
Survey or more detailed professional study of
those that are alluvial, have a depth to bedrock
of less than 3 feet or a seasonally high water
table of less than 3 feet.
E. MAN-MADE FEATURES:
1. Existing and proposed lot lines
a. The boundaries of lots (other than
residual lot of at least 10 acres) shall be
determined by accurate field survey,
closed with an error not to exceed 1 in
10,000 and balanced.
b. The boundaries of any residual tract
which is greater than 10 acres may be
determined by deed.
2. Location and elevation of existing monuments
3. The following data for the cartway edges (curb
lines) and right-of-way lines for all recorded
(except those which are to be vacated) and /or
proposed streets, and for the right-of-way of all
existing streets within the property: the
horizontal length of all straight lines including
radii or curved lines; the length of all arcs (in
feet carried to the second decimal) and the
central angles in degrees, minutes and seconds
of all horizontal curves.
4. Buildings estimated to be 80 years or older that
are proposed to be impacted by the project,
with name and description
5. Existing and proposed utility easements and
restrictive covenants and easements for
purposes which might affect development
(stating which easements and rights-of-ways
proposed for dedication to the municipality)
6. Existing building locations and land uses
7. Overhead electrical high-voltage lines and
rights-of-ways/ easements
F. ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
1. Applicable zoning district and the applicable lot
area, width, building coverage, height
regulations and minimum yard requirements
2. Minimum building setback requirements
shown for each lot graphically shown
3. Area and location of any proposed common
open space (if none proposed, place "W" in Not
Submitted Column)
4. If any common open space proposed: method of
ownership and entity proposed to be
responsible for maintenance
5. If any common open space proposed:
description of intended purposes,
proposedimprovements (such as rough
grading) and any proposed recreation facilities
XXVII -64
A03427
6. Statement of type of water and sewer service
proposed (such as "municipal water and
municipal sewer")
7. Linear feet of proposed streets
8. Required and proposed building coverage and
impervious coverage (may be stated as "typical
proposed" for single family detached or twin
homes)
G. PROPOSED LAYOUT:
1. Total acreage of site and total proposed number
of lots and dwelling units
2. Identification number for each lot
3. Approximate lot area for each lot
4. Approximate dimensions of each lot
5. Existing rights-of-way and cartway widths and
locations of existing streets, including existing
streets within 100 feet of boundaries of tract
6. Proposed rights-of-way and cartway widths
and locations of existing and proposed streets,
including streets proposed as part of other
projects within 100 feet of the boundaries of
tract
7. Street centerline information, with
horizontal curve data, bearings, distances and
stations corresponding to the profile
8. Right-of-way and curb lines with horizontal
curve radii at intersections
9. Beginning and end of proposed street
construction
10. Street improvements proposed by the applicant,
including any acceleration/ deceleration lanes,
traffic signals, street re-alignment or
construction improvement
11. Any proposed curbing
12. Any proposed sidewalks with proposed
handicapped ramps at intersections
13. Any proposed bicycle paths
14. Names of existing streets and initial proposed
names of new streets
15. Designation of streets proposed to be dedicated
to the Township or to remain private.
)0(V11-65
16. Clear site triangles
17. Any required PennDOT Highway Occupancy
Permit numbers.
H. UTILITY PLAN:
r A
A
1. As applicable, the following existing and
proposed items for each lot, using the following
symbols (or other symbols preapproved by the
Township staff):
Well (if not connected to central water system)
with required separation distance shown from
septic drain fields, and with dimensions from
lotlines
Primary drain field (with dimensions from
lotlines)
Secondary drain field
Soil probe location (located with dimensions)
Percolation test location (located with
dimensions)
2. If onlot sewage disposal systems are proposed:
a. proposed contour lines on same sheet as
utility layout
b. location of existing and proposed wells
within 100 feet of the boundaries of the
project
c. proposed or typical location of
dwelling/ building
d. locations of soils with a seasonally high
water table averaging less than 3 feet (see
County Soil Survey)
3. If a centralized sewage system is proposed:
a. proposed contour lines on same sheet as
utility layout
b. location and size of lines and laterals, with
stations of lines corresponding to the
profile, and extensions to reach existing
sewer lines
c. locations of manholes, with invert
elevation of flow line and grade at top of
each manhole
d. proposed lot lines and any proposed
easements or rights-of-ways needed for
the utilities
e. location of all other drainage facilities and
public utilities in the vicinity of sanitary
sewer lines
f. manhole numbers assigned by the
Municipal Authority
g. separation distances from water lines and
locations of concrete encasements
4. If centralized water service is proposed:
a. location and size of existing and proposed
waterlines
b. existing and proposed fire hydrant
locations
c. distance noted that water lines will have
to be extended to reach existing lines (if
not already abutting the tract)
5. As applicable, existing and proposed
underground natural gas, electrical, telephone,
cable TV and any other utility lines, with any
easements shown that will affect development
6. List of contacts for underground utilities in the
area, with phone numbers stated on the grading
plans
I. GRADING AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PLAN AND CALCULATIONS:
The following information shall be shown on the Plan or in
calculations:
1. Existing and proposed storm drainage facilities
or structures, including detention basins (with
capacity), swales, pipes (with sizes), culverts
and inlets
2. Capacity, depth and locations of detention
basins
A03427
3. Watershed areas for each drainage structure or
swale
4. Locations of any proposed or existing
stormwater easements
5. Intended design year standards for culverts,
bridge structures and/or other stormwater
facilities
6. Location of all underground utilities
7. Entity responsible to maintain/own any
detention basin
8. See also requirements of Section 1008
9. Existing contour lines (see description under
"Natural Features")
10. Proposed contour lines
11. Stationing of any storm sewers, with stationing
corresponding to profiles
J. FOR USES OTHER THAN SINGLE FAMILY
DETACHED, TWO FAMILY SEMIDETACHED OR
TWO FAMILY DETACHED:
1. For townhouses or apartments, evidence that the
project meets the density requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance
2. Evidence that the project will meet the off-street
parking requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
3. Identification numbers for proposed buildings
if more than one building proposed per lot
4. Arrangement of off-street parking spaces,
parking aisles, paved areas and off-street
loading areas
5. For townhouses, any proposed methods to
ensure privacy between outdoor semi-private
areas (such as fences between rear yard)
6. Illustrative sketches of proposed buildings
(encouraged not required)
7. Proposed building locations and land uses (if
known)
8. Major types and locations of outdoor lighting
9. Location of any proposed outdoor storage areas
10. Square feet of paved area, including areas
covered by gravel
K. LANDSCAPE PLAN:
1. Locations of treelines and existing forested
areas
2. Locations of individual mature trees of greater
than 6 inches trunk diameter measured at a
height of 3 feet above the surrounding average
ground level, other than trees within wooded
areas and treelines
3. Any proposed evergreen screening, buffer
yards or earthen berming (if required by
Township Zoning Ordinance)
4. Areas of existing mature woods that are
proposed to be protected and preserved or
removed
5. Types, sizes and locations of any required trees
(see Section 1017), paved area landscaping (see
Section 706 of the Township Zoning Ordinance)
and any other major proposed landscaping.
6. Any proposed fencing (including height and
type) and/ or landscaping around any
stormwater detention basin (see Section 1007)
L. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION PLAN:
1. Drawings showing locations and types of
proposed measures, complying with the
regulations and standards of the County
Conservation District and DER.
2. Narrative describing proposed soil erosion and
sedimentation control methods.
3. Approval letter from Berks County
Conservation District.
M. ROAD PROFILES:
1. Profile of existing and proposed ground surface
along centerline of street.
2. Proposed centerline grade with percent on
tangents and elevations at 50 feet intervals
3. All vertical curve data including length,
elevations and minimum sight distance as
required by Part 10.
XXVII-69
N. WATER MAIN, SANITARY SEWER AND STORM
DRAIN PROFILES:
1. Profile of proposed ground surface with
elevations at top of manholes or inlets
2. Profile of water main, storm sewer and sanitary
sewer lines, with stationing, elevations, lengths,
slopes, material, sizes, etc.
3. All line crossings of other utilities.
0. ADDITIONAL FINAL PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
1. Protective covenants shall be placed on the land
providing for:
a. clear sight triangle easements (see
Sections 1004.M and 1011.D)
b. all needed utility, drainage, maintenance,
pedestrian, open space or other
easements.
2. Required Plan Notations. The following
wording shall be required to be placed on any
final subdivision or land development plan, as
applicable:
a. "Well and sewage disposal systems shall
be constructed in accordance with
standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources."
b. "Individual owners of lots must receive
approval from the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer for a sewage permit
prior to undertaking the construction of
an on-lot sewage disposal system or
building that will need to be served by
such a system."
c. "The Planning Commission and
Governing Body have not passed upon
the feasibility of any individual lot or
location within a lot being able to sustain
any type of well or sewage disposal
system."
3. Street Lighting
a. Existing street lighting
b. Any proposed street lighting (or notation
stating none is proposed), including types
of poles, spacing of poles and intensity of
lamps
4. Proposed monument locations
P. CONSTRUCTION DETAILS:(following any applicable
Township standards).
1. Typical cross-section and specifications for
street construction as required by Section 1004
and the Township Street and Improvement
Specifications.
2. Drainage swale cross-section and construction
materials.
3. Pipe bedding details.
4. Storm drainage structures, including any
detention basin outfall structure and spillway
5. Sanitary sewer structures.
6. Curb and sidewalk details.
7. Landscaping details
Q. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS AND ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION:
1. A copy of any "Supporting Documentation and
Additional Information" that was required for
the Preliminary Plan and that needed to be
adjusted or revised to reflect changes between
the Preliminary and the Final Plan.
2. List of Modifications or Waivers granted to this
Ordinance, together with variances granted by
the Township Zoning Hearing Board to the
Township Zoning Ordinance.
3. Deed Restrictions. All private deed
restrictions, homeowner or condominium
association agreements or covenants already
imposed or to be imposed as a condition to sale.
Any homeowner or condominium association
agreement may be subject to review by the
Township Solicitor and acceptance by the
Governing Body.
A03427
4. Nondedicated Streets Agreement. Agreement
for any street not offered for dedication stating
who is responsible for the improvement and
maintenance of such streets. The developer
shall be responsible for such maintenance until
the condominium or homeowners association is
established and operational.
5. Open Space Agreement. A formal contract
providing for the maintenance of open space
and the method of management, together with
all offers of dedication and covenants governing
the reservation and maintenance of
undedicated open space. This agreement is
subject to the review of the Township Solicitor
and acceptance by the Governing. Body.
6. Storm Drainage Calculations. All calculations
relating to facilities appearing on the Grading
and Storm Drainage Plan and the Erosion and
Sedimentation Plan shall be submitted for
review by the Township Engineer. (see Section
1008).
7. Development Schedule. A statement indicating
the approximate date when construction can be
expected to begin and be completed.
8. State Highway Reviews. The applicant shall
submit to the Township a copy of the
application to PennDOT for any needed
occupancy permit to have access onto a State
highway, and shall also submit any review
comments received from PennDOT within 5
days of receiving such comments. Any needed
permit shall be issued prior to Final Approval.
9. If service is proposed by means other than by
private individual wells owned by the owner of
each lot, the applicant shall present evidence to
the Township that the service will be provided
by a certified public utility, a bona fide
cooperative association of property owners
or by a municipal corporation, authority or
utility, as permitted by the Township. This
evidence shall include a copy of one or more of
the following, as appropriate: the "Certificate of
Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania
)0(VII-72
A03427
Public Utility Commission or a copy of an
application submitted for such certificate or a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question.
10. If the subdivision or land development was not
required to submit a preliminary plan, a copy of
any supporting information listed in Section 503
that is applicable to this project.
11. All signed agreements or contracts with utility
companies, water companies or authorities or
sewage companies or authorities for the
provision of services to the project.
12. Approval letters from all appropriate Federal
and State agencies of any private centralized
water supply system or private centralized
sewage disposal system.
13. Approved DER Sewage Planning Module, if
applicable
14. DER Water Quality Management Permit, if
applicable
R. MATERIALS REQUIRED PRIOR TO RECORDING: The
following are not required at the time of final plan
submission, but are required prior to recording of the final
plan and prior to the construction of any buildings.
1. Reproducible mylar of the "Record Plan"
provided to the Township after Final Plan
Approval. See Section 803.B.6.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 603)
Section 604. Certifications. All certifications shall comply with the State
professional licensing laws. All subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a
registered land surveyor. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 604)
A03427
Part 7
Minor Subdivisions and Lot Line Adjustments
Section 701. Purpose. The purpose of this Part is to permit applicants and the
Township to use a simplified procedure for reviewing minor subdivisions and
boundary line adjustments prior to approval for recording. (Ordinance 240, May 23,
1994, Section 701)
Section 702. Submission and Review Procedure.
(A) Final Plan Submission Required. A final plan submission for each
minor subdivision or lot line adjustment must be filed by the applicant and
reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this Part. A preliminary plan is
not required for a minor subdivision or lot line adjustment.
(B) Required Submission.
(1) The applicant shall file to the staff at least twenty-one (21)
days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting:
(a) The required fee(s) including any County Planning
Commission review fee; and,
(b) The number of copies* of plans, applications and
materials provided for in §703 for a minor subdivision and §704 for
a lot line adjustment.
*The staff may require the applicant to provide additional copies.
(2) The Township staff shall forward, prior to final plan
approval, the appropriate plan information to the following agencies to
seek their comments, unless the staff determines that such review is not
needed because of the limited scope of the proposed project:
(a) Municipal Authority or Sewage Enforcement Officer.
(b) Fire Chief and Police Chief.
(c) Township Codes Enforcement staff and Township
Secretary.
(d) Township Engineer and/or Consulting Engineer.
XXVII-74
(3) The applicant is fully responsible for the following:
(a) Providing a copy of the soil and erosion control plan
to the County Conservation District if earth disturbance is
proposed.
(b) Contacting the appropriate utility companies.
(c) Applying for any PennDOT highway occupancy
permit that may be required.
(d) Determining whether any permits or approvals are
needed from any agency outside of the Township.
(4) All sheets should be folded to approximately nine inches by
twelve inches (9"x12") in size or rolled in such a manner that the title of
the sheet faces out.
(5) Each set of supportive documents shall provide the
information required by §703, unless otherwise exempt.
(C) Initial Actions by the Staff.
(1) The staff shall review the submission items filed against a
checklist for completeness and shall report such review to the
Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(2) The staff shall submit one (1) set of plans to the County
Planning Commission for their review.
(3) The staff shall retain in the Commission's files one (1) copy
of all materials submitted by the applicant.
(4) The staff shall forward to the Commission at or before the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission:
(a) Copies of the application form.
(b) Copies of the final plan checklist.
(c) Copies of the final plan.
A03427
(d) At least one (1) copy of the supportive documents.
(D) Determination of Completeness by Commission.
(1) Based upon the initial review of the Township staff and /or
the Township Engineer, the Commission shall have authority, at its first
regularly scheduled meeting after the submission is timely filed, to
determine that a submission is significantly incomplete and therefore to
refuse to review the submission further and to do one (1) of the following:
(a) Not accept the submission, indicating the deficiencies,
and return the fee (minus the costs of any Township review) to the
applicant.
(b) Accept the submission as being filed for review on the
condition that the applicant shall file such additional required
materials and information to the staff or appropriate agency or
person within a certain number of days from the date of such
acceptance.
(c) Table the acceptance of the submission until the next
Planning Commission meeting where the applicant has met all of
the submittal requirements, and has filed such materials within the
required twenty-one (21) days prior to the meeting. The ninety (90)
day time limit for action shall not begin until such acceptance.
(d) Recommend that the plan be rejected by the Board of
Supervisors for just cause.
(2) If the Commission determines that the submission is
significantly complete, as filed and as required, the Commission shall
accept the plans and may begin its review.
(3) Zoning Variances. An application under this Chapter shall
not be considered to be complete if one (1) or more zoning variances will
be required for the subdivision or land development to legally occur as
submitted, until such time as the needed zoning variances have been
granted. If the Planning Commission becomes aware that the zoning
variance has been lawfully appealed, the Planning Commission may table
the lawful acceptance of a submission until that appeal is resolved if they
determine that the variance is needed for the feasibility of the proposal as
submitted.
(E) Review by Township Engineer.
(1) Within forty-five (45) days from the date the plan is duly
submitted for review (unless granted an extension by the Commission) the
Township Engineer should review the engineering considerations in the
plan and prepare an initial report on such considerations to the
Commission.
(2) The Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Commission and the Board of Supervisors during
review of the plan.
(F) Review by Commission. The Planning Commission shall
accomplish the following within the time limitations of the State Municipalities
Planning Code (unless the applicant grants a written time extension).
(1) Review all applicable reports received from the appropriate
review agencies and officers.
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
objectives and requirements of this Chapter, other ordinances and
statutes.
(3) Review the final plan submission with the applicant, his
agent or representative (if present) and recommend any needed revisions
so that the submission will conform to this Chapter, other ordinances and
statutes.
(4) Recommend approval or disapproval of the final plan
submission in an advisory report to the Board of Supervisors, specifying
any recommended conditions for approval, identifying defects found by
the application, describing requirements which have not been met, citing
the provisions of the ordinance or statute relied upon.
(G) Review by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) Review the report of the Commission.
(2) Review the report received from any other official reviewing
agencies.
A03427
(3) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
objectives and requirements of this Chapter, other ordinances and
statutes.
(4) Approve or reject the final plan submission within the time
required by the Municipalities Planning Code.
(5) County Planning Commission Review. No subdivision or
land development shall be granted final approval until a report is received
from the County Planning Commission or until the expiration of thirty
(30) days from the date the application was forwarded to the County
Planning Commission.
(H) Decision by Board of Supervisors.
(1) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing
and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed not later
than fifteen (15) days following the decision.
(2) Approval.
(a) The approval of the final plan by the Board of
Supervisors shall not by itself constitute an acceptance of the
dedication of any street or other proposed public way, space or
area, unless such acceptance is specifically made at such time.
(b) Any such acceptance of dedication shall be
specifically stated along with the signatures required for approval.
(c) if the Board of Supervisors elects to accept lands
offered for dedication, the submission shall be accompanied by
duly executed instruments of conveyance to the Township. Such
instruments shall state that the title thereof is free and
unencumbered.
(3) If a final plan submission is disapproved, the decision shall
specify defects found in the submission, shall describe requirements
which have not been met, and shall cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon in each case.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 702)
A03427
Section 703. Minor Subdivision Final Plan Requirements. All of the following
information and materials listed in this Section are required as part of all minor
subdivision submissions. This list of requirements shall serve as both a list of
requirements, and as a checklist for the applicant and the Township to ensure
completion of submissions. The applicant shall submit completed photocopies of this
Section as part of the application.
TOWNSHIP OF SPRING
MINOR SUBDIVISION FINAL PLAN CHECKLIST
AND LIST OF SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
(To Be Completed By Applicant)
Applicant's Name:
Applicant's Address:
Applicant's Phone No.:
Applicant's Signature:
Date:
*Insert "NA" in the "Not Submitted" column if not applicable. Insert "W" in the "Not
Submitted" column if a waiver is requested from the requirement.
NOT
SUBMITTED SUBMITTED*
A. GENERAL SUBMISSION ITEMS:
1. Township application/ review fee(s)/escrow
2. 2 copies of the Application (see Section 1201)
3. 2 copies of the Minor Subdivision Plan Checklist
(using the photocopies of the pages in is Section)
4. 8 copies of the Final Plan
5. 4 sets of Supportive Documents (Not applicable
for Lot Line Adjustments
6. A completed County Subdivision and Land
Development Review Application with any
review fee charged by the County
B. DRAFTING REQUIREMENTS: All information shall
be legibly and accurately presented.
XXVII-79
A03427
1. Plans prepared on a standard sized sheet (such
as 18"x24", 24"x36", 30"x42" or 36"x48")
2. Plans drawn at a scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet or
other scale preapproved by the Township
Engineer or Township Staff
3. All dimensions set in feet and decimal parts
thereof, and bearings in degrees, minutes and
seconds.
4. Differentiation between existing and proposed
features
5. Boundary line of the tract, shown as a heavy
line
C. GENERAL INFORMATION:
1. Name and location of subdivision
2. Name of landowner and developer (with
addresses)
3. Names of adjoining property owners, including
those across adjacent streets and alleys, with
lotlines of adjacent lots and approximate
locations of any buildings existing on these lots
within 100 feet
4. Notarized Owners Statement of Intent-see
Section 1202
5. Name, address, signature, and seal of the plan
surveyor and plan preparer. (See Section 1202)
6. Approval/review signature blocks for:
- Township Governing Body, Township
Planning Commission and County Planning
Commission (see Section 1202)
7. Location map at a scale of 1" = 800' showing the
location of the project in relation to the
following features within 1000 feet of the
boundaries of the tract: existing and proposed
streets, waterways, zoning district boundaries,
and municipal boundaries
8. North arrow, graphic scale, written scale
9. Date of plan and all subsequent revision dates
(especially noting if it is a revision of a
previously approved plan)
10. Source of title, including date, grantor and
grantee
11. Tax map number (if available) and block and lot
for the tract being subdivided
12. A statement indicating if the proposed
development will result in ten or more lots from
the tract as of 1976
13. All record information if property was
previously subdivided
D. NATURAL FEATURES:
1. Contour lines as follows:
a. 0% to 15% slope - may be accurately
superimposed from the U.S.G.S.
quadrangle map - 2' contour interval
b. 15% or greater - shall be based on a field
survey or photogrametric procedure at an
interval of 5 feet (or other interval preapproved
by the Township Engineer or
Township Staff) at a scale of 1"=100' or
larger
2. Identification of any slopes of 15 to 25 percent,
and greater than 25 percent
3. Areas within any hydric soils (see County Soil
Survey), with a notation that there are none if
that is the case
4. Watercourses (with any name), natural springs,
lakes and wetlands. Detailed delineations of
wetlands are not required if there is clearly no
alteration proposed of any areas that could be
reasonably suspected of being wetlands
5. Rock outcrops, stone fields and sinkholes
6. Areas of existing mature woods, with areas
noted that are proposed to be preserved or
removed
E. MAN-MADE FEATURES:
1. Existing and proposed lot lines
a. The boundaries of lots (other than a
residual lot of at least 10 acres) shall be
determined by accurate field survey,
XXVII-81
closed with an error not to exceed 1 in
10,000 and balanced.
b. The boundaries of any residual tract
which is greater than 10 acres may be
determined by deed.
2. Location of existing and proposed monuments
3. Sufficient bearings, lengths of lines, radii, arc
lengths, street widths, right-of-way and
easement widths of all lots, streets, rights -ofway,
easements and community or public areas
to accurately and completely reproduce each
and every course on the ground.
4. Buildings estimated to be 80 years or older that
are proposed to be impacted by the subdivision,
with name and description
5. Sewer lines, storm water facilities, water lines,
bridges and culverts
6. Existing and proposed utility easements and
restrictive covenants and easements for
purposes which might affect development
(stating which easements and rights-of-ways
proposed for dedication to the municipality)
7. Proposed (if known) and existing building
locations and land uses
F. ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
1. Applicable district and minimum lot area
2. Minimum setback requirements shown for each
lot
G. PROPOSED LAYOUT:
1. Total acreage of site and total proposed number
of lots
2. Identification number for each lot
3. Lot area for each lot
4. The following items for each lot, as applicable,
using the following symbols (or other symbols
pre-approved by the Township staff):
Well (if not connected to central water system)
with required separation distance shown from
)0N11-82
A03427
/ 4
I
septic drain fields, and with dimensions from
lotlines
Primary drain field (with dimensions from
lotlines)
Secondary drain field
Soil probe location (located with dimensions)
Percolation test location (located with
dimensions)
5. Existing and proposed storm drainage facilities
or structures
H. Additional Information: The Planning Commission may require
the submission of any additional information that would be
required for the Final Plan of a major subdivision under Section
603.
1. Residual Lands Sketch. If the submitted plans
do not include all undeveloped or
underdeveloped adjacent or abutting lands
owned by the same or landowner or under
control of the same developer (or closely
related corporations), the Township may
require that a sketch be submitted at an
appropriate scale, on one sheet, covering all
such land holdings together with a sketch of a
reasonable future road system to demonstrate
that the proposed subdivision provides for the
orderly development of any residual lands
and/ or does not adversely affect the potential
development of residual lands.
2. Completed DER Sewage Planning Module
application, if applicable
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 703)
A03427
Section 704. Lot Line Adjustments, Annexations and Other Plans Exempt from
Normal Submission.
(A) An applicant may submit the reduced submission requirements
listed in this Section together with the procedures that would apply to a minor
subdivision plan instead of the preliminary and final submission requirements
only where all of the following would apply:
(1) No additional number of new lots will be created.
(2) No additional segments or significantly changed alignments
of streets are proposed.
(3) The plan cannot reasonably be expected to result in any
construction of new principal nonresidential buildings (other than
buildings to support crop farming).
(4) The plans will only involve one (1) or more of the following:
(a) Adjustment to lotlines.
(b) Annexation of one (1) or more lots onto one (1) or
more lots.
(c) Changes in the supporting documentation or
engineering details of an approved plan.
(B) The following list of requirements shall serve as both a list of
requirements, and as a checklist for the applicant and the Township to ensure
completion of submissions. The applicant shall submit completed photocopies of
this Section as part of the application. The required information listed in this
Section may be combined or separated onto different sheets, provided that the
plans will be clearly readable.
A03427
TOWNSHIP OF SPRING
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS, ANNEXATIONS AND
PLANS EXEMPT FROM NORMAL REQUIREMENTS
CHECKLIST AND LIST OF SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
(To Be Completed By Applicant)
Applicant's Name:
Applicant's Address:
Applicant's Phone No.:
Applicant's Signature:
Date:
*Insert "NA" in the "Not Submitted" column if not applicable. Insert "W" in
the "Not Submitted" column if a waiver is requested from the requirement.
SUBMITTED NOT SUBMITTED*
1. Township application/review fee(s)/escrow
2. 2 copies of the Completed Application (see
Section 1201)
3.. 2 copies of this Checklist (using the photocopies
of the pages in this Section)
4. 5 print copies of the complete Final Plans
6. 2 sets of Supportive Documents (Not applicable
for Lot Line Adjustments)
7. A completed County Subdivision and Land
Development Review Application with any
review fee charged by the County (if required by
the County; unless the Township staff permit the
applicant to deliver directly to the County) Note-
The Township may require the Applicant to file
additional copies.
8. Plans prepared on a standard sized sheet (such
as 18"x24", 24"x36", 30"x42" or 36"x48")
9. Plans drawn at a scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet or
other standard scale.
10. All dimensions set in feet and decimal parts
thereof, and bearings in degrees, minutes and
seconds.
A03427
11. Differentiation between existing and proposed
features
12. Boundary line of the tract, shown as a heavy line
13. Words "Final Plan"
14. Name of project on each sheet
15. Name of landowner and developer (with
addresses)
16. Names of adjacent property owners, including
those across adjacent streets and alleys
17. Lot lines of adjacent lots
18. Notarized Owners Statement - see Section 1202
19. Surveyor and plan preparer's statement (See
Section 1202)
20. Approval/review signature blocks for: Township
Governing Body, Township Planning
Commission and County Planning Commission
(see Section 1202)
21. Location map at a scale of 1"= 800' showing the
location of the project
22. North arrow, graphic scale, written scale
23. Date of plan and all subsequent revision dates
and submission dates (especially noting if is
revision of a previously approved plan) with
space for future revision dates
24. Existing and proposed lot lines
25. Existing building locations and land uses
26. Applicable zoning district and required minimum
lot area
27. Minimum setback requirements shown for each
lot
28. Statement of type of water and sewer service
proposed (such as "municipal water and
municipal sewer")
29. Lot width (at minimum building setback line)
and lot area for each lot
30. Dimensions of each lot in feet
31. Existing rights-of-way and cartway widths and
locations of existing streets
32. List of any Modifications or Waivers requested to
this Ordinance
33. All record information if property was previously
subdivided
A03427
34. Notation stating that a covenant shall be placed
on deed
(C) Additional Information. The Planning Commission may require that a plan
under this Section include the submission of additional information that would be
required if the plan would be a final minor subdivision plan, if such information would
be necessary to determine compliance with this Chapter.
(D) A plan for annexation under this Section shall bear the following note:
"The lot to be annexed, as shown hereon, shall be combined in a
common description with the lot to which such lot is joined."
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 704)
Section 705. Recording Plans. See Part 9. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994,
Section 705)
A03427
Part 8
Improvements Guarantees
Section 801. Guarantee of Improvements Installation Required.
(A) Before approving any subdivision or land development plan for
recording, the Board of Supervisors shall require that the Township be assured
(by means of a proper improvements agreement and performance guarantee)
that the improvements required by this Chapter and the improvements
appearing on the plan will be installed in strict accordance with the standards
and specifications of this Chapter.
(B) Purpose of Bond. The bond and other surety agreements shall
stand as security for compliance with all Township ordinances, other laws,
covenants, stipulations, conditions and rules applicable to the subdivision for
which it is filed.
(C) No construction of buildings or paving or sales of any individual
lot or condominium unit within a subdivision shall take place in any subdivision
unless there is on file, with the Township, a current duly executed performance
bond (and security escrow agreement if necessary), or unless all rough grading is
complete and all required public improvements, utilities, streets, drainage
facilities, sewers and street lights have been completed and accepted by the
Township Board of Supervisors.
(D) If a developer chooses to install all required improvements prior to
construction of any building, in place of using performance guarantees, the
Township shall, as deemed necessary, require the developer to have adequate
insurance, hold harmless agreements and an escrow account to cover the costs of
inspections.
(E) The developer shall provide a deed of dedication together with an
"as-built" plan of each such improvements.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 801)
Section 802. Improvements to be Provided by the Applicant.
(A) In all cases, the subdivider or land developer shall be responsible
for the installation of all improvements required by this Chapter.
A03427
(B) Inspections.
(1) The Township Engineer or the Township's designee shall
make such inspections of the required improvements at such intervals as
may be reasonably necessary to assure compliance with this Chapter.
(2) The reasonable costs of such inspection shall be borne by the
subdivider or land developer, and held in an escrow account.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 802)
Section 803. Development Agreement.
(A) Improvements Agreement Required.
(1) All applicants proposing any subdivision or land
development which provides for the installation of improvements
required by this Chapter or any improvements or amenities which appear
on the plan shall be required to enter into a legally binding improvements
agreement complete with performance guarantee with the Township prior
to final plan approval.
(2) The improvements agreement shall guarantee the
installation of said improvements in strict accordance with all Township
requirements.
(B) Terms of Improvements Agreement The improvements agreement
shall be in the manner and form approved by the Township Solicitor and it shall
consist of the following terms, where applicable:
(1) Construction.
(a) The construction depicted upon the approved plans
in itemized format.
(b) Construction of streets with related curbs, street signs,
drainage facilities and related improvements.
(c) Installation of utility lines.
(2) Improvements.
(a) A work schedule setting forth the beginning and
ending dates and such other details as the Township deems fit and
appropriate for the improvements covered by the improvements
agreement.
(b) An inspection schedule approved by the Township
Engineer.
(3) Performance Guarantee.
(a) The provision of a performance guarantee for
completion of required improvements which complies with §804.
(b) The estimated cost of the improvements, including a
detailed breakdown in a form acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors, and amount of the performance guarantee.
(c) All improvements subject to the improvements
agreement shall be approved according to the approved inspection
schedule and §804.
(4) Developer's Responsibilities for Damage to Other Property.
(a) Developer shall secure or maintain public liability
insurance for the duration of improvements construction. A copy
(or other evidence of coverage) shall be submitted to the Township.
(b)
liability.
A save harmless clause to protect the Township from
(c) Prevention of erosion, sedimentation and water
damage to the subject and adjacent properties.
(5)
easements.
Dedication of streets, transfer of water and sewer lines and
(6) After completion of all required improvements, the
developer shall provide the Township with a set of reproducible
completed improvement plans prepared by and certified by a professional
engineer or landscape surveyor of all streets, storm and sanitary sewers,
and water distribution facilities and street monuments and elevations.
XXVII-90
A03427
(7) The developer shall be responsible for all reasonable
engineering and legal costs and expenses for review, inspection,
consultations and preparation of agreements.
(8) Provisions for violation of the improvements agreement.
(9) Any other lawful terms which the Board of Supervisors may
require to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.
(10) Signatures. The development agreement shall be signed by
all landowners and/ or developers.
(C) Ownership of Land and Guarantee. A certificate of ownership in
the form of Section 1202 shall be executed in the exact name in which title is held.
If the developer(s) of a subdivision is someone other than the landowner(s) of the
subdivision, the developer shall also execute the affidavit given above, along
with a performance bond and security agreements.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 803)
Section 804. Performance Guarantee. The performance guarantee for
completion of required improvements shall meet the following requirements:
(A) Security.
(1) The guarantee shall be secured by the credit of any of the
following:
(a) An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit of a
Federal or State chartered lending institution.
(b) A restrictive or escrow account in a Federal or State
chartered lending institution.
(c) Such other financial security approved by the Board
of Supervisors (which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld).
(2) Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to
the public, the completion of any improvements which may be required
within one (1) year of the date fixed in the development schedule for the
completion of such improvements.
XXVII-91
A03427
(3) Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding
company or Federally issued or State chartered lending institution chosen
by the party posting the financial security, provided said bonding
company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business
within the State.
(4) The Board of Supervisors may require that evidence be
provided that such institution or company has sufficiently adequate and
secure assets to cover the security.
(5) The Township shall be an authorized signatory on any
account in which the escrow funds are held and all escrow funds from
sales of lots shall be paid directly to such fund, and a monthly statement
shall be furnished to the Township.
(B) Amount.
(1) The amount of financial security to be posted for the
completion of the required improvements shall be equal to one hundred
ten (110) percent of the cost of completion estimated as of ninety (90) days
following the date scheduled for completion by the developer in the
official development schedule, and within the process for increases to
cover inflation as permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.
(2) The cost of the improvements shall be established by an
estimate prepared by a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer,
(pursuant to the applicable revisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended).
(3) If the party posting the financial security requires more than
one (1) year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security shall be
increased by an additional ten (10) percent for each one (1) year period
beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to
an amount not exceeding one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of
completing the required improvements as reestablished on or about the
expiration of the preceding one (1) year period by using the above bidding
procedure.
(C) Multi-Year or Multi-Stage Development. In the case where
development is projected over a period of years, the Board of Supervisors may
XXVII-92
A03427
authorize submission of final plats by section or stages of development subject to
such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages
of development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally approved
section of the development.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 804)
Section 805. Approval of Improvements.
(A) In General. As the work of installing the required improvements
proceeds, the party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such
portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor(s)
performing the work.
(B) Notice of Completion. When the developer has completed an
improvement, the developer shall notify the Board of Supervisors in writing by
certified or registered mail of such completion and request for release and shall
send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer.
(C) Engineer's Report.
(1) Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such request, the
Township Engineer shall submit a written report certifying which
improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved
plan to the Board of Supervisors.
(2) This report shall be based on the inspections made according
to the approved inspection schedule included in the improvements
agreement and shall recommend approval or rejection of the
improvements, either in whole or in part.
(3) If the Engineer finds any or all of the improvements to be
not as required, he shall include a statement of the reasons for
recommending their rejection in the report.
(D) Release of Funds. See §510 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.
(E) Completion of Unapproved Improvements. The developer shall
proceed to complete any improvements not approved by the Board of
Supervisors and, upon completion, request approval in conformance with the
procedures specified in §805.
)0(VII-93
A03427
(F) Final Release.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall request final release in
conformance with the procedures specified in §805. See time limitations
and procedures in §510 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(2) A maintenance agreement must be in place before final
release.
(G) Appeal. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation
of the developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise,
any determination of the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 805)
Section 806. Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements.
(A) Enforcement of Security.
(1) In the event that any improvements which may be required
have not been installed as provided in this Chapter or in accord with the
approved final plan, or in the event of the bankruptcy of the owner or
developer, the Board of Supervisors is hereby granted the power to elect
to enforce any corporate bond (or other security) by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies.
(2) This may include taking all actions necessary to obtain
moneys under said bond including, but not limited to, seizure of
undeveloped lots, confession of judgment, suit on the bond, seizure of
escrow funds, revocation of building permits and prosecution under this
Chapter.
(3) Rate of Construction. Failure of a developer to construct
streets and other public improvements reasonably at the same time or
prior to the construction of the buildings served by those streets or public
improvements, and at the same rate in time at which buildings are
completed, shall be a violation of this Chapter and a cause for default.
(B) Completion by Township. If the proceeds of such bond or other
security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or
corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Board of
)03/II-94
A03427
Supervisors may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or part of
the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal or
equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of
the improvements.
(C) Proceeds for Installation of Improvements All of the proceeds,
whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought
against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the
improvements covered by such security, and not for any other Township
purpose.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 806)
Section 807. Maintenance Agreement.
(A) Maintenance Agreement Required.
(1) All applicants proposing any subdivision or land
development which provides for the dedication of improvements required
by this Chapter or any improvements or amenities which appear on the
plan shall be required to enter into a legally binding maintenance
agreement with the Township prior to acceptance of dedication by the
Township.
(2) The dedication of any improvement shall not be accepted by
the Township prior to the execution of a maintenance agreement and the
delivery of the maintenance guarantee.
(B) Terms of Maintenance Agreement.
(1) The maintenance agreement shall be in the manner and form
approved by the Township Solicitor.
(2) The maintenance agreement shall require the applicant to
make any repair or reconstruction of any improvement stipulated in the
maintenance agreement which is specified by the Board of Supervisors as
necessary by reason of faulty construction, workmanship or materials
prior to acceptance of such improvement by the Township.
(3) The maintenance agreement shall require the applicant to
maintain, at his/her own cost, all improvements stipulated in the
maintenance agreement. This period shall not exceed eighteen (18)
months from the date of acceptance or dedication by the Township, except
>O<V11-95
A03427
for any special purpose escrow or maintenance agreements required by
the Township.
(4) The maintenance agreement shall require the posting of
financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as
well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the
design and specifications as depicted on the final plat for a term not to
exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance of dedication.
(5) Snowplowing. It shall be the responsibility of the developer
to plow snow and maintain all streets until such time as the Township
may accept such streets.
(C) Public Utilities and Authorities. If water mains or sanitary sewer
lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed
under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public
utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial
security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal
authority and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise
required by this Section.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 807)
Section 808. Maintenance Guarantee.
(A) Security. The maintenance guarantee shall be secured by the credit
of any of the following:
(1) An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit of a Federal
or State chartered lending institution;
(2) A restrictive or escrow account in a Federal or State
chartered lending institution; or,
(3) Such other financial security approved by the Board
Supervisors (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld).
(B) Terms. Such maintenance guarantee shall be in the form approved
by the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors, payable to the Township, to
guarantee the maintenance and repair of the streets and other public
improvements in the subdivision for eighteen (18) months from the date of
acceptance thereof by the Township. The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction
)0W11-96
A03427
of the Board of Supervisors that there will be an acceptable system for the longterm
maintenance of any stormwater detention basins.
(C) Amount. The amount of the maintenance guarantee shall be
determined by the Township, but shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the
actual cost of installation of such improvements.
(D) Release After the expiration of eighteen (18) months from the date
of acceptance of said improvements, the Township shall release said
maintenance guarantee to the developer (or party posting said maintenance
guarantee) if all improvements are in satisfactory condition.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 808)
A03427
Part 9
Recording of Final Plan
Section 901. Recording of Final Plan.
(A) Deadline. The applicant is responsible to ensure that the final plan
as approved by the Board of Supervisors is recorded in the Office of the Recorder
of Deeds of the County within ninety (90) days of such final approval, unless an
extension has been granted in writing by the Board of Supervisors. The
applicant shall then send or deliver a receipt of the recording to the Township.
(B) At its option, the Township may agree to record a final plan, in
which case the applicant shall compensate the Township for all such cost.
(C) The final plan shall not be recorded without the required signatures
of Township officials, and the County Planning Commission staff, as applicable.
(D) The final plan shall not be recorded unless the applicant has met all
required conditions that the Township staff determine would impact the
recorded final plan.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 901)
Section 902. Record Plan. The applicant shall provide a copy of the approved
plan to serve as the record plan. This record plan shall be a clear and legible mylar and
one (1) paper print after recording, and shall be an exact copy of those portions of the
approved final plan that the Township requires to be recorded. Such record plan, at an
absolute minimum, shall include all of the following: street right-of-ways, easements,
lotlines, lot dimensions, common open space and covenants that the Township require
to be placed on the final plan. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 902)
Section 903. Effect of Recording.
(A) Official Map. If the Township has adopted or does adopt an official
map, any dedicated streets on the record plan shall be considered to be part of
that official map.
(B) Private Improvements. Every street, park or other improvement
shown on a subdivision or land development plan that is recorded, as provided
herein, shall be deemed to be a private street, open space or improvement until
such time it has been offered for dedication to the Township and accepted by
resolution or ordinance, and recorded, or it is condemned for a public purpose.
XXVII -98
A03427
(C) Dedication of Improvements. Streets, parks and other public
improvements shown on a subdivision or land development plan to be recorded
(1) May be offered for dedication to the Township by formal
notation thereof on the plan; or,
(2) The owner shall note on the plan that such improvements
have not been offered for dedication to the Township.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 903)
A03427
Part 10
Design Standards and Required Improvements
Section 1001. Application.
(A) Evaluating Plans. The design standards and improvements
required in this Part are the minimum requirements that the Planning
Commission and the Board of Supervisors shall apply in evaluating plans for any
proposed subdivision or land development.
(B) Additional Improvements. Additional or higher type
improvements may be required in specific cases when the Board of Supervisors
determines the improvements are clearly necessary to protect the public health
and safety.
(C) Modifications and Exceptions. See §107 of this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1001)
Section 1002. Required Improvements. The remainder of this Part sets forth the
design and construction standards for required improvements. These minimum
standards shall apply to any improvement, regardless of whether this Chapter requires
the improvement. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1002)
Section 1003. Overall Requirements.
(A) Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided
or developed.
(B) Hazardous Conditions. Land subject to hazardous conditions (such
as open quarries, limestone solution channels, unconsolidated fill, floods,
excessive erosion or unsafe water supply) shall not be subdivided until the
developer has provided adequate safeguards to overcome or eliminate the
hazards and until the Board Supervisors has approved the correction of the
hazardous condition. See the floodplain requirements of the Township Zoning
Ordinance.
(C) Comprehensive Plan. The subdivision or land development shall
be designed in consideration of any applicable provisions of the Township
Comprehensive Plan.
A03427
(D) Zoning. All aspects of a proposed subdivision or land
development shall conform to the Township Zoning Ordinance and all other
Township ordinances and specifications.
(E) Nearby Development. A subdivision or land development and its
street pattern shall be coordinated with existing or approved nearby
developments or neighborhoods to help develop the area harmoniously and to
help prevent conflicts between neighboring development.
(F) Safety. No subdivision or land development shall occur in such a
way that would significantly threaten the public health and safety, including
hazards of toxic substances, traffic hazards, explosive hazards and fire hazards.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1003)
Section 1004. Streets.
(A) Access to Proposed Subdivisions and Land Developments. All
proposed subdivisions and land developments shall have adequate and safe
access to the public street system.
(B) Streets and Topography. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the
contour of the land to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient. See
the steep slope regulations in Part 5 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(C) State and Federal Standards. All design elements of all streets,
including horizontal and vertical alignment, sight distance and superelevation
are subject to review and approval by the Township. When reviewing the design
of streets, in addition to the standards in this Chapter, the Rural or Urban Design
Criteria in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation "Design Manual Part
2, Highway Design," latest edition, and "A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets," AASHTO, latest revision, shall be consulted to assure
that the road design is in accordance with acceptable engineering practice.
(D) Street Continuations. Where deemed appropriate by the Board of
Supervisors, proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract
being subdivided to eventually provide for normal circulation of traffic within
the vicinity.
(E) Design Speeds. For certain aspects of vertical and horizontal
alignment discussed below, standards are determined by design speed of the
road involved. For all proposed streets the subdivider shall indicate the
proposed design speed. The designated design speed is subject to the approval
)0111-101
A03427
of the Township. Unless otherwise approved by the Township, minimum design
speeds shall be as follows:
(1) Arterial Streets - fifty-five (55) mph
(2) Minor Arterial Streets - fifty-five (55) mph
(3) Urban Collector Streets - forty (40) mph
(4) Rural Collector Streets - forty (40) mph
(5) Local Streets - thirty (30)' mph
'Design speeds for local streets may be reduced upon approval of the
Township Engineer when the average lot size is less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.
(F) General Standards.
(1) The location and width of all streets shall conform to the
official plans as may have been adopted by the Township and shall be
properly related to all existing streets, recorded streets and official plans.
(2) The proposed street system shall extend existing or recorded
streets at the same width as the existing or recorded streets if these streets
meet the standards of §1004(K). If the existing or recorded streets do not
meet the standards of §1004(K), the proposed street extensions will meet
those standards.
(3) New local streets shall be designed as to discourage through
traffic, but the subdivider shall give adequate consideration to provision
for the extension and continuation of collector streets into and from
adjoining properties when required by the Township. Local streets shall
be extended and continued into and from adjoining properties when
necessary for the proper development of traffic circulation in the
Township.
(4) If lots or parcels in the subdivision are large enough for
resubdivision, or if a portion of the subdivider's property is not proposed
to be subdivided but could be subdivided in the future, the Township
may require the reservation of land adequate to provide for future street
access to land which could be resubdivided or subdivided in the future
and require that the location of land reserved for future streets be
coordinated with the street system shown on the subdivision plan.
(G) Loop Roads.
(1) Where practical, local streets shall be designed as "loop
roads" so that all abutting lots shall have two (2) directions of access.
(2) In areas where site topography and/or tract configuration
prohibit the design of "loop local streets", under extraordinary
circumstances the Board of Supervisors may allow the use of cul-de-sac
streets. The number of such cul-de-sac streets within a subdivision shall
be limited to no more than is necessary to serve the areas having the
topographic or tract configuration constraints. All cul-de-sac streets shall
meet the design requirements of §1004(N).
(H) Partial and Half Street. New half and partial streets are prohibited.
(I) Intersections.
(1) The centerlines of streets shall intersect at right angles unless
existing conditions dictate otherwise. When said conditions exist, the
intersection shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, but not less than
seventy-five (75) degrees at intersections.
(2) Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one (1) point
shall be prohibited. Where streets intersect other streets, the intersecting
street shall either be aligned with any street intersecting on the other side
or be offset by the minimum distance stated in this subsection. This
minimum offset and the minimum distance between centerlines of parallel
or approximately parallel streets intersecting a cross street from opposite
directions shall be:
(a) One hundred fifty (150) feet along a local street.
(b) Four hundred (400) feet along a collector street.
(c) One thousand (1,000) feet along an arterial street.
(d) The distances of this subsection shall be measured
between the intersections of the center lines of the legal rights-ofway
of the streets. (See the following figures).
A03427
Al load if leat onto
At lActi 401:1' if confider street
Al least 1000' if Grimly( slit.
77)1r--- 657
STREET INTERSECTKIN STREET INTERSECTION
isiserVOTAP4 r Iretr,P4 ACCEPTABLE DESIGN
(3) At street intersections, the property line shall be rounded by
arcs with the radii listed below. For streets other than local streets, the
Township may require a larger radius.
Type of Street Minimum Radius of Arc at
Intersection of Cartway
Edge or Curb Line (in feet)
Minimum Radius of Arc at
Intersection of Rightof-
Way (in feet)
Arterial 40 30
Collector 30 20
Local 20 10
(J) Arterial and Collector Street Frontage. Where a subdivision or land
development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector street,
the Board of Supervisors shall require one (1) or more of the following methods
of layout and site design if it determines one (1) or more of these methods will be
reasonable, feasible and necessary to avoid increased traffic congestion and
improve traffic safety. The Board's decision to use one (1) or more of the
following methods will be based on the recommendations of the Planning
Commission, the Township Engineer, any comments from PennDOT and any
professional traffic studies that have been submitted.
(1) Provision of reverse frontage lots.
(2) Provision of service streets along the rear of the abutting
lots, together with prohibition of private driveways intersecting the
streets.
XXVII-104
(3) The minimization of the number and length of driveway
cuts or street intersections onto an arterial or collector street, which may
include requiring the use of shared driveways between adjacent uses or
lots.
(4) The restriction of ingress and egress involving left-hand
turns onto or off of the arterial or collector street.
(5) The prohibition of driveways from individual dwellings
entering directly onto an arterial or collector street. If there is no
alternative to this, each driveway entering onto an arterial or collector
street shall have adequate turn-around space for vehicles provided within
the lot so that vehicles do not back onto the street.
(6) See also §407 of the Township Zoning Ordinance, "Frontage
Development Along Arterial and Collector Streets."
cr C0110C or
UNACCEPTABLE DESIGN
(K) Street Design Standards.
111-111L
BUFF' R STRIP
Art errol O4 CO" "t"
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOrs
ACCEPTABLE DEM ON
(1) Minimum street design standards shall be as shown in Table
10.1., unless PennDOT establishes a more restrictive requirement.
A03427
TABLE 10.1
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
(All Dimensions in Feet Unless Specified)
Design Specification Type of Street
Arterial Minor
Arterial
Collector
Urban Rural
Local
Right-of-Way Widths S4 60 60 60 53
Cartway Width' (plus
turning lanes as determined
to be needed by
the Board of Supervisors
or PennDot
64 40 40 40 33
Acceleration/Declaration
Lane Width (where
determined to be needed
by the Board of Supervisors
or PennDOT)
10 10 NA NA MA
Minimum Sight Distance2 550 550 375 375 200
Minimum Tangent Between
Reverse Curves3
220 200 100 100 100
Minimum Centerline Radii
for Horizontal Curves
400' 400. 300 300 150
Maximum Grade" 5% 5% 6% 8% 10%
Design Speed (mph) 55 55 40 40 30-
'Additional widths may be required by the Board of Supervisors, after considering
the advice of the Township Engineer, for the purpose of promoting the public safety
and convenience and for providing the proposed traffic volumes.
2Horizontal sight distances shall be measured from a point 3.5 feet above the road
surface to a point 6 inches above the road surface, and shall be based upon standards of
the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
the specified sight distance shall be provided at all horizontal, sag vertical and crest
vertical curves.
3A11 tangents shall be measured along the street centerline.
*Larger radii may be required as determined by the Township Engineer.
-Minimum grades for all streets shall be 1.0 percent, unless the Township Engineer
determines that a lesser grade acceptable.
-Design speeds for local streets may be reduced upon approval of the Township
Engineer when average lot size is less than 10,000 square feet.
)0(V11-106
(2) Horizontal curves shall connect street lines that are deflected
in excess of two (2) degrees.
(3) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding
one (1) percent. The length of the vertical curve shall be determined by
the required site distance specified in Table 10.1.
(4) All approaches to an intersection of two (2) or more streets
shall have a leveling area not greater than five (5) percent grade for a
distance of fifty (50) feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of
the intersecting street.
(5)
percent.
The minimum grade of any street gutter shall be one (1)
(6) A minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet, measured
from edge of cartway, shall be required between a curve and a street
intersection where one (1) of the intersecting streets is a collector or an
arterial street.
(7) Combinations of the minimum radius and the maximum
grade shall be avoided.
(L) Easements. Easements shall be provided adjacent to street rightsof-
way, tract boundaries and lot lines and other required areas according to the
following standards:
(1) Drainage or domestic water easements shall be provided as
indicated and required by the plans. The minimum width of easement
shall be twenty (20) feet (which might include ten (10) feet on each side of
abutting lots within a subdivision) with an additional width of 10 feet for
each additional utility. A separate twenty (20) foot wide easement shall be
provided for sanitary sewer lines, or as is required by the sewer authority.
(2) A minimum separation distance of ten (10) feet shall be
provided between any sanitary sewer and any other utility or storm
sewer. The centerline of any sanitary or storm sewer shall be a minimum
of ten (10) feet from the edge of any utility easement.
(M) Sight lines at Intersections of Streets.
(1) A triangular area, as defined by this subsection, shall be
graded and shall be free of sight obstructions so that vision of the
intersecting streets is not obscured.
(2) A sight distance easement, a deed restriction, lease
restriction or plan notation (whichever method is applicable), shall be
used to prohibit vegetation and the construction of a fence or wall within
the triangular area defined by this subsection.
(3) Such triangular area shall be bounded by the intersecting
street centerlines and a diagonal connecting two (2) points. These points
are a distance from each end of the centerline of each street of:
(a) One hundred fifty (150) feet from the intersection of
such street centerlines along one (1) or more arterial streets.
(b) One hundred (100) feet from the intersection of such
street centerlines along one (1) or more collector streets.
(c) Seventy-five (75) feet from the intersection of such
street centerlines, along one (1) or more local streets.
(4) If determined by the Township Engineer to be necessary for
traffic safety, the Planning Commission may require that driveways or
new street intersections of a subdivision or land development entering
onto a Township street meet the same PennDOT standards that would
apply as if such street would be State-owned.
(N) Cul-de-Sac Streets.
(1) The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the
edge of the cartway of an intersecting street to the center of the bulb of the
cul-de-sac. The minimum length of a cul-de-sac shall be two hundred fifty
A03427
(250) feet. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be as listed in the
following table:
Minimum Lot Width Maximum Cul-de-Sac Length
Greater than or equal to 200 feet 1,300 feet
150 feet to 199 feet 1,000 feet
100 feet to 149 feet 750 feet
Less than 100 feet 500 feet
*as defined by the then applicable zoning ordinance of the Township or the actual lot
width as shown on the subdivision plan.
(2) Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with a turn-around
having a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet to the outside curb and sixty
(60) feet to the right-of-way line. The circular right-of-way of the cul-desac
shall be connected to the approach right-of-way by a transition arc
having a radius of not less than sixty-five (65) feet. The circular paving of
the cul-de-sac shall be connected to the approach paving by a transition
arc having a radius of not less than seventy-five (75) feet (see the figure
below).
(3) The Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, may permit acceptable alternative turn-around
designs, including a turn-around of acceptable radii incorporated into a
parking court or a landscaped island (with an acceptable system for
maintenance) within a cul-de-sac.
(4) No street, whether designed to be permanent or temporary,
shall include a dead end without an approved turn-around at the end of
the street. Temporary stub streets resulting from the phasing of a
development shall include at least a temporary cul-de-sac conforming to
the dimensional requirements of this Section. The temporary turn-around
shall be constructed with a paved surface acceptable to the Township
Engineer. The Township will not accept the dedication of temporary stub
streets. No lots shall be developed along the transition arcs or the turnaround
of a temporary cul-de-sac street.
A03427
(5)
percent.
15.14 101941MUM
SSTI MINIMUM
The maximum grade across the turn-around shall be five (5)
(6) The maximum centerline profile grade of any cul-de-sac
shall be eight (8).
(7) On-street parking within a turn-around shall be prohibited.
(8) A maximum of twenty (20) residential lots shall be
permitted on any cul-de-sac street.
(0) Maintenance. As a condition for final plan approval, the developer
must enter into a legally binding agreement which shall state who is to be
responsible for the improvement and maintenance of any street not offered for
dedication. If an association of lot owners is to be made responsible, such
association must be legally organized prior to plan approval by an agreement
approved by the Township.
(P) Street Design and Construction Standards.
(1) Streets shall be graded, improved and surfaced to the grades
and dimensions shown on plans, profiles and cross-sections submitted by
the developer that meet applicable Township standards. All subdivisions
and land developments shall comply with the Township's "Standard
Specifications for Developers," as amended, or its successor standards.
(2) Right-of-Way Grading.
(a) The entire right-of-way shall be graded to the
approved cross-section. All trees, stumps and other material
deemed unsuitable by the Township Engineer shall be removed.
The excavation shall be backfilled and suitably compacted to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
(b) The finished street surface shall be crowned in
conformance with the Township street and improvement
specifications.
(c) A proper super-elevation (banked curves) shall be
provided on arterial and collector streets when required by the
Township Engineer.
(3) Grading Beyond Right-of-Way.
(a) The subdivider or developer may be required to
grade beyond the right-of-way line in order to provide continuous
slope from the right-of-way line to the proposed elevation of the
abutting property.
(b) Such grading beyond the right-of-way shall maintain
the original conditions of slope and contours except where
stormwater runoff designs dictate or warrant improvement or
alteration of the original slope and contours.
(c) Approved plans, either preliminary or final, showing
proposed grading, shall be a covenant running with the land,
unless altered by written permission from the Board of Supervisors
in conjunction with the County Conservation District.
(d) In areas of earth excavation or earth fill, such grading
shall be done to a maximum slope of one (1) foot vertical to three
(3) feet horizontal.
(e) In no case shall the required street grading extend
onto an adjoining property owned by someone else, unless the
other adjoining property owner gives a written agreement to the
developer to do so.
(4) Trench Excavation. All trenches excavated within the
cartway of an existing or proposed public street or right-of-way shall be
mechanically compacted with backfill acceptable to the Township
Engineer or be stone backfilled if the cartway is to be paved in the same
construction season.
(5) Drainage of streets shall comply with §1007 of this Part.
A03427
(6) Street Construction Standards. See the Township's standard
specifications for developers for streets.
(7) Alternative Designs. Alternative road bed designs may be
prepared and will be considered. The alternate design must provide load
capabilities equivalent to or higher than the capabilities of the designs set
forth above. Alternate designs will be reviewed on the basis of design
recommendations of the appropriate trade association and be subject to
the approval of the Board of Supervisors, based upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer.
(Q) Private Streets. Any private street or accessway that will
eventually serve traffic from three (3) or more residential lots or two (2) or more
industrial, commercial and or institutional lots shall be designed and constructed
to Township construction standards, including the provision of a street right-ofway.
These requirements may be waived or reduced by the Board of
Supervisors, based upon advice by the Township Engineer, for accessways
through parking courts to be maintained by the owner of a rental development
or a homeowner/property-owner association.
(R) Required Traffic Improvements.
(1) If there is a reasonable relationship between the need for an
"on-site improvement"* of a street (including but not limited to a new or
upgraded traffic signal or land dedication to improve an abutting
intersection or the re-alignment of an abutting curve in a street or
widening of the abutting cartway or right-of-way), and a proposed
subdivision or land development, the subdivision or land development
shall be required to fund its fair share of the cost of such improvement
and /or dedicate sufficient right-of-way, when permitted by applicable
law.
An "on-site improvement" of a street shall be defined as follows, unless
this definition is amended by State law: "all street improvements
constructed on the applicant's property, or the improvements constructed
on the property abutting the applicant's property that are necessary for
the ingress and egress to the applicant's property."
(2) An applicant for any land development or major subdivision
shall be required to widen the cartway and any shoulders of abutting
streets to Township standards (see Table 10.1 "Design Standards for
Streets"), from the centerline of the street right-of-way inward towards the
project's lot lines, unless:
XXVII-112
A03427
(a) The Board of Supervisors, based upon review of the
Planning Commission and Township Engineer, determines that
such widening is not needed or that a lesser improvement is
sufficient.
(b) PennDOT specifically refuses in writing to allow such
improvement to a State street in the foreseeable future.
(3) In place of funding the improvement at the time of final
approval, the Township may enter into an agreement to allow the
developer to accomplish the improvement or allow the improvement to be
funded in stages in relationship to the stages of the development or
require the funds to be placed in escrow until such time as sufficient funds
are available for a more comprehensive improvement. Any such funds
received under this Section shall be accounted for separately and emain
committed to traffic improvements.
(S) Bus Stops.
(1) The developer of any residential land developments or
subdivisions that involve fifteen (15) or more dwelling units shall contact
the School District prior to submitting final plans to establish an
acceptable and safe location for a school bus stop.
(2) The Planning Commission may require the developer of any
major subdivision or land development to contact the local public
transportation agency to seek an appropriate location for a public bus
stop.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1004)
Section 1005. Lots.
(A) Lots shall conform to the applicable minimum lot sizes, lot widths,
setback and all other requirements as set forth in the Township Zoning
Ordinance.
(B) All lots shall front on a public or private street improved to meet
Township standards or for which such improvements have been insured by the
posting of an acceptable performance guarantee under this Chapter.
A03427
(C) The depth-to-width ratio of a lot shall generally not be greater than
two and one-half (2.5) to one (1) or less than one (1) to one (1), unless otherwise
permitted by the Board of Supervisors.
(D) Side lines of lots shall abut and be approximately at right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines to curved streets, unless otherwise permitted
by the Board of Supervisors. Pointed or very irregularly shaped lots shall be
avoided.
(E) Lots.
(1) Double frontage lots shall ordinarily not be created except as
needed to avoid direct vehicular access onto an arterial or collector street
by individual driveways.
(2) On any residential lot that includes a rear yard directly
abutting onto a collector or arterial street or expressway, such rear yard
shall include a ten (10) feet deep planting strip along the back of the lot,
outside of right-of-way with access across this strip clearly prohibited on
notes on any approved plan (see Figure below). This planting strip shall
include evergreen plantings meeting the requirements of §405(I) of the
Township Zoning Ordinance. Any fencing in the rear of such lots shall be
placed on the inside of such plantings. Such plantings shall be placed so
that they do not obstruct safe sight distance.
1 t
if I Art 0 a Coll dtol
WINAIIM0110MEMI.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS
(3) If any remnants of land (other than rights-of-way) would
exist after subdividing, those remnants shall be incorporated into existing
or proposed lots.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1005)
A03427
Section 1006. Open Space and Recreation Areas and Fees.
(A) Intent.
(1) To provide adequate open spaces, recreational lands and
recreational facilities to serve new residents of new developments, for
both active and passive recreation.
(2) To recognize and work to carry out the officially adopted
Spring Township "Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan."
(3) To recognize the rationale for these common open space and
fee-in-lieu of land requirements, as described in a June 12, 1990,
memorandum to the Township from the Township's professional
recreation planning consultants.
(B) Applicability.
(1) This subsection shall apply to any subdivision or land
development for which a preliminary plan or a combined
preliminary/final plan is submitted after the enactment date of this
amendment.
(2) This subsection shall not apply to plans that the Board of
Supervisors determines only involve clearly minor adjustments or
corrections to an approved preliminary plan or clearly minor adjustments
or corrections to a preliminary plan that was before the Township for
consideration at the date of the adoption of this amendment.
(C) Limitations on Use of Fees.
(1) Any fees collected under this subsection shall be placed
within an interest-bearing account and shall be accounted for separately
from other Township funds.
(2) To ensure that the lands and facilities are accessible to the
residents and employees of the developments that paid fees towards their
cost, the attached "Recreation Fee District Map" (Section 1204 hereof)
designates two (2) overlapping "Recreation Fee Districts." These districts
are the "Northern Recreation Fee District" and the "Southern Recreation
Fee District." Any such fees collected under this Section shall only be
expended within the same recreation fee district as the subdivision or land
development that contributed the fees.
XXVII -115
A03427
(3) Such fees shall only be used for the following: acquisition of
public open space, development of public recreational facilities,
landscaping of public open space and closely related engineering and
design work.
(4) Unless the Township identifies fees for a particular set of
facilities or particular recreation area, then the fees shall be used for the
further development of the Cacoosing Creek Recreation Area as a
generally centrally located recreation area providing programs and
facilities for the entire Township.
(D) Land Dedication. Any subdivision or land development regulated
under this Section shall be required to dedicate the specified amount of common
open space, unless the Board of Supervisors determines that such land in that
location would not serve a valid public purpose, in which case recreation fees-inlieu
of land shall be required.
(1) Generally, it is the intent of this subsection that
developments of five or fewer dwelling units that do not include land that
is adjacent to existing publicly-owned land shall be required to pay a
recreation and open space fee in lieu of dedicating land. However, if the
applicant does not agree to pay such fees, then land shall be required to be
dedicated.
(2) The land and fee requirements of this subsection shall be
based upon the number of new dwelling units that would be permitted on
the lots of a subdivision or land development after approval.
(3) Prime Open Space. For the purposes of this subsection, the
term "prime open space" shall mean land proposed to be dedicated as
common open space that would meet all of the following standards:
(a) Less than six (6) percent slope.
(b)
regulations.
Not a "wetland" under Federal and/or State
(c) Be part of a contiguous tract of at least two (2) acres
(which may include existing adjacent common open space).
(d) Not be within the "one hundred (100) year floodplain"
as defined by official floodplain maps of the Township.
A03427
(4) Amount of Common Open Space. A subdivision or land
development shall be required to dedicate the following amounts of
common open space for each permitted new dwelling unit, unless the
governing body determines that recreation fees in lieu of the open space
would be more in the public interest.
Percentage of the Total Required Common Minimum Required Common Open
Open Space that Would Meet the Definition Space Per Permitted Dwelling
of "Prime Open Space": Unit
0% to 39.9% 1,280 square feet
40% to 74.9% 1,175 square feet
75% to 100% 1,070 square feet
(E) Fees for Residential Development. If the governing body
determines that a land dedication within a proposed subdivision or land
development would not be in the public interest, the applicant shall be required
to pay fees-in-lieu of dedicating open space. This fee shall be one thousand two
hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per permitted dwelling unit, or as set by resolution,
from time to time, by the governing body.
(F) Fees for Business Development.
(1) Intent. To recognize that the development of employers in
the Township creates significant demand for local recreational facilities,
such as athletic fields, volleyball courts and picnic areas.
(2) Any new business subdivision or land development shall be
required to pay a recreation fee of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) for each acre within such subdivision or land development that
is intended for new business uses. This amount of the fee may be
amended by resolution, from time to time, by the governing body.
(3) The fee shall be based upon the nearest one-quarter (1/4)
acre. (For example, if a fee of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) per acre is currently in place, a two and one-quarter (2.25) acre
business use would pay a fee of three thousand three hundred seventyfive
dollars ($3,375.00). No fee shall be required for business subdivisions
or land developments involving less than one-quarter (1/4) acre of land
for new business uses.
A03427
(4) See possible modifications of fees in §1007(K).
(G) Decision on Land vs. Fees. The Board of Supervisors shall
determine whether a land dedication or the payment of fees shall be required.
This determination should, but is not required to, be made at the time of sketch
plan review. The Township should, at a minimum, consider the following in this
decision:
(1) Whether the land in that location would serve a valid public
purpose.
(2) Whether there is potential to make a desirable addition to an
existing recreation area.
(3) Whether the proposed land would meet the objectives and
requirements of this Section.
(4) Whether the area surrounding the proposed development
has sufficient existing recreation and open space land, and whether it is
possible for pedestrians and bicyclists to reach those lands.
(5) Any recommendations that may be received from the
Planning Commission, the Township Engineer, the local School Board or
School District staff and the Township Parks and Recreation Board.
(6) Any relevant policies of the Township Parks, Recreation and
Open Space Plan.
(H) Land to be Dedicated.
(1) Land required to be dedicated shall be suitable for its
intended purpose, in the determination of the Board of Supervisors. The
applicant shall state what improvements, if any, that he/she intends to
make to the land to make it suitable for its intended purpose, such as
grading, landscaping or development of trails. Such land shall be free of
construction debris at the time of dedication.
(2) Required common open space shall be dedicated to the
Township, unless the Board of Supervisors agrees to accept a dedication
to any of the following: the Wilson School District, Berks County, a
homeowner association or an environmental organization acceptable to
the Board of Supervisors. In the case of a rental development, the
Township may permit the common open space be retained by the owner
of the adjacent residential buildings.
(3) If required common open space is to the owned by a
homeowner association, the developer shall be required to establish such
association in a form that requires all property-owners with the
development to annually contribute to the maintenance of the common
open space. Any homeowner association agreements regarding required
common open space shall be subject to acceptance by the Board of
Supervisors, based upon review by the Township Solicitor. The
provisions of §703(F) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
should serve as a model for such agreement.
(4) Any required common open space dedication shall include
deed restrictions to permanently prevent its development for buildings,
except buildings for noncommercial recreation or to support maintenance
of the land.
(5) Priority shall be given to dedication of land that would be
suitable for:
(a) A new community park in the south-central portion
of the Township.
(b) Preserving woods, steep slopes or other important
natural features or land along a creek.
(c) Adding needed land onto an existing public
recreation area.
(6) Land that is not suitable for active or passive recreation shall
not be accepted as part of a required dedication, including areas within a
stormwater detention basin that could not serve recreation purposes.
Portions intended for active recreation shall be well-drained, of less than
six (6) percent average slope and not require filling in of a wetland for use.
(7) Common open space within a subdivision or land
development shall be contiguous, except as may be specifically exempted
by the Board of Supervisors, and shall have adequate access for
maintenance and for pedestrians.
A03427
(8) Other Ordinances. Any required land dedication under this
subsection shall be in addition to any land dedication or improvement
requirements of any other Township ordinance or resolution.
(9) Lands Close to Buildings.
(a) For the purposes of this subsection, no land shall be
used to meet the minimum common open space requirements of
this Section if such land is within:
(1) Fifteen (15) feet of any building.
(2) Within fifteen (15) feet of a parking area of
more than six (6) parking spaces (other than parking
areas specifically developed to serve the open space).
(b) This specifically includes, but is not limited to, open
space surrounding buildings in a development of apartments or
townhouses.
(10) Residual Lands. If only a portion of a larger tract of land is
currently proposed to be subdivided, or the applicant owns one (1) or
more adjacent tracts that are not currently proposed to be subdivided, the
applicant shall provide a sketch of a possible future land dedication on
these adjacent lands in case they would be developed in the future.
(11) Coordination With Future Adjacent Dedication. The Board
of Supervisors may require that a required land dedication within a
property currently being subdivided be placed along an edge of the
property so that it may, in the future, be combined with an open space
dedication on the edge of an adjoining property when that adjoining
property is subdivided or developed.
(I) Combination of Land and Fees. Upon mutual agreement of the
Board of Supervisors and the applicant, the Township may accept a combination
of common open space and fees-in-lieu of land to meet the requirements of this
Section for a residential subdivision or land development. This combination
shall be based upon the common open space requirement applying for a certain
number of dwelling units and the fee-in-lieu of land requirement applying for
the remaining number of dwelling units.
(J) Timing of Fees. Fees required under this subsection shall be paid
prior to the recording of the final plan, except as follows:
XXVII-120
A03427
(1) If the required fee would be greater than five thousand
dollars ($5,000), and the applicant and the Township mutually agree to
provisions in a binding development agreement to require the payment of
all applicable recreation fees prior to the issuance of any building permits
within each clearly defined phase of the development, then the fees are
not required to be paid prior to recording of the final plan but may instead
be paid within the requirements of that development agreement.
(2) If the applicant agrees to pay such fees in installments, then
all such fees shall not be considered to be "paid" for the purposes of any
applicable time limitations for utilization under the State Planning Code
until all such fees are paid in full, including all installments and phases.
(K) Fee Modification Process.
(1) An applicant may seek modification of the required amount
of a recreation fee under this Section, following the "Modifications/
Exceptions" procedures of §107 of this Chapter. In such case, the full
burden of proof, based upon relevant data and qualified professional
testimony, shall be upon the applicant to clearly prove to the satisfaction
of the Board of Supervisors that the required fees under this subsection
would:
(a) For a residential development, be disproportionate
compared to the current market value of the common open space
that would otherwise be required to be dedicated.
(b) For a business development, would be
disproportionate compared to the amount of impact on recreation
facilities and common open spaces that the employees of the
development would have upon the Township.
(2) An applicant may also seek a modification of the
requirements of this subsection under the procedures of §107 by offering
to construct substantial permanent recreation facilities within the
proposed subdivision or land development or on adjacent public open
space that the applicant clearly proves to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors will substantially meet the recreation needs of the residents
and/ or employees, as applicable, of the development.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1006; as amended by No. Ordinance 265, July
13, 1998, Section 1; as further amended by Ordinance No. 286, August 26, 2002, Sections
1-3)
XXVII-121
A03427
Section 1007. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control.
(A) The management of stormwater on the site, both during and upon
completion of the disturbances associated with the proposed subdivision or land
development, shall be accomplished in accordance with the standards and
criteria of this Section.
(1) The design of any temporary or permanent facilities and
structures and the utilization of any natural drainage systems shall be in
full compliance with these terms and the interpretations of the Township.
(2) At the time of application for a building permit for any
approved lot created by a subdivision under terms of this Chapter,
issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon adherence to the terms of
this Section.
(B) In order to prevent accelerated erosion and resulting
sedimentation, land disturbance activities relating to an approved subdivision or
land development shall be conducted following methods approved by the
County Conservation District. Such measures shall conform with the following
principles:
(1) There shall be no increase in discharge of sediment or other
solid materials from the site as a result of stormwater runoff.
(2) Erosion and sedimentation devices such as temporary
vegetation/mulch, temporary detention basins, diversion terraces, silt
barrier fences, rock filter berms or hay bales (in areas of minimum flows)
appropriate to the scale of operations shall be installed concurrent with
earthmoving activities and whenever a situation is created which would
contribute to increased erosion.
(3) No earthmoving or stripping of vegetation will be
conducted in areas of greater than thirty-three (33) percent slope unless
specific approval is obtained from the Board of Supervisors upon
recommendation of the Township Engineer.
(4) Earthmoving and the addition of fill shall be maintained
where possible and practicable to preserve desirable natural features and
the topography of the site. Changes in grade and topography and other
earthmoving shall be in accordance with the storm and surface drainage
plan prepared by the applicant and approved by the Board of Supervisors
in accordance with this Section, based upon review by the Township
Engineer.
(5) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development
shall be done in such a way that will minimize erosion.
(6) To the maximum extent practicable, mature healthy trees of
at least six (6) inches trunk width measured three (3) feet above the
average surrounding ground level shall be retained and protected. Such
trees shall not be removed except as provided on the approved
subdivision or land development plan. The filling of soil over the roots of
trees to be preserved is prohibited. (The roots are presumed to extend out
from the tree as far as the tree's branches extent outward.)
(7) Land disturbance shall be limited to the actual construction
site and an access strip. The amount of disturbed area and the duration of
exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum.
(8) The permanent (final) vegetative and structural erosion
control and drainage measures shall be installed as directed by the
Township.
(9) Sediment in runoff water shall be trapped and removed
through means approved by the Township Engineer to assure adequate
capacity in the basins or traps.
(10) Procedures for protecting soils or geologic structures with
water supply potential from contamination by surface water or other
disruption by construction activity shall be established in consultation
with the Township and such areas shall include, at minimum, those
underlain by carbonate limestone formations. The Township may require
pollution control facilities to be provided on existing and proposed
stormwater management systems within or adjacent to the project site.
(11) Provisions for protecting existing wells or other water
supplies shall be established.
(12) Graded slopes shall not be steeper than three (3) horizontal
units to one (1) vertical unit.
(13) A minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil shall be provided on
all disturbed areas prior to final seeding and mulching.
A03427
(14) Sediment and erosion control facilities shall be designed
according to applicable governmental standards, specifically the
following:
(a) DEP sediment and erosion plan requirements in
Chapter 102, Title 25 [Pa.Code].
(b) County Conservation District standards, which has
been delegated by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection to enforce the erosion and sediment control plan.
(c) It shall be the responsibility of the land developer to
submit the application and other necessary material to the County
Conservation District. Comments shall be received and compliance
therewith accomplished prior to final plan approval.
(C) All stormwater management plans and calculations shall include a
detailed, site-specific narrative which contains, as a minimum, the following
information:
(1) A general description of the project.
(2) A description of any storm drainage problems within,
adjacent to or downstream of the project site.
(3) A description of the overall stormwater management
system.
(4) A description of all design assumptions, calculation
methods, computer models, etc.
(5) A summary comparing peak rates of runoff at all points of
discharge from the site for the predevelopment, construction phase and
post development conditions.
(6) A detailed description of the staging of earthmoving
activities, and accelerated erosion and sedimentation control measures.
(7) A description of the proposed maintenance of the temporary
erosion and sedimentation control measures during construction.
(D) All subdivision and land development activities involving an
increase in impervious cover, a diversion of stormwater runoff crossing or
)0W11-124
A03427
leaving the site, or an alteration to the existing groundcover, shall be conducted
in conformance with the following performance standards:
(1) All plans and designs for stormwater management facilities
shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer. Plans for facilities other
than storm sewers shall determine stormwater peak discharge and runoff
by the use of the Soil Cover Complex Method as set forth in Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55, with specific
attention given to antecedent moisture conditions, flood routing and peak
discharge specifications included therein, and "Hydrology National
Engineering Handbook" Section 4, both by the Soil Conservation Service.
The Rational Method, in accordance with the provisions of §1007(D)(8),
may be used for the design of detention facilities with drainage areas of
one hundred (100) acres or less.
(2) Unless otherwise specified, peak discharge rates from the
site during the construction phase and in the post development condition
shall not exceed the predevelopment peak discharge rate from a two (2)
year, twenty-four (24) hour storm of three and one tenth (3.1) inches of
rainfall for all storms up to a ten (10) year, twenty- four (24) hour storm of
four and nine tenths (4.9) inches of rainfall. Peak discharges for any
storms of greater than 10-year frequency up to and including a one
hundred (100) year storm shall not exceed the peak discharges from the
site of such storms before development including:
(a) A twenty-five (25) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm
of five and five tenths (5.5) inches of rainfall;
(b) A fifty (50) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm of six
and one tenth (6.1) inches of rainfall; and,
(c) A one hundred (100) year, twenty-four (24) hour
storm of six and nine tenth (6.9) inches of rainfall.
(3) In establishing the antecedent conditions for calculating
runoff prior to development, the following assumptions shall apply:
(a) Woodland shall be used as the prior condition for
those portions of the watershed [with] trees of greater than six (6)
inches DBH or where such trees existed within eighteen (18)
months of application.
(b) Meadow shall be used for all other areas, including
areas which are presently covered by impervious surfaces.
(c) Average antecedent moisture conditions.
(d) A Type II distribution storm.
(4) Post-development and construction phase runoff
hydrographs shall be routed through the proposed storage facilities
(detention and retention basin(s), underground facilities, temporary
construction phase facilities, etc.) using storage-indication procedures to
ensure that the facility discharge does not exceed the allowable discharge.
Allowable discharge shall be determined by subtracting the flows
bypassing the storage facility from the predevelopment runoff flow.
(5) During the construction progression of a project, the
discharge of stormwater runoff from the site may follow distinct patterns
that will be altered during the course of the construction. In such an
event, the comparison of the construction phase discharge rate to the
predevelopment rate shall be performed for each separate and distinct
pattern. At no time throughout the construction phase of a project shall
the peak discharge rate discharging from any location along the boundary
of a site exceed the predevelopment peak discharge rate at that location.
(6) Where applicable, construction phase and post-development
time of concentration to a storage facility shall be the time of concentration
in the storm sewer to its point of discharge into the storage facility.
Overland flow from the discharge point to the outlet structure shall not be
included in the time of concentration.
(7) When designing regional storage facilities for office parks,
industrial parks, etc., the following design criteria shall be followed:
(a) Assumed impervious, lawn, etc., coverage areas shall
be noted in the calculations for each lot which will drain to the
basin. Impervious coverage shall be assumed to be the maximum
coverage allowed by the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) A six (6.0) minute time of concentration shall be used
to calculate the post-development basin inflow hydrographs (five
(5.0) minutes for rational method). Longer times of concentration
shall be allowed only where significant portions of the drainage
area will remain undeveloped or where it can be demonstrated that
XXVII-126
A03427
the longer times will occur even after the full potential
development.
(c) For lots which will have on lot detention or retention
basins, the following criteria shall also apply:
i) The predevelopment time of concentration for
the lot shall be the same as the predevelopment time of
concentration for the entire predevelopment drainage area in
which it is located.
ii) The required predevelopment time of
concentration and SCS curve number shall be noted on the
recorded plan.
(8) The Rational Method may be used in lieu of the Soil Cover
Complex Method to compute design flows for the sizing of storm sewers,
inlets and swales.
(a) The following runoff coefficients shall be used for
calculating runoff using the Rational Method:
RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS FOR THE RATIONAL METHOD*
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP AND SLOPE RANGE
A B C D
Land Use 0-6% 6%+ 0-6% 6%+ 0-6% 6%+ 0- 6%+
6%
Cultivated Lane 0.25a 0.35 0.30 0.40 0.35 0.45 0.40 0.50
0.30b 0.40 0.35 0.45 0.40 0.50 0.50 0.60
Meadow 0.10 0.13 0.13 0.19 0.16 0.23 0.19 0.26
0.14 0.16 0.16 0.22 0.20 0.26 0.23 0.30
Forest 0.08 0.11 0.11 0.14 0.13 0.16 0.16 0.20
0.11 0.14 0.14 0.18 0.16 0.20 0.20 0.25
Open Space (Lawn) 0.10 0.14 0.15 0.19 0.20 0.24 0.25 0.28
0.16 0.20 0.20 0.25 0.25 0.30 0.30 0.35
Bare Earth During 0.40 0.45 0.45 0.50 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65
Construction 050 0.55 0.55 0.60 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75
Impervious Surfaces 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95
*Higher coefficients may be required by the Township due to local soil conditions.
a Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals less than 25 years.
b Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals of 25 years or more.
XXVII-127
A03427
(b) Time of concentration calculations shall be submitted
based upon current design methods outlined in SCS Technical
Release No. 55, latest edition. The sheet and shallow concentrated
flow lengths used in the calculations shall be justified based on
existing or proposed topography. The time of concentration flow
paths (predevelopment, construction phase and post-development)
shall be shown on the grading plan, and shall be representative of
the drainage area. The pre- development sheet flow length shall be
one hundred fifty (150) feet, unless a shorter length can be justified.
The maximum construction phase and post- development sheet
flow length for unpaved surfaces shall be one hundred (100) feet
for most situations (one hundred fifty (150) feet for areas which will
remain undisturbed). Use of maximum flow lengths shall be
justified, and all flow lengths are subject to approval by the
Township.
(c) Rainfall intensities shall be based upon the current
PennDOT Storm Intensity-Duration-Frequency chart for Region 4.
(9) All plans for erosion and sedimentation and stormwater
management shall conform to the plan content requirements of
Pennsylvania DEP's "Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual."
(E) Storm sewers, culverts, bridges and related installations shall be
provided:
(1) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses. Such
flow may be redirected as required, subject to the approval of DEP.
(2) To insure adequate drainage of all low points along the line
of streets.
(3) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained, and to
prevent substantial flow of water across intersections or flooded
intersections during the design storm required by §1007(F)(3)(c).
(4) To insure adequate and unimpeded flow of stormwater
under driveways in, near or across natural watercourses or drainage
swales. Suitable pipes or other waterway openings shall be provided as
necessary.
XXVII-128
(F) Design of storm sewers and related installations:
(1) Storm sewers, as required, shall be placed under or
immediately in front of the curb, when parallel to the street within the
right-of-way. Generally, locating storm sewers under curbs in curves or at
street intersections shall be prohibited. When located in undedicated
land, they shall be placed within an easement not less than twenty (20)
feet wide as approved by the Township Engineer.
(a) Open ditches will not be permitted but properly
designed, graded and turfed drainage swales shall be permitted in
lieu of storm sewers in commercial and industrial areas and, where
approved by the Township Engineer, in residential areas. Swales
shall be located within an easement not less than twenty (20) feet
wide, but of sufficient width to allow access for maintenance.
(b) Such swales shall be designed not only to carry the
required discharge without excessive erosion, but also to increase
the time of concentration, reduce the peak discharge and velocity
and permit the water to percolate into the soil. The minimum
grassed swale grade shall be one (1) percent and all swales shall be
designed with a minimum six (6) inches of freeboard. For grass
swales the minimum design flow velocity shall be two (2.0) fps, and
PennDOT approved turf reinforcement mat shall be installed where
design velocities exceed four (4) fps.
(2) Storm sewers shall be installed in accordance with the
following requirements:
(a) All storm sewers shall be constructed per PennDOT
Form 408 Specifications and Design Manual, Part 2, Highway
Design and Standards for Roadway Construction, unless otherwise
directed by the Township.
(b) Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of
fifteen (15) inches and a minimum slope of one-half (1/2) percent.
(c) Reinforced concrete pipe is acceptable for all storm
sewer construction. Corrugated polyethylene pipe will be
permitted for diameters of fifteen (15) inches to thirty-six (36)
inches only. Pipe materials shall be subject to approval by the
Township Engineer.
V<V11-129
(d) All storm sewer pipe within street cartways or other
paved areas shall be bedded and backfilled in accordance with the
provisions of the Township of Spring Construction Manual and
Standard Specification.
(e) In carbonate areas the Township shall require
watertight connections.
(3)
criteria:
Storm sewers shall be designed based upon the following
(a) Any changes in alignment shall be accomplished
utilizing straight sections connected by inlets or manholes.
(b) When there is a change in pipe size through a
structure, the top inside elevation of the outlet pipe shall be at or
below the elevations of all incoming pipes.
(c) Storm sewer sizes shall be determined based upon the
following design storm frequencies:
i) Ten (10) years in all residential subdivisions or
land developments with an average gross density of less
than six (6) units per acre.
ii) Twenty-five (25) years in all other residential
subdivisions or land developments, unless otherwise
specified by the Township Engineer.
(d) Storm sewer design shall be based upon PennDOT
design methods. Inlet efficiency and bypass flow shall be
determined for all inlets, and the gutter flow spread shall not
exceed one-half (1/2) the travel lane width.
(e) Where necessary, storm sewers and culverts shall be
evaluated for inlet and outlet control restrictions.
(f) Rainfall intensity curves and other hydraulic design
data, provided by the manufacturers of storm drainage structures,
shall be used for design purposes.
(4) Inlets shall conform to PennDOT standards. Precast
concrete inlets may be used but the Township Engineer must approve
these inlets for each project.
(a) Inlets shall generally be located at the lowest point of
street intersections to intercept the stormwater before it reaches
pedestrian crossings or at sag point of vertical curves in the street
alignment which provides a natural point of ponding of surface
stormwater.
(b) At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the
tangent and not the curved portion of the curbing.
(c) Where the Board of Supervisors deems it necessary
because of special land requirements, they may approve special
inlets.
(d) The interval between inlets serving stormwater runoff
flow along the curb shall not exceed a maximum of one thousand
(1,000) feet when located along any one (1) continuous curb line.
More frequent spacing shall be required when the entrance
capacity of any individual inlet warrants closer spacing as
determined by calculations which incorporate consideration of the
area drained, intensity of rainfall, slope or grade, runoff coefficient
of imperviousness and cross-sectional rear of the gutter.
(e) When inlets are used in a storm system within the
right-of-way limits of a street, in lieu of manholes, the spacing of
such inlets shall not exceed the maximum distance of four hundred
fifty (450) feet along any one (1) continuous line.
(5) Manholes shall be installed in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) The construction locations of manholes shall be as
indicated on the subdivision drainage plan or area drainage plan
approved by the governing municipal authorities.
(b) Manholes shall be located on a continuous storm
sewer system at all abrupt changes of grade, at all locations where a
transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all angle points
and at all points of convergence of two (2) or more influent storm
sewer mains.
XXVII -131
A03427
(c) Manholes shall not be more than three (300) feet apart
on sizes up to twenty-four (24) inches and not more than four
hundred fifty (450) feet apart on larger sizes. Inlets may be
substituted for manholes on approval by the Township.
(6) The construction of endwalls shall be required at ends of all
stormwater conveyance structures.
(a) Generally, these structures will be built of three
thousand (3000) psi concrete, except in special cases three thousand
five hundred (3500) psi may be required by the Township Engineer.
Special care shall be used by the design engineer to select the
proper endwall to fit the condition.
(b) The design engineer shall provide energy dissipators
at endwalls where the discharge velocity with pipe flowing full is
more than one (1) fps.
(7) Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly
over a sidewalk or into any sanitary sewer line.
(G) Bridges and culverts shall have ample waterway to carry expected
flows, based on a minimum storm frequency of twenty-five (25) years. Bridge
and /or culvert construction shall be in accordance with the PennDOT
specifications and shall meet the requirements of DEP.
(1) Culverts shall be provided with wing walls and constructed
for the full width of the right-of-way. The cartway area over the bridge
shall be 24 inches wider, on either side, than the road connecting with the
bridge, or if the character of the road is expected to change for future
planning, the cartway of the bridge shall be made to anticipate this
condition. On either side of the bridge cartway, the bridge railing must be
set back from the edge of the final cartway and this area may be used to
place sidewalks, present or future.
(H) All existing and proposed one hundred (100) year floodplains shall
be delineated on the plans for drainageways having watershed areas greater than
one hundred (100) acres. The floodplain delineations shall be based upon the
following criteria.
(1) Where available, the floodplain shall be as mapped by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency as part of the National. Flood
Insurance program.
(2) If the drainage course has not been mapped by FEMA, the
horizontal and vertical limits of the floodplain shall be determined by the
Standard Step Method (i.e., HEC-2 or similar approved computer model).
If the HEC-2 model is used, the applicant shall submit a computer disc
containing all input files for the calculations.
(3) Where approved by the Township Engineer, the Manning
Equation may be used for relatively small drainage areas.
(4) The methods below may be used to compute the design
flow(s) in the drainage course. A conservative average of at least two (2)
methods, preferably three (3), shall be used, and the design flow is subject
to approval by the Township. Other methods may be used with approval
of the Township.
(a) The graphical and tabular hydrograph methods in
Technical Release No. 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watershed",
latest edition, by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service. The graphical method may be used for
streams whose drainage area at the point of interest is no larger
than two thousand (2,000) acres, and the tabular hydrograph
method may be used for drainage areas up to twenty (20) square
miles.
(b) The Rational Method may be used for streams whose
drainage area at the point of interest is no larger than three
hundred twenty (320) acres.
(c) The method in Water Resources Bulletin Number 13,
"Floods in Pennsylvania," issued by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, may be used for streams whose
drainage area at the point of interest is larger than two (2) square
miles.
(d) The "Procedure PSU-IV for Estimating Design Flood
Peaks on Ungaged Pennsylvania Watersheds".
(e) The Penn State Runoff Model.
A03427
(I) Detention or retention basins for the control of stormwater peak
discharges shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Basins shall be installed prior to any earthmoving or land
disturbances which they will serve. The phasing of their construction
shall be noted in the narrative and on the plan.
(2) Whenever a basin will be located in an area underlain by
limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed location will be
conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design
of all facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to
prevent groundwater contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole
formation. Soils used for the construction of basins shall have lowerodibility
factors ("K" factors). The Township may require an
impermeable liner to be installed up to the one hundred (100) year design
water surface elevation.
(3) Energy dissipators and/ or level spreaders shall be installed
at points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
Generally, outlet pipes designed to carry the predevelopment, two (2)
year storm flow will be permitted to discharge to a stream with only an
energy dissipator. Storms of a ten (10) year or greater intensity should be
spread across floodplains by level spreaders; rock material found on the
site is suggested for their construction.
(4) The following slope restrictions shall apply to basins:
(a) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed one
(1) foot vertical for three (3) feet horizontal, and may be further
reduced if the soil has unstable characteristics.
(b) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed one (1)
foot vertical in two and one-half (2.5) feet horizontal except with
approval of the Township:
i) Where maximum water depth will not exceed
three (3) feet; or,
ii) When a two (2) inch rainfall in one (1) hour
will not fill the basin in one (1) hour; or,
iii) Where concrete, stone or brick walls are used
with side slopes proposed to be steeper than one (1) foot
)0W11-134
vertical in three (3) feet horizontal, in which case the basin
shall be fenced by a permanent wire fence forty-eight (48)
inches in height and a ramp of durable, nonslip materials for
maintenance vehicles shall be provided for access into the
basin.
(c) The minimum bottom slope shall be two (2) percent
for grass and seventy-five hundredths (0.75) percents for concrete
paving. One (1) percent may be used for grass if an underdrain
system is provided. A concrete low flow channel shall be required
for all basins where the distance from the inlet pipe to the outlet
structure exceeds one hundred (100) feet. The minimum channel
width shall be four (4) feet and the design must be approved by the
Township.
(5) Detention and retention basins shall also be designed to
meet the following requirements:
(a) The minimum top of berm width shall be eight (8)
feet.
(b) Outlet pipes shall have a minimum diameter of
twelve (12) inches. For pipe lengths exceeding one hundred (100)
feet, the minimum diameter shall be fifteen (15) inches.
(c) Properly spaced antiseep collars shall be installed on
all basin outlet pipes. Design calculations shall be provided.
(d) All basins shall be constructed with a compacted,
relatively impervious (Unified Soil Classification CL-ML or ML)
key trench and core. The key trench shall extend at least two (2)
feet into undisturbed subsoil (below topsoil layer). The minimum
bottom width of the trench shall be six (6) feet and the minimum
top width of the core shall be four (4) feet. The side slopes of the
compacted core and trench shall not exceed one (1) horizontal to
one (1) vertical, and the top elevation of the core shall be set at or
above the twenty-five (25) year design water elevation.
(6) Outlet structures within basins which will control peak
discharge flows and distribute the flows by plans to discharge areas shall
be constructed of reinforced concrete, and shall have childproof,
nonclogging trash racks over all design openings twelve (12) inches in
diameter, except those openings designed to carry perennial stream flows.
)0N11-135
A03427
(a) Emergency spillways shall be constructed of concrete
of sufficient mass and structural stability to withstand the pressures
of impounded waters and outlet velocities. Precast concrete paving
blocks and sod may be used when approved by the Township.
Emergency spillways shall be designed to safely convey the one
hundred (100) year basin inflow hydrograph through the basin
assuming the principal outlet is completely blocked, and a
minimum six (6) inch freeboard shall be provided.
(7) Inlet and outlet structures shall be located at maximum
distances from one another. The Township may require a rock filter berm
or rock-filled gabbions between inlet and outlet areas when the distance is
deemed insufficient for sediment trappings.
(8) Permanent grasses or stabilization measures shall be
established on the sides of all earthen basins by hydroseeding within five
(5) days of initial construction. The Township may require jute or erosion
control matting to be installed inside the basin or on the basin
embankment.
(9) Adequate drainage courses shall be provided and
maintained for the discharge(s) from the basin. If the basin will not
discharge to a suitable natural drainage course, the Township may require
the developer to provide facilities to safely and efficiently convey the
discharge to a suitable drainage course. Securing of necessary drainage
easements for this purpose shall be the sole responsibility of the
developer.
(10) When Pennsylvania DEP requires facilities to have a State
permit, the designer shall submit all information to Pennsylvania DEP and
obtain all necessary approval and permits. No stormwater facility shall
create health or sanitation problems. Consideration shall be given to
safety standards.
(J) All calculations shall be submitted to the Township Engineer on
computation sheets for approval. If, in the opinion of the Township Engineer,
the size of pipes or holding pond is insufficient, the Board of Supervisors may
require the developer to increase the size of pipes or capacity of the holding
pond. If the storm drainage system design is completed on a computer
installation, sufficient supporting data shall be provided to allow comprehensive
review by Township officials.
A03427
(K) Intercepting underdrains shall be required at all locations in which
subsurface water is encountered which may permeate or endanger the subgrade
of the street. Underdrains shall be required in all cuts three (3) feet deep and
greater, and in all other locations stipulated by the Township Engineer.. Pipe
foundation underdrains shall be parallel to the established street grade to outlet
in approved drainage structures. Pipe foundation underdrain shall consist of a
trench excavated to a minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches below the
underneath elevation of the special subgrade and to the minimum width of
eighteen (18) inches in which a six (6) inch pipe underdrain shall be laid. The
trench shall be backfilled with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation 2B
aggregate to its full depth around and above the laid pipe.
(1) If the length of pipe underdrain exceeds six hundred (600)
feet in one (1) run, the minimum diameter of six (6) inches shall be
increased to eight (8) [inches] beyond that point. Pipe shall meet
PennDOT, Form 408 Specifications.
(L) Future Construction.
(1) Within all subdivisions in which offstreet storm or sanitary
sewers are to be constructed, or are anticipated for future construction, a
twenty (20) foot maintenance easement shall be provided for such
easement shown in the subdivision plans which are submitted to the
governing Municipal authorities for their approval. Existing watercourses
which are under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania DEP into
which stormwater is permitted to be deposited shall require an easement
within or adjacent to its banks equal to the one hundred (100) year
floodplain.
(2) All storm sewers, if placed to feed into the said existing
watercourses, shall require the stipulated maintenance easement. Sanitary
sewers which parallel or are adjacent to such watercourses shall be
provided with the stipulated easement.
(3) Any developer shall be responsible for the control of surface
water from his property to a point of natural disposal. Downstream
easements may be required, as well as the construction of improvements
necessary to control runoff and prevent property damage. Whenever
practicable, the maintenance easement shall be parallel with and
conjunctive to property lines of the subdivision.
A03427
(M) When deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors, stormwater
detention facilities shall be enclosed with a fence of a type approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
(N) All streets shall be so designed as to provide for the discharge of
surface water from their rights-of-way.
(0) The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall not be less than
one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot and not more than one-third (1/3)inch per foot.
(P) Maintenance and repair for detention basins shall be the
responsibility of the property owner(s) and shall be deed restricted and indicated
on the approved plans. The Township may perform necessary maintenance and
repairs to detention basins if the owner(s) fail to do so after receiving notice from
the Township. The Township may recover the cost of such necessary
maintenance and repairs from the property owner.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1007; as amended by Ordinance No. 336,
March 26, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1008. Sanitary Sewage Disposal Systems.
(A) In General. All subdivisions and land developments shall be
served with an adequate sewage disposal system (either onlot or centralized
systems) that will meet State regulations.
(B) Centralized Sewage Disposal System. In addition to the above
general requirements, the appropriate municipal authority or agency shall also
review and approve centralized sewage disposal systems.
(C) On lot Sewage Disposal System.
(1) If connection to a public sanitary sewage system is not
required at the time of occupancy, and if an alternative central sewage
system is not approved by the Township under the Township sewage
facilities plan, then each lot shall be required to be served by an on-lot
sewage disposal system that will meet all applicable State regulations.
Each such proposed location shall be tested and approved by Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer, prior to approval of the preliminary plan.
The approved test locations shall be shown on the preliminary plan.
(2) Alternate System. Any use with an onlot septic system and
that does not have capped sewers shall include a suitable land area set
)0(V II-138
A03427
aside in open space for a second septic system that could be used if the
first system fails. Such site shall be tested and approved by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
(3) The applicant shall enter the results of the tests of required
onlot septic tests on four (4) copies of a DER form for perc tests and shall
submit these with the preliminary plan.
(D) Sewer Connection and Capped Sewers.
(1) Any building or use within a subdivision or land
development that generates wastewater and that in the determination of
the Board of Supervisors, upon the advice of the Municipal Authority and
the Township Engineer, could reasonably connect into a public sewage
system shall be required to connect into that system. The applicant shall
be responsible to pay such reasonable capital expenses that are necessary
for such connection.
(2) If sewage service will not be accessible at the time of the
development of the land development or subdivision, but is planned to be
accessible within five (5) years of the final approval, the subdivider shall
install approved capped sewer lines within the limits of the land
development or subdivision, in addition to approved onsite sewage
facilities. Such sewer lines shall be capped at the limits of the subdivision
or land development and the laterals shall be capped at the street right-ofway.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1008)
Section 1009. Water Supply Systems and Fire Hydrants.
(A) In General. All subdivisions and land developments shall be
served with an adequate water supply system (either onlot or centralized
system) that will meet DER requirements.
(B) Centralized Water Supply System. Proposed extensions of
centralized water systems shall meet all applicable procedures, reviews and
requirements of the appropriate municipal authority or public utility and meet
with their approval prior to final plan of any plan relying upon such system.
(C) Onlot Water Supply System.
A03427
(1) The Board of Supervisors, based upon any recommendations
of the Planning Commission, the Township Engineer and the appropriate
water supplier, shall require all lots and principal uses within a
subdivision or land development to be connected to the central water
system where the Board of Supervisors determines that such connection
would be feasible and reasonable.
(2) When a subdivision or land development is not required to
connect to a central water system, acceptable locations for onlot water
systems shall be shown on plans and shall be constructed in accordance
with regulations of DER.
(3) Wells should be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet
from any future street right-of-way.
(D) Fire Hydrants. All subdivisions and land developments that will
be served by public water service shall provide fire hydrants as needed with
appropriate water pressure so that all dwelling units and principal buildings are
within six hundred (600) feet of an active fire hydrant. Fire hydrant locations are
subject to review by the water company and the appropriate fire official.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1009)
Section 1010. Refuse Collection and Utilities Other Than Water and Sewer.
(A) All electric power, telephone, cable television, natural gas and other
utilities shall be placed underground except where the Board of Supervisors
determines it is not feasible, and in accordance with the current standards of the
utility serving the subdivision or development.
(B) All garden apartment developments shall include conveniently
located and sanitary refuse collection facilities for the residents. All uses within
nonresidential land developments and subdivisions shall include appropriate
and sanitary refuse collection facilities. All refuse shall be regularly collected.
All bulk refuse collection dumpsters shall be screened on three (3) of four (4)
sides by walls or evergreen landscaping from view of dwellings, adjacent
residentially zoned lots and public streets.
(C) All commercial, industrial, institutional and rental apartment
complexes shall provide suitable locations for recycling containers, as needed
and/ or as may be required by Township recycling ordinances.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1010)
XXVII-140
A03427
Section 1011. Access Drives and Driveways.
(A) Construction Standards for Access Drives. See §1004.
(B) Access. A State highway occupancy permit is required for all
access drives or driveways onto a State road.
(C) Location. The minimum distance between an access drive or
driveway to a street intersection shall be as follows:
Type of Subdivision or
Land Development
Distance Between Centerlines of Access Drive or
Driveway and Nearest Intersection Street by Type
of Intersecting Street
Arterial Collector Local
Residential - Single 150 feet 100 feet 75 feet
family detached dwelling
Residential - Other 150 feet 75 feet 50 feet
than single family detached
dwellings and garden
apartments
Nonresidential or mixed 300 feet 200 feet 150 feet
(D) Sightlines at Intersections of Driveways or Access Drives with
Streets. See §405 of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
(E) Grades. Grades of access drives or driveways shall not exceed
twelve (12) percent when connecting to a local or collector street and seven (7)
percent when connecting onto an arterial street; however, the initial twenty (20)
feet from the edge of the cartway shall not exceed seven (7) percent, except for an
arterial street shall not exceed four (4) percent.
(F) Drainage. The developer shall make adequate provisions to
maintain uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street where intersected
by an access drive or driveway. Access drives and aisles within parking lots
shall be graded and drained to keep the primary travel lane free of stormwater.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1011)
A03427
Section 1012. Off-street Parking and Loading. See Part 7 of the Township Zoning
Ordinance. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1012)
Section 1013. Sidewalks, Pathways and Driveway Aprons.
(A) Sidewalks built to Township specifications shall be required in all
subdivisions and land developments.
(B) Pathway or Bikeway.
(1) If deemed necessary for the convenient and safe circulation
of bicycles and pedestrians, the Board of Supervisors, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, may require that a major
subdivision or land development include the granting of an easement for
a pathway or bikeway.
(2) A bikeway or pathway may be required to have a width of
up to eight (8) feet and may be required to be illuminated and/or paved to
Township standards
(3) A bikeway or pathway may be included within the required
minimum area of an abutting lot.
(C) Location.
(1) Sidewalks, where required or provided, shall be located
within the street right-of-way and no closer than one (1) foot from the
right-of-way line nor closer than three (3) feet from the curb line.
(2) A grass planting strip shall be planted between the curb and
sidewalk. This strip shall not be paved except at driveway entrances.
(D) Required sidewalks and pathways shall each have a minimum
width of four (4) feet.
(E) Construction.
(1) Sidewalks. See Township improvement requirements.
(2) Pathways shall be constructed of one (1) of the following, at
a minimum: four (4) inches of portland cement concrete underlain by four
(4) inches of compacted gravel or crushed stone or two and one-half (2
A03427
1/2) inches of bituminous concrete underlain by six (6) inches of
compacted gravel or crushed stone.
(F) Handicapped Access. All sidewalks and curbs at the intersection of
two (2) or more public streets shall include a sloped curb cut suitable for use by
wheelchairs at all four (4) crossings.
(G) Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of adjacent landowners
to maintain sidewalks.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1013)
Section 1014. Street Lighting.
(A) Street lights shall be placed along streets within and abutting a
proposed subdivision or land development where the Board of Supervisors
deems them necessary to provide safe traffic or pedestrian circulation. At a
minimum, street lights shall be required to be provided at all street intersections,
curves in streets and the more isolated areas of a development.
(B) Such lights shall meet design standards established by the public
utility.
(C) Where street lights are required on a public street, the public utility
shall install cabling, poles, fixtures and all other equipment required for a
complete street lighting system. The developer shall complete all excavation
required for the street lighting system designed by the public utility and
approved by the Township and shall be responsible for any reasonable costs that
may be levied by the public utility for such work.
(D) On all private streets, parking areas and other areas requiring
lighting, the developer shall provide materials, installation, energizing and
power for all lighting systems. A system acceptable to the Board of Supervisors
shall be established for the maintenance of such lights.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1014)
Section 1015. Identification Signs and Street Names.
(A) The developer shall reimburse the Township for the supply and
installation of adequate street signs at the intersection of all streets and with any
other signs required.
A03427
(B) Street names are subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors
and the U.S. Postal Service, and shall continue the name of any street with the
same alignment, and shall not duplicate or be closely similar to the name of
another street within the Township or the postal district.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1015)
Section 1016. Regulatory Signs. The developer shall reimburse the Township for
the costs of supplying and installing traffic regulatory signs that meet current design
standards as established by PennDOT. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1016)
Section 1017. Landscaping, Trees and Historic Buildings.
(A) Required Trees. Where required by the Township as part of a
buffer yard or otherwise, trees shall meet the requirements of this Section.
(1) The following species of trees are permitted to be used to
meet Township requirements:
Deciduous:
Gleditsia triacanthos - Thornless Locust
Acer rubrum - American Red Maple
Acer saccharum - Sugar Maple
Celtis occidentalis - Common Hackberry
Fagus sylvatica - European Beech
Fraxinus pennsylvania - Green Ash
Fraxinus americana - White Ash
Ginko biloba fastigiata - Maiden Hair Tree (male only)
Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweet Gum
Liriodendron tulipifera- Tulip Poplar
Quercus phellos - Willow Oak
Quercus acutissima - Sawtooth Oak
Quercus imbricaria - Shingle Oak
Quercus borealis - Red Oak
Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak
Sophora japonica - Chinese Scholar Tree
Quercus macrocarpa - Bur Oak
Quercus alba - White Oak
Quercus montana - Chestnut Oak
Quercus velutina - Black Oak
Tilia american - American Linden
)00/11-144
Tilia petiolaris - Silver Linden
Tilia euchlora - Crimean Linden
Tilia cordata - Little Leaf European Linden
Zelkova serrata - Zelkova
Evergreen:
Ilex opaca - American Holly
Picea abies - Norway Spruce
Picea glauca - White Spruce
Picea omorika - Serbian Spruce
Picea pungens - Colorado Spruce
Pinus nigra - Austrian Pine
Pinus strobus - White Pine
Pinus thunbergi - Japanese Black Pine
Pseudotsuga taxffolia - Douglas Fir
Tsuga canadensis - Canada Hemlock
Tsuga caroliniana - Carolina Hemlock
(2) Quality of Trees. Trees permitted shall be of symmetrical
growth, free of insect pests and disease, and durable under the
maintenance contemplated.
(3) Minimum Size. The trunk diameter (measured at a height of
1 foot above the finished grade level) shall be a minimum of two (2)
inches.
(4) Planting and Maintenance.
(a) Trees shall be planted and staked in conformance
with good landscaping practices.
(b) Trees adjacent to or within parking areas shall be
properly protected from damage by vehicles by raised curbs,
similar devices or sufficient setback.
(c) Required trees shall be properly maintained and shall
not be removed by the developer without being replaced by
another tree that meets the requirements of this Section.
(5) Spacing. The trees required under this Section shall be
generally spaced throughout the development at the required interval, but
may be clustered at locations acceptable to the Planning Commission.
)0N11-145
A03427
(6) Credit for Existing Trees. If existing healthy trees are to be
protected and preserved that would, in the determination of the Township
Engineer, generally meet the intent and requirements of this Section, they
may serve as a credit towards the number of trees required to be planted.
(B) Ground Cover.
(1) After completion of a project, all exposed ground surfaces
that are not paved within a subdivision or land development, and that are
not covered by approved gravel areas or decorative stones or similar
material, shall be covered by a natural ground cover that will prevent soil
erosion and the emanation of dust.
(2) The vegetative cover shall not be poisonous in nature.
(C) Buffer Yards. See the requirements for buffer yards in §405 of the
Township Zoning Ordinance.
(D) Preservation of Existing Trees.
(1) The cutting down or other destruction of mature attractive
healthy trees shall be held to the minimum necessary to carry out the
approved construction and for public safety. Such trees of greater than six
(6) inch trunk diameter measured 4 feet above the average surrounding
ground level shall be preserved whenever reasonable, in the
determination of the Board of Supervisors, based upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer and the Planning
Commission.
(2) All reasonable efforts shall be taken during construction to
ensure that trees protected by this Section are not damaged or destroyed
during construction.
(3) A tract of land shall not be permitted to be cleared of mature
trees prior to a development submission or approval in order to
circumvent the requirements of this Section. Clear-cutting of areas of onehalf
(1/2) acre of mature woods or more is specifically prohibited, except
as is approved to allow construction under this Chapter.
(E) Natural and Historic Feature Preservation.
A03427
(1) Substantial and sensitive natural features and historic
structures and important archaeological sites worthy of protection, as
determined by the Board of Supervisors upon the advice of the Planning
Commission, shall be respected, incorporated into the design of and
reasonably protected in any subdivision or land development.
(a) These features include, but are not limited to, natural
drainage channels, waterways and falls, large trees or groves,
highly scenic views and important community landmarks.
(b) Wetlands. All subdivisions and land developments
shall comply with State and Federal wetland regulations. The
Township Engineer or Board of Supervisors may require that an
applicant provide a professional wetlands study to prove
compliance with wetland regulations if an area of suspected
wetlands is proposed to be altered.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1017)
Section 1018. Monuments and Lot Pins.
(A) Monuments.
(1) Permanent reference monuments shall be located along
street right-of-way lines at the following locations:
(a) At least one (1) monument at each street intersection.
(b) At changes in direction of street lines, excluding arcs
at intersections.
(c) At each end of each curved street line, excluding arcs
at intersections.
(d) An intermediate monument wherever topographical
or other conditions make it impossible to sight between two (2)
otherwise requirement monuments.
(e) At such other places along the line of streets as may
be determined by the Township Engineer to be necessary so that
any street may be readily defined in the future.
A03427
(2) With the approval of the Township Engineer the subdivider
may install monuments on only one (1) side of the street provided that
enough monuments are set to permit a surveyor to stakeout accurately
any building lot shown on the plan.
(3) All monuments shall be placed by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor so that the center of the monument shall coincide
exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being monumented.
(4) Reference monuments shall be constructed of steel
reinforced portland cement concrete to the dimensions shown in the
accompanying sketch or other detail accepted by the Township Engineer.
(5) Reference monuments shall be placed so that the top of the
monument is flush with the surrounding grade.
Tl
IMP FLUSH
WI Fri GRAO 0 -err'rat
-ulimOLE REFERENCE malid
Model
Style
REFEEENCE MONUMENT
teNe 9t7T.
(B) Lot Pins. All lot corner markers shall be permanently located and
shall be at least a three-quarter (3/4) inch metal pin or pipe with a minimum
length of twenty (20) inches, located in the ground to existing grade.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1018)
Section 1019. Curbs.
(A) Curbs shall be provided along both sides of all public streets and all
private streets.
A03427
(B) If curbs are waived, appropriate stabilized drainage channels
designed according to §1007 shall be required along all streets, within the street
right-of-way, or drainage easements.
(C) All required curbs shall meet Township specifications.
(D) Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the adjacent
landowners to maintain curbs.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1019)
A03427
Part 11
Mobile Home Park Design Standards and Required Improvements
Section 1101. Application.
(A) The requirements in this Part shall apply to a mobile home park
which is on a tract held in single ownership and provides mobile home space on
a lease or rental basis.
(B) Mobile home parks proposed to be developed for sale of lots shall
be designed in accordance with all requirements set forth for single family
dwelling residential development.
(C) Every proposed mobile home park shall be submitted, reviewed,
approved and recorded as either a land development or a major subdivision.
(D) Definition. The terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home"
shall have the same meaning.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1101)
Section 1102. Exemptions. The provisions of this Part shall not apply to:
(A) The business of mobile home sales, provided that the mobile homes
shall not be occupied.
(B) The storage or garaging of mobile homes not being used for living
or sleeping purposes within a building or structure.
(C) A single mobile home used as a residence on a lot with no other
dwellings.
(D) A mobile home located on the site of a construction project, survey
project, or other similar work project and used solely as a field office or work or
tool house in connection with such project, provided such mobile home is
removed from said site within thirty (30) days after the completion of such
project.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1102)
Section 1103. Contents, Submission and Review of Plans. All provisions of this
Chapter and all other Township ordinances which are not specifically modified by this
)O VII -150
A03427
Part shall apply to a mobile home park. This specifically includes, but is not limited to
Parts 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9 with respect to the contents, submission and review of mobile
home park plans. (Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1103)
Section 1104. General Standards and Requirements.
(A) The mobile home park shall have direct access to a paved public
street.
(B) The individual mobile homes shall not be leased or rented for
periods of less than sixty (60) days. The owner or manager of the mobile home
park shall periodically report changes in adult tenants to the Township Tax
Collector.
(C) The mobile home park shall have adequate access by emergency
vehicles and shall include fire hydrants with adequate water pressure.
(D) All mobile home parks of more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units
shall include a qualified resident manager.
(E) The plans shall show typical locations for each mobile home unit.
(F) The owner of the mobile home park shall ensure that there is
proper maintenance of all private roads, parking courts, common open spaces
and privately owned utilities within the mobile home park. This shall include
but not be limited to, snow removal. The applicant shall propose a method to
permanently ensure that such maintenance, occurs. Such method shall be
reviewed by the Township Solicitor and shall be subject to acceptance by the
Board of Supervisors.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1104)
Section 1105. Design Standards.
(A) Access.
(1) Access to individual mobile home spaces shall be from
interior parking courts, access drives, or private streets and shall not be
from public streets exterior to the development. Streets within the
development providing access to twenty (20) or more dwellings shall have
a paved cartway width of at least twenty-six (26) feet, and other streets
shall have a paved cartway width of at least twenty-two (22) feet.
A03427
(2) All streets within the mobile home park shall be private and
be maintained as part of the mobile home park. See §1004(L) concerning
construction of private streets. A private street within a mobile home
park is not required to provide right-of-way. All construction of access
drives and driveways shall meet the requirements of §1012.
(B) Parking. Parking courts are encouraged to be used to meet the offstreet
parking requirements. Parking shall be prohibited along the cartway of
streets with a cartway width of less than twenty-eight (28) feet within the mobile
home park.
(C) Other Design Standards and Improvements.
(1) Every mobile home space shall be graded to provide a level,
stable and well-drained stand for the mobile home.
(2) Every space shall be provided with underground electric,
telephone and T.V. cable (if available) service.
(3) All fuel storage and supply systems shall be constructed and
maintained in conformity with the regulations of all agencies having
jurisdiction, and if above ground shall adequately be screened with
landscaping or a screen wall compatible with the home.
(4) An average of one (1) deciduous shade tree shall be
provided for each fifty (50) feet of frontage along a public or private street.
The trunk of such trees shall not be located within the ultimate/future
street right-of-way, but shall be planted within twenty (20) feet of such
right-of-way line. Such trees may be irregularly spaced or clustered in
locations approved by the Township. These trees shall meet the
requirements of §1017 of this Chapter.
(5) See §1006 concerning required recreation land dedication or
fees-in-lieu of land.
(6) The owner of the mobile home park shall install and operate
sufficient lighting along private streets for security and safety purposes.
(Ordinance No. 240, May 23, 1994, Section 1105)
A03427
Part 12.
Appendices
Section 1201. Township of Spring Application Form for Subdivision or Land
Development.
A03427
TOWNSHIP OF SPRING APPLICATION FORM FOR
SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
FILE NUMBER
New Submission Resubmission
Date of Application (to be filled in by Township Staff)
Sketch Plan Review
Preliminary Plan Name of Development
Final Plan
Minor Subdivision Location
Resubdivision
Boundary Line Adjustment
PRD
Land Owner's Name Telephone #
Address
Applicant's Name Telephone #
Address
Plan Preparer's Name Telephone #
Address
Total Acreage Number of Lots
Water Supply: On lot well: Public: Other:
Sewage System: Private (onlot): Public: Other:
Submit 3 copies of this form to the Township Staff. A copy will be receipted and
returned to you.
Previous Subdivision or Construction on this Tract within the Past 5 Years:
A03427
TOWNSHIP OF SPRING
SUBDIVISION/ LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION - Page 2
Any Relevant Zoning Variances/ Special Exception Approvals on this Tract (and dates):
Application Fees Paid: 1. Check to Township of Spring
2. Check to County Planning Commission
I HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGE AND REQUEST REVIEW OF THIS APPLICATION
Applicant's Signature
I HEREBY AUTHORIZE THE PLANNING COMMISSIONERS, GOVERNING BODY
MEMBERS, ENGINEER, CODE ENFORCEMENT STAFF AND ANY WETLANDS
CONSULTANT OF THE TOWNSHIP TO ENTER THE EXTERIOR PREMISES OF THIS
PROPERTY, BETWEEN 9 A.M. AND 8 P.M. AT THEIR OWN RISK, WHILE THIS
PLAN IS BEING CONSIDERED FOR APPROVAL, AS NEEDED TO DETERMINE
COMPLIANCE WITH TOWNSHIP ORDINANCES (Optional)
Applicant/ Land Owner's Signature
(Lower Half of Page For Township Use Only)
Initial Review Received From Township Engineer: (check off)
County Planning Commission Review: Date Sent to-
Date Review from-
Final Action by Township Planning Commission: Date:
Action Taken:
Final Action by Governing Body: Date:
Action Taken:
Date Applicant Notified of Governing Body Final Action:
Township Staff Initial Review Comments:
A03427
Section 1202. Plan Preparer's Statement; Owner's Statement; Approval/ Review
Block Forms.
B.1 PLAN PREPARERS STATEMENT.
, a registered surveyor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that the Plan, prepared from a field survey on
19 correctly represents the property boundary of the
proposed subdivision or land development.
Date Registered Surveyors' Signature
Address Printed Name
B.2 OWNERS STATEMENT. - Model Form for Individual Owner(s) (strike
inappropriate words)
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA :
:SS
COUNTY OF BERKS
ON THIS, THE DAY OF 20 , BEFORE ME, THE
UNDERSIGNED OFFICER, PERSONALLY APPEARED
WHO BEING DULY SWORN ACCORDING TO LAW, DEPOSES AND SAYS
THAT HE/SHE/THEY IS (ARE) THE (EQUITABLE) OWNER(S) OF THE
PROPERTY SHOWN HEREON AND THAT THE SUBDIVISION PLAN
THEREOF WAS MADE AT HIS/HER/THEIR DIRECTION, AND
ACKNOWLEDGE(S) THE SAME TO BE HIS/HER/THEIR ACT AND PLAN
AND DESIRES THE SAME TO BE RECORDED AS SUCH ACCORDING TO
LAW AND THAT ALL STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY, UTILITY EASEMENTS, AND
ALL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS TO BE CONSTRUCTED WITHIN THEIR LIMITS
AND WITHIN ANY PROPOSED PUBLIC OPEN SPACES, AS SHOWN AND/OR
NOTED ON THE OFFICIAL APPROVED FINAL PLANS AND NOT
HERETOFORE DEDICATED ARE HEREBY DEDICATED TO THE PUBLIC USE
AND OWNERSHIP.
NOTARY
(SEAL)
XXVII-156
OWNER
A03427
B.3 OWNER'S STATEMENT. - Model Form for Corporation (strike inappropriate
words)
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
:SS
COUNTY OF BERKS
ON THIS, THE DAY OF , 20 , BEFORE ME,
THE UNDERSIGNED OFFICER, PERSONALLY APPEARED
, WHO, BEING DULY SWORN ACCORDING TO
LAW, DEPOSES AND SAYS THAT HE/SHE/THEY IS THE AUTHORIZED
OFFICER OF THE (EQUITABLE)
OWNER(S) OF THE PROPERTY SHOWN HEREON AND THAT THE
SUBDIVISION PLAN THEREOF WAS MADE AT ITS DIRECTION, AND
ACKNOWLEDGES THE SAME TO BE ITS ACT AND PLAN AND DESIRES THE
SAME TO BE RECORDED AS SUCH ACCORDING TO LAW AND THAT ALL
STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY, UTILITY EASEMENTS, AND ALL PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS TO BE CONSTRUCTED WITHIN THEIR LIMITS AND
WITHIN ANY PROPOSED PUBLIC OPEN SPACES, AS SHOWN AND /OR
NOTED ON THE OFFICIAL APPROVED FINAL PLANS AND NOT
HERETOFORE DEDICATED ARE HEREBY DEDICATED TO THE PUBLIC
USE AND OWNERSHIP.
NOTARY
(SEAL)
OWNER
A03427
B.4 APPROVAL/ REVIEW BLOCKS.
1. BERKS COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
A blank space measuring three and one-half (3 -1/2 ") inches square shall be
provided in which the endorsement stamp of the County Planning
Commission may be applied. It is preferred that this space be adjacent to
the Township certification.
2. BERKS COUNTY RECORDER OF DEEDS
A blank space measuring three (3") inches square shall be provided along
the bottom edge of the plan in which the Recorder of Deeds may
acknowledge receipt and recording of the plan.
3. TOWNSHIP OF SPRING PLANNING COMMISSION
AT A MEETING HELD ON , 20 THE PLANNING
COMMISSION OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING, BY MOTION, DULY
ENACTED, RECOMMENDED THAT THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
APPROVE THE FINAL PLAN AS SHOWN HEREON.
(followed by 7 signature lines)
4. TOWNSHIP OF SPRING BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
AT A MEETING HELD ON , 20 , THE BOARD OF
SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING APPROVED THE FINAL
PLAN AS SHOWN HEREON.
(followed by 5 signature lines)
A03427
Section 1203. Drainage Covenant Agreement.
C.1 STANDARD DRAINAGE COVENANTS AGREEMENT. - Model Form.
The Owner(s) for themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators, and
successors and assigns do hereby covenant to bind themselves, their heirs,
executors, administrators, successors, and assigns and the lands described in the
plan entitled to faithfully perform all of the
following requirements:
1. The Owner(s) shall be responsible for stabilization and reconstruction (to
approved design grades and specifications) of all drainage facilities and
detention basins within an owner's lot, which because of construction
activities, grading, or stripping of vegetation on the owner's lot has caused
damage to said improvements.
2. All drainage and detention basin easements shown on this plan shall be
maintained in a grassed or otherwise improved condition, in accordance
with the grades and designs shown on the approved development plans
for this project. All these easements shall be kept free of all obstructions,
including but not limited to, such obstructions as fill, temporary or
permanent structures, and plants (other than grass). Fences may be
constructed within these easements, within the requirements of other
Township Ordinances, provided that the fence is of a type and location
that will not impede the flow of stormwater, and provided that the
owner(s) shall be bound to remove such fence at the owner(s) expense and
without compensation to the owner(s) if determined by the Township to
be necessary to allow work within the easement. The maintenance of all
such easements shall be the responsibility of the current lot owner(s) at
any point in time, including future owner(s).
3. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, grading or
other earth moving activities, it shall be the responsibility of the Owner(s)
to remove the sedimentation from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems
and watercourses, and to repair any damage at the Owner(s)'s expense.
4. The Owner(s) shall make provision for and be personally responsible for
strict compliance with all of the aforesaid covenants, and any other
agreement contained in any and all agreements with the Township. Upon
failure by the Owner(s) to comply within the time period specified by oral
or written notice, or in the event the Township, in its sole and absolute
discretion determines the work to be on an emergency nature, the
Township may perform such work as may be necessary in its sole and
XXVII-159
A03427
absolute discretion to bring the Owner(s) into compliance at the Owner(s)'
expense and the Owner(s) shall be charged for said expense, plus a 20%
surcharge for the Township's administrative expenses, plus any costs
expended by the Township if a municipal lien or suit in assumpsit or
equity is filed, which expense the Owner(s) hereby agree to assume and
pay.
I accept this Standard Drainage Covenants Agreement.
Owner's Signature Date
Attest
A03427
Section 1204. Recreation Fee Districts.
Draft
RECREATION FEE DISTRICTS
5oultaxn liebrbelati Ines MUSA
111'2 lacrttierri Rigrita ton Fee District
February biell
6tXT6 mt1. 110A4
A° l' A.
3-'.
. 40-541 I / 0 IP - f )1, .e.i, ..
j.
141410 ......110.
. / '.. 4° iliV0114.1. A::'-' :....w,r, _ i;Zi*,,:,
r.-- 4; 400' bi 41k',
,;:-.17ii c fr.;-.1-k=. .-.. . 0514. : or Oe -54.'
- i4044144 ,- Vik trA
Allts-,t(Vilri-0
lk
4009.--1041 14,7"-0'6 O4011n' o6
lip= ci4,40MI:Ic
A, gia- - Fr/prom ROAD
l'.giOl'ffi.aigr
A -A7
044
r_pr ..
VOrt 4
OF SPRING
TOWNS H
LERKS Cfalici
Wei CrkhiA
tiNADMalEi I rig oat RELELWE et wan; FC41191.914
CJIMPINFRIS
0.110S)
PLANNING
MODULE
COMP. 3
SUBMISSION
FLOW CHART
C CHI 01.04 E.HT
C C1.111.11E2
446f rnJ 141
ILV.ILIt
:EN
UHL
e/ANN........
at Amin NN,
I. Tirtr-Whirat. II( 'RAH?
I, 0011Itimp.. MN"
CIEV. 12141kE1 ES COMP. I
cFPali.AI.
0.
G.
9, 11.L.E.MAYSIS
1 .Y.0 LTAILLUIP111CY
L PRIA: Pf) IICC
F. 19W. 119.14. I /eV
Waif
ItNE
FDFPA .[PA
40 OM (MT, 11,
. !trifle ,jr.)
31 C °MIME NCI
13CIE41$11111111
a:eam ite
ressE:Y44A/FII*
SUPPLIER
mug
fiircht
rawinrr tcr-
Mil De
IT0
AR.. VEY
f iti 19 aAr
new Lam a
11.10 Hu. If
JItM.1II Cer.
(EWA-ME ll AHM110
so nias
lawn, .. _
Ix
.L.NN ' titrimiiiifs
4UPOIWItN WWI:001th
COVIPLUE9 -'- IIENM...4. MO - PrZAIPURIAL$
CIMPIVINES COALMN11
Mk 1.4k0 I. FIN.
i
tIgNIEW
ENNY5
(CES SUM) ow DAVIrria blk
Pilik VIP. MVP 10401116
00 4NIS 41 WM. NI.
Lt1101
of
Im4I-OV.01/
Obffier.th
jiriu vs fesmrtni. Poe.w.x.
..".
OWlTA'FM 1
gar II FINICIEP
CHAPTER XXVIII
SWIMMING POOLS
(See Zoning, Chapter )00M and Code Enforcement, Chapter VI)
(Reserved for Future Use)
B14625
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204.
Section 205.
Section 206.
Section 207.
Section 208.
Section 209.
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305.
Section 306.
Section 307.
Section 308.
Section 309.
Section 310.
CHAPTER XXIX
TAXATION, SPECIAL
Part 1
Per Capita Tax (Repealed)
Part 2
Realty Transfer Tax
Definitions
Imposition of Tax
Exempt Parties
Excluded Transactions
Documents Relating to Associations or Corporations and Members,
Partners, Stockholders or Shareholders Thereof
Acquired Company
Credits Against Tax
Administration
Severance
Part 3
Refuse Collection
Levy of Tax
Collection
Bond of Collector
Discount; Penalty
Duplicate Constitutes Warrant for Collection
Compensation of Tax Collector
Notice to Taxpayers
Addition of Names to Duplicate
Powers and Duties of Tax Collector
Severability
Section 401. Levy of Tax
Part 4
Street Lighting Tax
)0CD( -1
B14625
Section 501.
Section 502.
Section 503.
Section 504.
Section 505.
Section 506.
Section 507.
Section 508.
Part 5
Earned Income Tax
Definitions
Imposition of Tax
No Exemption From Tax
Individual Tax Returns and Payments
Employer Withholding, Remittance, and Tax Returns
Tax Collector
Interest, Penalties, Costs, and Fines
Severability
Section 601. Levy of Tax
Section 701. Levy of Tax
Section 801.
Section 802.
Section 803.
Section 804.
Section 805.
Section 806.
Section 807.
Section 808.
Section 809.
Section 810.
Section 811.
Section 812.
Section 813.
Section 814.
Section 815.
Part 6
Fire Protection Tax
Part 7
Fire Hydrant Tax
Part 8
Mercantile Tax
Short Title
Definitions
Levy and Collection of Tax
Imposition and Rates of Tax
Computation of Whole Volume of Business
Returns
Payment
Powers and Duties of Mercantile Tax Collector
Suits for Tax; Interest; Penalties
Returns to be Confidential
Fines and Penalties
Disposition of Tax
Annual Reenactment
Prohibited Levies
Severability Clause
)0CDC -2
B14625
Section 901.
Section 902.
Section 903.
Section 904.
Section 905.
Section 906.
Section 907.
Section 908.
Section 909.
Section 910.
Section 911.
Section 1001.
Section 1002.
Section 1003.
Section 1004.
Section 1005.
Section 1006.
Section 1007.
Section 1008.
Section 1009.
Section 1010.
Section 1011.
Section 1012.
Part 9
Business Privilege Tax
Short Title
Definitions
Levy, Collection and Administration of Tax
Returns
Fines and Violations
Continuing Offense
Payment of Tax
Duties of the Tax Administrator and Treasurer
Confidential Nature of Returns
Suit on Collection and Penalty
Savings and Severability Clauses
Part 10
Local Services Tax
Authority of Enactment
Definitions
Imposition of Tax
Nonresident Taxpayer
Exemptions
Exemption Application
Collection Through Employers
Direct Payment by Taxpayers
Administration and Enforcement
Collection
Refunds
Penalties
Section 1101. Levy of Tax
Part 11
Recycling Tax
B14625
Part 1
Per Capita Tax
The Township of Spring Per Capita Tax, as enacted by Ordinance No. 94December 28,
1972, as partially repealed by Ordinance No. 113, August 25, 1975, Section 2, was fully
repealed by Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007, Section 2.
B14625
Part 2
Realty Transfer Tax
Section 201. Definitions. The following words when used in this Part shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this Section:
ASSOCIATION - A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two (2) or more persons other
than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION- A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust, or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of this Commonwealth,
the United States, or any other state, territory, or foreign country, or dependency.
DOCUMENT - Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to real estate,
but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments or like
character given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the debtor,
land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total
consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof
unless due consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding thirty (30)
years or instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility
easement. "Document" shall also include a declaration of acquisition required to
be presented for recording under Section 206 of this Part.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION - A corporation of which at least
seventy-five percent (75%) of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture,
and at least seventy-five percent (75%) of each class of stock of the corporation is
continuously owned by members of the same family. The business of agriculture
shall not be deemed to include:
(1) Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting,
fishing, camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
(2) The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game
birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
(3)
(4)
(5)
Fur farming;
Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
Manufacturing or processing operations or any kind.
)OW( -5
B14625
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY - Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents and
grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a
spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals
related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related
by the whole blood.
PERSON - Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the
term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the responsible members
or general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE
(1) Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within this
Commonwealth, including without limitation buildings, structures,
fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper
or lower boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land,
but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
(2) A condominium unit.
(3) A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy
agreement.
REAL ESTATE COMPANY - A corporation or association which is
primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate ninety
percent (90%) or more of the ownership in which is held by thirty-five (35) or
fewer persons and which;
(1) derives sixty percent (60%) or more of its annual gross
receipts from the ownership or disposition of real estate; or
(2) holds real estate, the value of which comprises ninety
percent (90%) or more of the value of its entire tangible asset holdings
exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and actively
traded on an established market.
B14625
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE
(1) Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time
the termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number
of years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
(2) Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of
years but which, either by reason of the length of the term of the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group of
rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
thirty (30) years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in
real estate in which the lessee has equity.
TRANSACTION - The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE
(1) In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration
therefore, paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances
thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or
not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances and
ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real estate;
provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration , the "value" therefore shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
(2) In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or
upon the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions
without consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary
worth of the real estate, taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a
leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real
estate of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real
estate determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for
local real estate tax purpose for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board, or a commensurate part of the assessment where the
assessment includes other real estate.
)0CD( - 7
B14625
(3) In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the
value of which is not determinable under clause (A) or (B), the actual
monetary worth of such interest; or
(4) The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or between
the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related corporation,
association or partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with
the transfer.
(Ordinance No. 192, October 13,1986, Section 1)
Section 202. Imposition of Tax. The Township of Spring adopts the provisions of
Article XI-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as
authorized under that Article subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed
under this Section shall be at the rate of one percent (1%) shared equally with the
Wilson School District. (Ordinance No. 192, October 13, 1986, Section 2; as amended by
Resolution No. 2007-22, June 11, 2007, Section 1)
Section 203. Exempt Parties. The United States, the Commonwealth, or any of
their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment
of the tax imposed by this Part. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall not,
however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the tax.
(Ordinance No. 192, October 13, 1986, Section 3)
Section 204. Excluded Transactions. The tax imposed by Section 202 shall not be
imposed upon:
(A) A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property
condemned to the owner of record at the time of condemnation which
reconveyance is made within one (1) year from the date of condemnation.
(B) A document which the Commonwealth is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(C) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or county
of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau sale.
)0CD( - 8
B14625
(D) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
conforms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit
existing record legal title or interest.
(E) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual
consideration of property, passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value than their
undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(F) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided the
property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the husband
and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce,
between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister
or spouse of a brother or sister and between grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee
within one (1) year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such
transfer.
(G) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(H) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee or an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if the
transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible beneficiaries,
whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. No such
exemption shall be granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy
of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
(I) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(K) A transfer:
(1) for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or
(2) from or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or
straw party where his principal, no tax would be imposed under this Part.
)OW( - 9
B14625
Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or statement
of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from, or
for the benefit of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(L) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation of statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where
the department reasonably determines that the primary intent for such merger,
consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this Part.
(M) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same proportion as
his interest in or ownership of the real estate being conveyed and where the stock
of the corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the grantee
for more than two (2) years.
(N) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit
industrial development agency or authority.
(0) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(1) the grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy conversion,
energy production, pollution control, ware-housing or agriculture; and
(2) the agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(P) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which
the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the holder
assigns the bid to another person.
(Q) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being or
has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
XXIX -10
B14625
(R) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, (68 Stat. 3), 26
U.S.C., Section 501(c)(3) and which has as its primary purpose preservation of
land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
(S) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns at least
seventy-five (75%) percent of each class of the stock thereof.
(1') A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(U) A transaction wherein the tax due is one dollar ($1.00) or less.
(V) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full complete
value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of value. For leases of coal, oil,
natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this Part. (Ordinance No. 192,
October 13, 1986, Section 4)
Section 205. Documents Relating to Associations or Corporations and Members,
Partners, Stockholders or Shareholders Thereof. Except as otherwise provided in
Section 203, documents which make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title
to real estate between associations or corporations and the members, partners,
shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this Subpart,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders. (Ordinance No. 192, October 13, 1986, Section 5)
Section 206. Acquired Company.
(A) A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in
the ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, ninety (90%) percent or more of the
total ownership interest in the company within a period of three (3) years.
(B) With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or in
XXIX - 11
B14625
voluntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when, because
of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer of assets that
are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum
requirements of a family farm corporation under this Part.
(C) Within thirty (30) days after becoming an acquired company, the
company shall present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each
county in which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the
acquired company in such county.
(Ordinance No. 192, October 13, 1986, Section 6)
Section 207. Credits Against Tax.
(A) Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the preceding year as
consideration for the purchase of other residential property, a credit for the
amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him shall be given to him
toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
(B) Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which
has transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration for the
purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a credit for the
amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder shall be given to
the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
(C) Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the
grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the demise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
(D) Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of
tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon
the deed.
(E) If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given
under this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover shall be allowed.
(Ordinance No. 192, October 13, 1986, Section 7)
Section 208. Administration. The tax imposed under Section 202 shall be
administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, N.
)0CDC - 12
B14625
511, as amended, known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act"); provided that if the correct
amount of the tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, Township
of Spring, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. Section
8102-D) authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax. (Resolution No. 2007-22, June
11, 2007, Section 2)
Section 209. Severance. If any part, section, subsection, provision, regulation,
limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this Part, is, for any reason
declared to be illegal, unconstitutional or invalid, by any Court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect or impair the validity of this Part as a whole,
or any other part, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation, restriction,
sentence, clause, phrase, word, or remaining portion of the within Part. The Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Pennsylvania, hereby declares that it would
have adopted the within Part and each part, section, subsection, provision, regulation,
limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase and word thereof, irrespective of the
limitations, restrictions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or word may be declared illegal,
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ordinance No. 192, October 13, 1986, Section 8)
B14625
Part 3
Refuse Collection
Section 301. Levy of Tax. A per capita trash and refuse collection tax in the
amount of Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00) per household with single occupancy, One
Hundred Forty-Five Dollars ($145.00) per household with double occupancy and Two
Hundred Ten Dollars ($210.00) per household with three (3) or more occupants, per
annum, for the collection, removal and disposal of trash and/or refuse from the
dwellings situate within the areas heretofore referred to is levied and assessed under
§2101, et seq., of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. §67101, et seq., and its
amendments, upon each adult taxable resident of the following areas, villages,
developments and/ or subdivisions and extensions and additions thereto: Beverly
Heights, Colony Park, Cornwall Terrace, Drexelwood, Gelsinger Road, Grings Hill
Estates, Gring's Hill Road, Hain Road, Lenape Valley, Lincoln Park, Midvale Manor,
Miller Road, Montrose Manor, Oak Meadows, Oakview Estates, Oakview Estates II,
Oak Terrace, The Oaks, Old Fritztown Road, Pendergast Road, Reedy Road, Reedy
Run, Shiloh Hills, Springmont, Spring Ridge, Springton Village, Stonegate/ Wagner
Farm, Tallowyck, TomLisa Heights, Werner Estates, Western Meadows, West
Wyomissing, Wheatfield Road, Wheaton Heights, Whitfield, North Whitfield, Whitfield
Wyomissing, Wilshire, Wilshire Meadows, the village abutting Old Fritztown Road
between Gring's Hill Road and Fritztown Road, village abutting Wheatfield Road from
Gring's Hill Road to Chapel Hill Road, village abutting Hain Road between Old
Fritztown Road and the common boundary line of the Townships of Spring and
Cumru. The Township of Spring reserves the right to add new areas, subdivisions,
villages and/or developments pursuant to appropriate resolution of the Township
Board of Supervisors. Said tax shall be effective for the entirety of calendar year 2002,
and shall continue in effect unless and until repealed. (Ordinance 68, March 20, 1967,
Section 1; as amended by Ordinance 96, January 8, 1973, Section 1; by Ordinance 106,
February 24, 1975, Sections 1 and 2; by Ordinance 134, March 4, 1977, Section 1; by
Ordinance 143, February 27, 1978, Section 1; by Ordinance 180, January 6, 1986, Section
1; and by Ordinance 278, January 14, 2002, Section 1; as further amended by Resolution
No. 2006-32, December, 2007; as confirmed by Resolution No. 2007-36, December, 2007;
as confirmed by Resolution No. 2008-24, December, 2008)
Section 302. Collection. Such tax shall be collected by the duly elected or
appointed Tax Collector of the Township of Spring in the same manner and at the same
time as other Township taxes are collected as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law
of 1945, as amended and supplemented. (Ordinance No. 68, March 20, 1967, Section 2)
Section 303. Bond of Collector. The Tax Collector shall give bond, secured and
conditioned for the collection and payment of such taxes as provided by law for other
Township taxes. (Ordinance No. 68, March 20, 1967, Section 3)
)0m( -1
B14625
Section 304. Discount; Penalty. All adult taxable residents subject to the
payment of the within per capita refuse collection tax shall be entitled to a discount of
two per centum (2%) of the amount of such tax making payment of whole amount
thereof within two (2) months after the date of the tax notice. All adult taxable residents
who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged against them for four (4)
months after the date of the tax notice shall be charged to a penalty of ten per centum
(10%), which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Tax Collector and be collected
by him. (Ordinance No. 68, March 20, 1967, Section 4, as amended by Ordinance
No. 134, March 14, 1977, Section 2; and by Ordinance No. 180, January 6, 1986,
Section 2)
Section 305. Duplicate Constitutes Warrant for Collection. The entry of the per
capita refuse collection tax in the tax duplicate and the issuance of such duplicate to the
Tax Collector shall constitute his warrant for the collection of the per capita refuse
collection tax hereby levied and assessed. (Ordinance 68, March 20, 1967, Section 5)
Section 306. Compensation of Tax Collector. The expense of collection and
compensation of the Tax Collector shall be paid and allowed as provided in the Local
Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented, which compensation shall
be the same as shall be fixed from time to time for the collection of other Township
taxes. (Ordinance No. 68, March 20, 1967, Section 6)
Section 307. Notice to Taxpayers. The Tax Collector shall give notice to the
taxpayers of the amount of per capita refuse collection tax under this Part 3, at the same
time and in the same manner as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as
amended and supplemented. (Ordinance No. 68, March 20, 1967, Section 7)
Section 308. Addition of Names to Duplicate. In case the Tax Collector shall, at
any time, find within the areas of the Township of Spring heretofore designated, any
adult taxable resident whose name does not appear upon the tax duplicate, he shall
report the name of such person forthwith to the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Spring, which shall promptly certify the same to the Tax Collector reporting such
name; whereupon, the Tax Collector shall add such name and the assessment of this per
capita refuse collection tax against such person to the duplicate of the refuse collection
area of the Township of Spring, and shall proceed to collect the same. (Ordinance 68,
March 20, 1967, Section 8)
Section 309. Powers and Duties of Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall give
notice to the taxpayers; shall have the power to collect such taxes by distress; shall have
the power and authority to demand and receive such tax from the employer of any
person owing any per capita refuse collection tax; shall remit such taxes to the Treasurer
of the Township of Spring by separate statement at the same time as other taxes are
remitted to the said Township; shall allow discounts and add penalties; shall generally
be subject to all the duties and shall have all the rights and authority inferred upon him
)0(DC - 2
B14625
by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented. It is hereby
declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring in
enacting this Part 3 to confer upon the Tax Collector in the collection of this per capita
refuse collection tax, all the powers together with all the duties and obligations to the
same extent and as more fully provided for in the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as
amended and supplemented. (Ordinance 68, March 20, 1967, Section 9)
Section 310. Severability. If any sentence, clause or section of this Part 3 is, for
any reason, found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses or sections or parts of this Part 3. It is hereby declared as the intent of
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring that this Part 3 would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part
thereof not been included therein. (Ordinance 68, March 20, 1967, Section 11)
B14625
Part 4
Street Lighting Tax
Section 401. Levy of Tax. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring
adopts the following new rates of taxation upon individuals and upon taxable real
estate located within the Township as follows:
Street Lighting $.60/front foot improved
$.30/ front foot unimproved
(Ordinance No. 278, January 14, 2002, Section 3; as amended by Resolution No. 2006-32,
December, 2006; as confirmed by Resolution No. 2007-36, December, 2007; as amended
by Resolution No. 2008-24, December, 2008; as amended by Resolution No. 2012-18,
December 10, 2012)
1314625
Part 5
Earned Income Tax
Section 501. Definitions. All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall
have the meanings set forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set
forth herein:
(A) Collector. The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the Tax.
(B) Effective Date. January 1, 2012.
(C) Enactment. This Ordinance.
(D) Governing Body. The Township of Spring.
(E) Local Tax Enabling Act. The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth in
53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in effect under
Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq. when such numbering
and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as amended in the future.
(F) TCD. Any tax collection district to which the Taxing Authority or
any part of the Taxing Authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
(G) TCC. The tax collection committee established to govern and
oversee the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
(H) Tax. The tax imposed by this Enactment.
(I) Tax Return. A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of Tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or
reported under this Enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
(J) Tax Year. The period from January 1 to December 31.
(K) Taxing Authority. Township of Spring.
(Ordinance No. 381, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 502. Imposition of Tax.
(A) General Purpose Resident Tax. The Taxing Authority hereby
imposes a Tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of one-half (1/2) of one
percent (1%) on earned income and net profits of individual residents of the
Taxing Authority.
XXIX -5
B14625
(B) General Purpose Municipal Nonresident Tax. The Taxing
Authority also imposes a Tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of one
percent (1%) on earned income and net profits derived by an individual who is
not a resident of the Taxing Authority from any work, business, profession, or
activity, of any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the Taxing Authority.
(C) Ongoing Tax. The Tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current Tax Year and each Tax Year thereafter, without annual re-enactment,
until this Enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
(D) Combined Tax Rate Applicable to Residents. Currently, the total
rate applicable to residents of the Taxing Authority, including the tax imposed
by the School District and municipality in which the individual resides, is one
percent (1%).
(E) Municipal Tax Rate Applicable to Nonresidents. Currently, the
total rate applicable to non-residents working within the Taxing Authority based
on the municipal non-resident tax rate is one percent (1%).
(F) Local Tax Enabling Act Applicable. The Tax is imposed under
authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this Enactment. Any
future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required to be applied
to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically become part of this
Enactment upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for
formal amendment of this Enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
(G) Applicable Laws, Regulations, Policies, and Procedures. The Tax
shall be collected and administered in accordance with: (1) all applicable laws
and regulations; and (2) regulations, policies, and procedures adopted by the
TCC or by the Collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
(Ordinance No. 381, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 503. No Exemption From Tax. Although credits and deductions against
Tax are permitted under certain circumstances as provided in applicable law and
regulations, no individuals are exempt from Tax based on age, income, or other factors.
(Ordinance No. 381, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 504. Individual Tax Returns and Payments. Every individual receiving
earned income or earning net profits in any Tax Year shall file Tax Returns and pay Tax
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act. (Ordinance No. 381, November 28,
2011, Section 1)
)0Ca - 6
B14625
Section 505. Employer Withholding, Remittance, and Tax Returns. Every
employer shall register, withhold, and remit Tax, and file Tax Returns in accordance
with the Local Tax Enabling Act. (Ordinance No. 381, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 506. Tax Collector. The Tax will be collected from individuals and
employers by the Collector. (Ordinance No. 381, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 507. Interest, Penalties, Costs, and Fines. Individuals and employers are
subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling
Act, including costs imposed by the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act. (Ordinance No. 381, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 508. Severability. The provisions of this Enactment are severable and if
any of its provisions are ruled by a court invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this Enactment. It is declared to
be the intention of the Governing Body that this Enactment would have been adopted if
such invalid or unconstitutional provision had not been included. (Ordinance No. 381,
November 28, 2011, Section 1)
B14625
Part 6
Fire Protection Tax
Section 601. Levy of Tax. That for the special purposes, for which the
Supervisors of said Township are authorized by law to levy and collect taxes, rates are
hereby levied for the fiscal year in the amount and for the specific purposes as follows:
Fire Protection Tax 1.00 mill (.0010)
(Resolution No. 74-29, December 30, 1974; as amended by Resolution No. 2002-42,
December 2002; as confirmed by Resolution No. 2006-32, December, 2006; as amended
by Resolution No. 2007-36, December, 2007; as confirmed by Resolution No. 2008-24,
December, 2008; as amended by Resolution No. 2012-18, December 10, 2012)
B14625
Part 7
Fire Hydrant Tax
Section 701. Levy of Tax. That for the special purposes, for which the
Supervisors of said Township are authorized by law to levy and collect taxes, rates are
hereby levied for the fiscal year in the amount and for the specific purposes as follows:
Fire Hydrant .06 mills (.00006)
(Resolution No. 74-29, December 30, 1974; as amended by Resolution No. 2002-42,
December, 2002; as amended by Resolution No. 2006-32, December, 2006; as confirmed
by Resolution No. 2007-36, December, 2007; as confirmed by Resolution No. 2008-24,
December, 2008; as amended by Resolution No. 2012-18, December 10, 2012)
B14625
Part 8
Mercantile Tax
Section 801. Short Title. This Part shall be known and may be cited as the
"Mercantile Tax Ordinance of the Township of Spring." (Ordinance No. 385, November
28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 802. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this
Part, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
PERSON - any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm, corporation or other entity engaging in business. As used in Section 811,
the term "Person" shall include the partners, members and/or officers of a
business entity.
RETAIL DEALER - any Person who is a dealer in, or vendor of, goods,
wares and merchandise who is not a Wholesale Dealer or a Wholesale and Retail
Dealer as herein defined.
TAX YEAR - the Township fiscal year period from January 1 to December
31, inclusive, and, because this Part shall continue in force from year to year on a
Township fiscal year basis without annual reenactment, each and every
successive Township fiscal year thereafter.
TAXPAYER - Any Person subject to this Mercantile Tax Ordinance.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS - any business
that is conducted at one location for less than sixty (60) consecutive calendar
days.
TOWNSHIP - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
MERCANTILE TAX COLLECTOR - the officer appointed by the
Township to collect the tax covered under this Part.
WHOLE VOLUME OF BUSINESS - the money or money's worth received
by any Wholesale Dealer, Retail Dealer, Wholesale and Retail Dealer or
proprietor of any restaurant or other place where food, drink and refreshments
are served, in, or by reason of, the sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
including in every case cash, credits and, except as herein provided, property of
any kind or nature, without deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials, labor and services expended, interest,
)0(DC - 10
B14625
discounts, other taxes paid and other expenses; but not including the dollar
volume of business transacted by Wholesale Dealers, Retail Dealers and
Wholesale and Retail Dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares and
merchandise taken by any such dealer as a trade-in or as part payment for other
goods, wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the re-sale price exceeds
the trade-in allowance.
WHOLESALE DEALER - any Person who sells to dealers in, or vendors
of, goods, wares and merchandise and to no other Persons.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DEALER - any Person who sells to dealers
in, or vendors of, goods, wares and merchandise and to other Persons.
The terms PERSON, WHOLESALE DEALER, RETAIL DEALER and WHOLESALE
AND RETAIL DEALER shall not include non-profit corporations or associations
organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes, social or civic groups,
agencies of the government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any Person vending or disposing of articles of his own growth,
production or manufacture for shipment or delivery from the place of growth,
production or manufacture thereof.
When any of the foregoing terms are used in this Part, the singular shall include the
plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 803. Levy and Collection of Tax. For the second half of Township fiscal
year 1983, i.e. from July 1, 1983 to December 31, 1983, and annually on the Township
fiscal year basis thereafter, the Township hereby imposes a tax on each dollar of the
Whole Volume of Business transacted in the Township by Wholesale Dealers, Retail
Dealers, wholesale and retail dealers and proprietors of restaurants or other places
where food, drink and refreshments are served, regardless or whether such Person,
dealer or proprietor shall maintain a place of business within the Township, at the rates
and at the times hereinafter set forth. The Township further directs that annual tax
return filings and payments of tax shall be made as hereinafter set forth.
Beginning January 1, 2012, and for each Tax Year thereafter, the Tax Year shall be
a calendar year, January 1 through December 31, inclusive. To effect the transition from
fiscal year, quarterly filing, to calendar year filing, the immediate prior fiscal year, July
1, 2010 through June 30, 2011 shall end on June 30, 2011. Each Taxpayer shall file a tax
return for the tax quarter July 1, 2011 through September 30, 2011, and shall pay all
taxes due on Whole Volume of Business in said quarter, on or before October 31, 2011.
Each Taxpayer shall file a tax return for the tax quarter October 1, 2011, through
December 31, 2011 and pay all taxes due on Whole Volume of Business in said quarter,
)0CD( - 11
B14625
on or before January 31, 2012. Beginning January 1, 2012 and for each Tax Year
thereafter, each Taxpayer shall file an annual tax return on April 15 of each year as
provided in this Ordinance.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 804. Imposition and Rates of Tax. Every Person engaging in any of the
following occupations or businesses in the Township, regardless of whether such
Person maintains a place of business within the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, shall pay in the manner hereinafter provided, an annual tax on each
dollar of the Whole Volume of Business transacted in the Township by such Person, for
the second half of Township fiscal year 1983, i.e. from July 1, 1983 to December 31, 1983,
and annually thereafter on the Township fiscal year basis, at the following rates:
(A) Wholesale Dealers in goods, wares and merchandise at the rate of
one (1) mil on each dollar of the annual Whole Volume of Business transacted by
them;
(B) Retail Dealers in goods, wares and merchandise and proprietors of
restaurants or other places where food, drink and refreshments are served, at the
rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) mils on each dollar of the annual Whole Volume of
Business transacted by them; and
(C) Wholesale and Retail Dealers in goods, wares and merchandise at
the rate of one (1) mil on each dollar of the annual whole volume of wholesale
business transacted by them and at the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) mils on
each dollar of the annual whole volume of retail business transacted by them.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 805. Computation of Whole Volume of Business.
(A) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed, who has commenced
business at least a full year prior to the beginning of a Tax Year shall
compute the estimated Whole Volume of Business for that Tax Year upon
the actual gross amount of business transacted by such Person during the
twelve (12) months preceding.
(B) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed who has commenced
business less than one (1) year prior to the beginning of a Tax Year shall
compute the estimated Whole Volume of Business for that Tax Year by
multiplying by twelve (12) the monthly average of the actual gross
amount of business transacted during the months engaged in business
prior to January 1.
)0CDC -12
B14625
(C) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed who commences business
subsequent to the beginning of a Tax Year shall compute the estimated
Whole Volume of Business for that Tax Year upon the actual gross amount
of business transacted during the first month of engaging in business,
multiplied by the number of months remaining in the Tax Year.
(D) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed, who engages in a
business that is temporary, seasonal or itinerant in nature and of a
duration not exceeding sixty (60) days, shall compute the annual Whole
Volume of Business for the Tax Year upon the actual whole amount of
business transacted during the Tax Year.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 806. Returns.
(A) Every return shall be made upon a form prescribed and furnished
by the Mercantile Tax Collector. Every Person making a return shall furnish all
information requested therein and certify the correctness thereof.
(B) Beginning with Tax Year 2012 and for each subsequent Tax Year,
every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed who has commenced business at
least one (1) full year prior to the beginning of the Tax Year shall on or before the
15th day of April following, file with the Mercantile Tax Collector a return setting
forth his name, business name and business address and such other information
as may be required by the Mercantile Tax Collector to compute the actual gross
volume of business transacted during the immediately preceding Tax Year and
the amount of tax estimated to be due for the then current Tax Year. Each return
shall show the actual Whole Volume of Business transacted by the Taxpayer
during the preceding Tax Year, the amount of tax paid previously as an estimate
for the preceding Tax Year, the amount of tax, if any, remaining due for the
preceding Tax Year, and the amount of estimated tax due for the current Tax
Year.
(C) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed, who conducts or
commences such business less than one (1) year prior to the beginning of the Tax
Year shall, on or before the 15th day of April following, file with the Mercantile
Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, business name and business
address and such other information as may be required by the Mercantile Tax
Collector to compute the actual gross volume of business transacted during the
immediately preceding Tax Year and the amount of tax estimated to be due for
the then current Tax Year. Each return shall show the actual Whole Volume of
Business transacted by the Taxpayer during the preceding Tax Year, the amount
)OW(-13
B14625
of tax paid previously as an estimate for the preceding Tax Year, the amount of
tax, if any, remaining due for the preceding Tax Year, and the amount of
estimated tax due for the current Tax Year.
(D) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed, who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the Tax Year shall, within sixty (60) days
from the date of commencing such business, file with the Mercantile Tax
Collector a return setting forth his name, business name and business address
and such other information as may be required by the Mercantile Tax Collector
and shall compute and show the amount of tax estimated to be due for the then
current Tax Year.
(E) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed who engages in a
business which is temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature and of a duration
not exceeding sixty (60) days shall, within seven (7) days from the day of
completion of such business, file with the Mercantile Tax Collector a return
setting forth his name, business name, business address and such other
information as may be required by the Mercantile Tax Collector to compute the
actual gross amount of business transacted during such period and the amount
of tax due. Each tax return shall show the amount of tax due for the then current
Tax Year.
(F) Any Person ceasing to do business during the Tax Year shall,
within fourteen (14) days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a final tax
return showing the actual gross volume of business conducted during that
portion of the Tax Year in which said Person was actually in business, and pay
the tax due as computed thereon.
(G) The burden is hereby imposed upon any Person claiming an
exemption from the payment or imposition of tax hereby imposed to prove his
legal right to such exemption.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 807. Payment.
(A) At the time of filing the return, each Taxpayer shall pay an
estimated tax for the current year and any balance of taxes due for the Tax Year
immediately preceding. The estimated tax shall be as calculated as provided
above. The balance of tax due for the preceding Tax Year shall be the difference
between the amount of tax paid as an estimate for said preceding Tax Year and
the amount of the tax finally shown to be due.
B14625
(B) All taxes, interest and penalties imposed under the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be payable to the Mercantile Tax Collector.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 808. Powers and Duties of Mercantile Tax Collector.
(A) It shall be the duty of the Mercantile Tax Collector to collect and
receive the taxes, interest, penalties and fines imposed by this Part. It shall also
be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
Person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
(B) The Mercantile Tax Collector is hereby charged with the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Part, and is hereby
empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
Part, including provisions for the re-examination and correction of returns, for
payments alleged or found to be incorrect, and for overpayments claimed or
found to have occurred.
(C) If the Mercantile Tax Collector is not satisfied with the return made
by any Taxpayer or supposed Taxpayer under the provisions of this Part, he is
hereby authorized and empowered to re-determine the tax due by such Person,
based upon the facts contained in the return, or upon any information within his
possession or that shall come into his possession; and for this purpose he or his
representative is authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any
such Person in order to verify the accuracy of any return or payment made under
the provisions thereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by this Part
have been paid; and every such Person is hereby required to submit his books,
papers and records to such examination upon request of the Mercantile Tax
Collector and to give him or his representative the means, facilities and
opportunity for such an examination.
(D) If any Taxpayer or supposed Taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to file
any return required by this Part, or to pay the tax imposed by this Part, or if any
Person pays less than the correct amount of tax due from him, the Mercantile Tax
Collector shall estimate or determine the tax due by such Person and the amount
of interest and penalties thereon.
(E) The Mercantile Tax Collector is hereby authorized and directed to
make and keep such records and prepare such forms as may be necessary or
convenient to carry this Part into effect.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
)0CDC -15
B14625
Section 809. Suits for Tax; Interest; Penalties.
(A) All taxes, interest and penalties due and unpaid under this Part
shall be recovered by the Township in accordance with the provisions of the
Local Tax Enabling Act, 1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended from time to
time, or as otherwise provided by law.
(B) In the event that the amount of tax paid by any Taxpayer is less
than the amount determined to be due from such Taxpayer, interest shall be paid
on the difference at the rate of one-half of one percent (1 /2 of 1%) per month or
fractional part thereof from the day said tax was due and payable until the day
said tax is fully paid. For the purpose of this provision, the tax imposed by this
Ordinance shall be deemed due and payable on the 15th day of April of the Tax
Year; except that in the case of Taxpayers who file returns under Section 806(D)
of this Ordinance, said tax shall be deemed due and payable sixty (60) days from
the date of commencing such business and in the case of Taxpayers who file
returns under Section 806(E) of this Ordinance, said tax shall be deemed due and
payable seven (7) days from the day such business is completed.
(C) The Mercantile Tax levied pursuant to this Ordinance shall be due
and payable on the date which the Taxpayer is required to file a tax return as set
forth above. All taxes due shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half
percent (1 1/2%) per month or fractional part of a month, from the day they are
due and payable until paid. If any Taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any
return or payment as required, an additional ten percent (10%) of the amount of
the tax shall be added to the amount due. Where legal action is brought for the
recovery of this tax, the Taxpayer shall, in addition to the tax, be responsible and
liable for all collection costs, including attorneys' fees.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 810. Returns to be Confidential. Any information gained by the
Mercantile Tax Collector or any other official or agent of the Township as a result of
any returns, investigations or verifications required by this Part shall be confidential,
except for official purposes and except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as
otherwise provided by law. (Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 811. Fines and Penalties. Any Person, or any officer, agent, servant or
employee thereof, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms or
provisions of this Part or of any regulations or requirements made pursuant hereto and
authorized hereby, or who knowingly makes any false or untrue statement on his
return, or who refuses to permit inspection of any books, records or accounts of any
Person when the right to make such inspection is requested by the Mercantile Tax
>OW( - 16
B14625
Collector, or who fails or refuses to file a return required by this Part, or who fails or
refuses to pay any tax, interest or penalties required by this Part, shall, upon conviction
thereof before any Magisterial District Justice of Berks County, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) and costs of prosecution for each
offense, and in default of the payment of said fine and costs he shall be imprisoned in
the Berks County Prison for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days for each offense.
Each and every day that any such offense occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate offense. The fine imposed by this Section shall be in addition to any other
penalty imposed by any other section of this Part. (Ordinance No. 385, November 28,
2011, Section 1)
Section 812. Disposition of Tax. The tax imposed by this Part shall be in addition
to all other taxes of any kind and nature heretofore or hereafter levied by the Township,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, and the tax imposed herein is for general revenue
purposes. (Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 813. Annual Reenactment. Beginning January 1, 2012, and for each Tax
Year thereafter, the Tax Year shall be a calendar year, January 1 through December 31.
To effect the transition from fiscal year quarterly filing to calendar year annual filing,
the immediate prior fiscal quarterly filing, July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2011 shall end
on June 30, 2011. Each Taxpayer shall file a tax return for the tax quarter July 1, 2011,
through September 30, 2011, and pay all taxes due on gross volume of business in said
quarter, on or before October 31, 2011. Each Taxpayer shall file a tax return for the tax
quarter October 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011, and pay all taxes due on gross
volume of business in said quarter, on or before January 31, 2012. Beginning January 1,
2012 and for each Tax Year thereafter, each Taxpayer shall file an annual return on or
before April 15 of each year as provided in this Ordinance. (Ordinance No. 385,
November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 814. Prohibited Levies. Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed
to empower the Township to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any Person,
or any business, or any portion of any business, trade, occupation or profession not
within the taxing power of the Township under the Constitution of the United States
and the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Ordinance No.
385, November 28, 2011, Section 1)
Section 815. Severability Clause. If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed
under the provisions of this Part shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or of the laws or the Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as for that Person, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the Township's right to impose or collect said tax, or the validity of
the tax imposed, upon other Persons as herein provided; and if any phrase, clause,
section, provision or exclusion contained in this Part is held to be invalid, illegal or
unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the other
)0CD( -17
B14625
provisions of this Part, and it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this Part
would have been adopted had such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase,
clause, section, provision or exclusion not been included herein; and to this and the
provisions of this Part are hereby declared to be severable. (Ordinance No. 385,
November 28, 2011, Section 1)
B14625
Part 9
Business Privilege Tax
Section 901. Short Title. This Part shall be known as the "Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance". (Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
Section 902. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this
Part, shall have the following meanings:
BUSINESS - any activity carried on or exercised for gain or profit within
the Township of Spring, including, but not limited to: (1) the sale of merchandise
or other tangible personalty; (2) the performance of services; (3) the rental of
personalty and/or realty; and including, but not limited to, (4) those enterprises
engaged in by hotel operators, motel operators, parking lot and garage operators,
warehouse operators, lessors of real estate, lessors of tangible personal property,
physicians and surgeons, osteopaths, podiatrists, chiropractors, veterinarians,
optometrists, opticians, pharmacists, lawyers, dentists, engineers, surveyors,
architects, chemists, accountants, certified public accountants, funeral directors,
promoters, factors, commission merchants, agents, brokers, manufacturer's
representatives, advertising and public relations agencies, real estate brokers,
insurance brokers and agents, cable television operators, barber shop operators
and beauty shop operators, cleaning, pressing and dyeing establishment
operators, laundry operators, shoe repair operators, tailors, upholsterers,
electrical, plastering, brick laying, carpentry, heat, ventilation, air conditioning,
plumbing and painting contractors, general contractors of any nature or kind
engaged in any class of building or construction, remodeling or alteration,
repairers of electrical, electronic and automotive machinery and equipment, or
other machinery or equipment and other wares and merchandise, and all other
Persons, engaged in any other activity, whatsoever, carried on or exercised for
gain or profit within the Township of Spring.
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS - the actual gross consideration credited
or received for or on account of sales made, rentals and/ or services rendered by
any business subject to this Part. For the purposes of this Part, "Gross Volume of
Business" is intended to also mean "Whole Volume of Business".
PERSON - Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm, corporation or other entity engaging in business. As used in Section 905
below, the term "Person" shall include the partners or members of an association
and the officers of a corporation.
B14625
RETAIL DEALER - any Person who is a dealer in, or vendor of, goods,
wares and merchandise who is not a Wholesale Dealer or a Wholesale and Retail
Dealer as herein defined.
SERVICE - any act or instance of helping or benefiting another for
consideration.
TAX COLLECTOR - the Person duly appointed by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Spring to administer and collect the within tax.
TAXPAYER - a Person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
Part.
TAX YEAR - the Township of Spring's fiscal year, which is the period
from January 1 to December 31, inclusive, and because this Part shall continue in
force from year to year on a Township fiscal year basis without annual
reenactment, each and every successive Township fiscal year thereafter.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS - any business
that is conducted at one location for less than sixty (60) consecutive days.
TOWNSHIP - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP FISCAL YEAR - the period January 1 to December 31,
inclusive, and because this Part shall continue in force from year to year on a
Township calendar year basis without annual reenactment, each and every
successive Township calendar year thereafter.
TREASURER - the Treasurer of the Township of Spring.
WHOLESALE DEALER or VENDOR - any Person who sells to dealers in,
or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to no other Persons.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DEALER - any Person who sells to dealers
in, or vendors of, goods, wares and merchandise and to no other Persons.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
Section 903. Levy, Collection and Administration of Tax. There is hereby levied
for the second half of Township Fiscal Year 1983, i.e. from July 1, 1983 to December 31,
1983, and annually thereafter on the Township Fiscal Year basis, without reenactment, a
tax payable and due for general revenue purposes on the privilege of doing business as
herein defined within the Township of Spring, as follows:
XXIX - 20
B14625
(A) Rate and Basis of Tax. The rate of the tax on each and every dollar
of the Gross Volume of Business transacted within the territorial limits of the
Township shall be one and one-half (1 1/2 ) mils (one and one-half (1 1/2 ) mils shall
mean one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of
Gross Volume of Business) except that the rate of the tax on each and every
dollar of the Gross Volume of Business transacted by Wholesale Dealers or
Vendors within the territorial limits of the Township shall be one (1) mil. All
non-wholesale business of such Wholesale Dealers or Vendors shall be taxed at
the general rate of one and one-half (1 1/2 ) mils.
(B) Computation of Whole Volume of Business.
(1) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed, who has
commenced business at least a full year prior to the beginning of a Tax Year shall
compute the estimated Whole Volume of Business for that Tax Year upon the
actual gross amount of business transacted by such Person during the twelve (12)
months preceding.
(2) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed, who has
commenced business less than one (1) full year prior to the beginning of a Tax
Year shall compute the estimated Whole Volume of Business for that Tax Year by
multiplying by twelve (12) the monthly average of the actual gross amount of
business transacted during the months engaged in business prior to January 1.
(3) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed, who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the Tax Year shall compute the
estimated Whole Volume of Business for that Tax Year upon the actual gross
amount of business transacted during the first month of engaging in business,
multiplied by the number of months remaining in the Tax Year.
(4) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed, who engages in a
business that is temporary, seasonal or itinerant in nature, shall compute their
annual Whole Volume of Business for the Tax Year upon the actual whole
amount of business transacted during such Tax Year.
(5) The Tax Collector and/or Treasurer is hereby authorized to accept
payment under protest of the amount of business privilege tax claimed by the
Township in any case where the Taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the
Township's claim for tax.
(6) Payments made under the Mercantile Tax for business to which
this tax is applicable shall be credited to this tax and vice versa.
B14625
(7) Beginning January 1, 2012, and for each Tax Year thereafter, the Tax
Year shall be a calendar year, January 1 through December 31. To effect the
transition from fiscal year quarterly filing to calendar year annual filing, the
immediate prior fiscal year, July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2011 shall end on June
30, 2011. Each Taxpayer shall file a tax return for the tax quarter July 1, 2011,
through September 30, 2011, and pay taxes due on Gross Volume of Business in
said quarter, on or before October 31, 2011. Each Taxpayer shall file a tax return
for the tax quarter October 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011, and pay all taxes
due on Gross Volume of Business in said quarter, on or before January 31, 2012.
Beginning January 1, 2012, and for each Tax Year thereafter, each Taxpayer shall
file an annual tax return on April 15 of each year as provided in this Ordinance.
(C) Persons, Business and Receipts Exempted.
(1) Persons and Businesses. Persons employed for a wage or
salary, nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious,
charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the government of the
United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the business
of any political subdivision, or of any authority created or organized
under and pursuant to any act of assembly are exempt from the
provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege,
transaction, subject or occupation which is subject to a state tax or license
fee, and which tax or license fee has been held by the courts of
Pennsylvania to be the basis for exemption from the imposition of a
business privilege tax by a municipality.
(3) Utilities. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the
gross receipts from utility service of any Person or company whose rates
of service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission; or on any public utility service rendered by any such Person
or company or on any privilege or transaction involving the rendering of
any such public utility service.
(4) State Tax on Tangible Property. No such tax shall be
assessed and collected on the privilege of employing such tangible
property as is subject to a state tax except on sales of admission to places
of amusement or on sales or other transfers of title or possession of
property.
(5)
and collected on goods, articles and products, or on by-products of
manufacture, or on minerals, timber, natural resources and farm products,
)00X - 22
Production and Manufacture. No such tax shall be assessed
B14625
manufactured, produced or grown within the Township or on the
preparation or processing thereof for use or market, or on any privilege,
act or transaction relating to the business of manufacturing, the
production, preparation or processing of minerals, timber and natural
resources or farm products, by manufacturers, by producers and by
farmers with respect to the goods, articles and products of their own
manufacture, production or growth, or any privilege, act or transaction
relating to the business of processing by-products of manufacture, or on
the transportation, loading, unloading or dumping or storage of such
goods, articles, products or by-products.
(6) Construction of or Improvement to Residential Dwellings.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the construction of or
improvement to residential dwellings.
(D) Determination of Gross Volume Business. Gross volume of
business upon which the tax hereunder is computed shall include the actual
gross consideration credited or received for or on account of sales made, rentals
and/or services rendered, subject only to the following allowable deductions and
exemptions:
(1) The dollar volume of business transacted by Wholesale and
Retail Dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise
taken by any dealer as trade-in or as part payment of other goods, wares
and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds the
trade-in allowance.
(2) Refund, credits or allowances given by a Taxpayer to a
purchaser on account of defects in goods, wares or merchandise sold, or
on account of goods, wares or merchandise returned.
(3) Any commissions paid by a broker to another broker on
account of a purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with
such other broker.
(4) Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken in the same
year for Federal Income Taxation purposes.
(5) Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Township of Spring.
(E) Partial Exemptions. Where Gross Volume of Business in its entirety
cannot be subjected to the tax imposed by this Part by reason of the provisions of
the Constitution of the United States or any other provision of law, the Tax
)0CD( -23
B14625
Collector, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring, shall establish rules and regulations and methods of allocation and
evaluation so that only that part of the Gross Volume of Business which is
properly attributable and allowable to doing business in the Township shall be
taxed hereunder.
(F) Rate When Same Tax is Imposed by Two Taxing Bodies. If any
Person is liable for the same tax on the same subject imposed under the Local Tax
Enabling Act of 1965, December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, and its amendments, to the
Township and one or more political subdivisions of the State, then and in that
event the tax shall be apportioned by such percentage as may be agreed upon by
such political subdivisions, but in no event shall the combined taxes of both
subdivisions exceed a maximum rate of tax as fixed by the Local Tax Enabling
Act permitting the imposition of such taxes.
(G) Records. The Taxpayer, to obtain the foregoing enumerated
exclusions and deductions, shall keep books and records of their business to
show clearly, accurately and separately the amount of sales and services
excluded from the tax and the amounts of sales and services which are entitled to
be deducted from the Gross Volume of Business as hereinbefore provided.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
Section 904. Returns.
(A) Beginning with Tax Year 2012 and for each subsequent Tax Year,
every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed who has commenced business at
least one (1) full year prior to the beginning of the Tax Year shall, on or before the
15th day of April following, file with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his
name, business name, business address and such other information as may be
required by the Tax Collector to compute the actual Gross Volume of Business
transacted by him during the Tax Year immediately prior and the amount of tax
estimated to be due for the then current Tax Year. Each return shall show the
actual Gross Volume of Business transacted by the Taxpayer during the
preceding Tax Year, the amount of tax paid previously as an estimate for the
preceding Tax Year, the amount of tax, if any, remaining due for the preceding
year, and the amount of estimated tax due for the current Tax Year.
(B) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced business less than one (1) year prior to the beginning of the Tax Year
shall, on or before the 15th day of April following, file with the Tax Collector a
return setting forth his name, business name, business address and such other
information as may be required by the Tax Collector to compute the actual Cross
Volume of Business transacted during the Tax Year immediately prior and the
)00X - 24
B14625
amount of tax estimated to be due for the then current Tax Year. Each return
shall show the actual Whole Volume of Business transacted by the Taxpayer
during the preceding Tax Year, the amount of tax paid previously as an estimate
for the preceding Tax Year, the amount of tax, if any, remaining due for the
preceding Tax Year, and the amount of estimated tax due for the current Tax
Year.
(C) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the Tax Year shall, within sixty (60) days
from the date of commencing such business, file with the Tax Collector a tax
return setting forth his name, business name and business address and such
other information as may be required by the Tax Collector, and shall compute
and show the amount of tax estimated to be due for the then current Tax Year.
(D) Every Person subject to the tax hereby imposed who engages in a
Temporary, Seasonal or Itinerant Business by nature and of a duration not
exceeding sixty (60) days shall, within seven (7) days from the date they
complete such business, file with the Tax Collector a return setting forth their
name, business name, business address and any other information as may be
required by the Tax Collector to determine the actual Gross Volume of Business
for the period they engaged in business during the tax quarter and pay the
amount due.
(E) Any Person going out of or ceasing to do business during the Tax
Year shall, within fourteen (14) days from the date of ceasing to do business, file
a return showing the actual Gross Volume of Business conducted during that
portion of the Tax Year in which said Person was actually in business, and pay
the tax due as computed thereon.
(F) All taxes due under this Part shall bear interest at the rate of one
and one half percent (1 1 /2 %) per month or fraction of a month from the date due
and payable until paid. If any Taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any
return or payment as and when required, a penalty in the amount of ten percent
(10%) of the amount of the tax shall be added and collected.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
Section 905. Fines and Violations.
(A) Any Person who shall conduct, transact or engage in any of the
businesses subject to the tax imposed by this Part who fails, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the terms or provisions of this Part or of any regulations or
requirements made pursuant hereto and authorized hereby, or who knowingly
makes any false or untrue statement on his return, or who refuses to permit
)00X - 25
B14625
inspection of any books, records or accounts of any Person when the right to
make such inspection is requested by the Tax Collector, or who fails or refuses to
file a return required by this Part, or who fails or refuses to pay any tax, interest
or penalties required by this Part, shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magistrate District Justice of Berks County, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) and costs of prosecution for each
offense, and in default of the payment of said fine and costs he shall be
imprisoned in the Berks County Prison for a period not exceeding thirty (30)
days for each offense. Each and every day that any such offense occurs or
continues shall be considered a separate offense. The fine imposed by this
Section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of
this Part.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
Section 906. Continuing Offense. Each day on which such Person violates this
Part may be considered as a separate offense and punishable as such as aforeprovided.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
Section 907. Payment of Tax.
(A) At the time of filing a tax return, each Taxpayer shall pay an
estimated tax for the current year and any balance of taxes due for the Tax Year
immediately preceding. The estimated tax shall be calculated as provided above.
The balance of tax due for the preceding Tax Year shall be the difference between
the amount of the tax paid as an estimate for said preceding Tax Year and the
amount of the tax finally shown to be due.
(B) All taxes, interest and penalties imposed under the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be payable to the Tax Collector.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
Section 908. Duties of the Tax Collector and Treasurer.
(A) The Tax Collector is charged with the duty of collecting and
receiving the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this Part. It shall be the Tax
Collector's duty to keep a record showing the amount received from each Person
paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
(B) The Tax Collector, under the direction of the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Spring, is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement and correction of returns, and payments alleged
XXIX - 26
B14625
or found to be incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed, or found to
have occurred, and charged with enforcing the provisions of this Part and any
rules and/or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
(C) In the event the Person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a
return, then in such case the Tax Collector shall assess said Person or Persons on
such an amount of Gross Volume of Business as the said Tax Collector deems
reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the Tax Collector shall
give the parties assessed a notice in which shall be stated the trade, business,
occupation or class and the amount of the business privilege tax imposed or
levied.
(D) The Taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as
will enable the making of a true and accurate return in accordance with the
provisions of this Part. Such accounts and records must disclose in detail the
gross receipts and other data pertaining to the Taxpayer's Gross Volume of
Business, and must be sufficiently complete to enable the Tax Collector to verify
all transactions. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books,
papers and records of any Person or Persons subject to or supposed to be subject
to the tax imposed by this Part in order to verify the accuracy of the return made,
or if no return was made, ascertain the due tax due.
(E) The Tax Collector shall promptly pay over to the Township's
Treasurer all monies collected pursuant to this Part.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
Section 909. Confidential Nature of Returns. Any information gained by the Tax
Collector or any other official, agent or employee of the Township as a result of any
returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this Part
shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law. (Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
Section 910. Suit on Collection and Penalty.
(A) The Tax Collector and/or Treasurer shall have the power in the
name of the Township to institute proceedings against any and all Persons who
violate the provisions of this Part.
(B) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought
for the recovery of any such tax, the Person liable therefore shall, in addition, be
liable for the costs of collection and interest and penalties herein imposed.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
)00( - 27
B14625
Section 911. Savings and Severability Clauses.
(A) Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any Person, any
business, or any portion of any business not within the taxing power of the
District under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(B) If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any Person under
the provisions of this Part shall be held by any court of competent power or
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provision of the law, the decisions
of the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose the taxes, or the validity
of the taxes so imposed upon other Persons as herein provided.
(C) The provisions of this Part are severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this Part. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring that this Part would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included herein.
(Ordinance No. 385, November 28, 2011, Section 2)
B14625
Part 10
Local Services Tax
Section 1001. Authority of Enactment. This Part is enacted under authority of
the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. (Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1002. Definitions. As used in this Part, the following terms shall have
meanings indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMPENSATION - salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees or
any other earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYER - any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental agency
or any other body engaged in business or situated in the Township of Spring,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, employing one (1) or more employees engaged in
any occupation.
OCCUPATION - any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which monetary
compensation is received or charged.
LOCAL SERVICES TAX COLLECTOR - Berks Earned Income Tax
Bureau.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES - The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve,
United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, The
Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
TAXPAYER - any natural person liable for the tax levied by this Part.
TOWNSHIP - Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
(Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1003. Imposition of Tax. A local services tax for emergency services
(which shall include emergency medical services, police services, and /or fire services),
road construction and/ or maintenance, reduction of property taxes, and property tax
relief through implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance
with 53 Pa. C.S. Ch. 85 Subchapter F, in the amount of Forty-Seven Dollars ($47.00), is
)0 D( - 29
B14625
hereby imposed upon a Taxpayer engaging in an occupation within the Township, in
the year 2008 and in each succeeding calendar year in which this tax is in effect. This
rate is established in consideration of the levy of a $5.00 LST by the Wilson School
District and the statutory limit of $52.00 liability per taxpayer. In the event that the
Wilson School District should eliminate or reduce such tax, the Township reserves the
right to increase the Township's rate, accordingly, up to such maximum as may be
permitted by law. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of
time in any calendar year beginning with the year 2008 shall pay the tax in accordance
with the provisions hereof. (Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1004. Nonresident Taxpayer. Both residents and nonresident Taxpayers
shall, by virtue of engaging in an occupation within the Township of Spring, shall be
subject to the tax and the provisions of this Part. (Ordinance No. 348, November 13,
2007, Section 1)
Section 1005. Exemptions. The following persons may apply and shall be
eligible for an exemption from the imposition of the Local Services Tax:
(A) All Taxpayers whose total Compensation from all sources is less
than Twelve Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($12,000.00) per annum.
(B) Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service and as a result of military service,
the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or has a
service-connected disability declared by the United States Veterans'
Administration or its successor to be a total one hundred percent (100%)
permanent disability.
(C) Any person who serves as a member of a Reserve Component of
the Armed Forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable year.
(Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1006. Exemption Application. Taxpayers seeking to claim an Exemption
for the Local Services Tax shall annually file an Exemption Certificate with the
Township and with the Employer. (Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1007. Collection Through Employers.
(A) Each Employer shall register with the Local Services Tax Collector
("Tax Collector") the employer's name, address and other information the tax
collector may require within fifteen (15) days after the effective date of this Part
or within fifteen (15) days after first becoming an Employer.
)0CDC - 30
B14625
(B) Each Employer shall assess each Taxpayer a pro-rata share of the
tax for each payroll period. The pro-rata share shall be determined by dividing
the tax levied by the number of payroll periods established by the Employer for
the calendar year.
(C) For each Taxpayer employed for any length of time after the
effective date of this Part, each Employer shall deduct the tax from compensation
payable to the Taxpayer, file a return on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector
and pay to such Tax Collector the amount of taxes deducted on a quarterly basis
as follows: April 30, July 30, October 30 and January 30 for the preceding quarter
of the current tax year. For each Taxpayer for whom no prior deduction has been
made, who is employed after the effective date of this Part, each Employer shall
withhold from the Taxpayer, for the first payroll period after employment, a
lump sum equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the Taxpayer,
plus the per payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax
withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar
year shall be the same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the
employment of a Taxpayer subject to withholding of the tax under this Part is
subsequently severed in that calendar year, the Taxpayer shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due and the Township may pursue collection under
this Part and the Act.
(D) As to Taxpayers who present official receipts evidencing prior
payment of the tax imposed hereby either directly or by collection though
Employers, the Employer shall not deduct that pro-rata share of the tax but the
employer shall withhold from the Taxpayer, for the first payroll period, a lump
sum equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the Taxpayer to equal
the necessary amount due from that Taxpayer to date to equal what all other
employees have paid, plus the per payroll amount due for that first payroll
period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll
periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees.
(E) If a Taxpayer who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax levied under this Part becomes subject to the tax for the calendar
year under this Part, the Employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder of
that calendar year. The Employer shall withhold from the Taxpayer, for the first
payroll period after receipt of the notification, a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the Taxpayer due to the exemption claimed by
the Taxpayer, plus the per payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The
amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in
that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other employees.
)0CEX - 31
B14625
(F) Any Employer who discontinues business or ceases operation
before December 31 of any year during which this tax is in effect, shall file the
return hereinabove required and pay the tax to the Tax Collector, within fifteen
(15) days after discontinuing business or ceasing operations.
(G) The failure of any Employer to deduct the tax as required in this
Section shall not relieve the Taxpayer from the duty to file a return and pay the
tax. Any Employer who fails to deduct the tax as required by this Section, or
who fails to pay such tax to the Tax Collector, shall be liable for such tax in full,
without deduction of the commission hereinafter provided, as though the tax
had originally been levied against such Employer.
(H) Each Employer may deduct and retain a commission equal to two
percent (2%) of the total amount of tax collected through the Employer pursuant
to this Section.
(Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1008. Direct Payment by Taxpayers. Every Taxpayer who is selfemployed
or whose tax for any other reason is not collected under Section 505 of this
Chapter shall file a return on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector and shall pay the
tax directly to such collector. Each such Taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax
after the effective date of this Part, shall file a return on a form prescribed by the Tax
Collector and pay to such Tax Collector the amount of taxes due and owing on a
quarterly basis as follows: April 30, July 30, October 30 and January 30 for the
preceding quarter of the current tax year. (Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007,
Section 1)
Section 1009. Administration and Enforcement. The Tax Collector shall collect
and receive the taxes, interest, fines and penalties imposed by this Part and shall
maintain records showing the amounts received and the dates such amounts were
received. The Tax Collector shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for the
administration of the tax and may adopt and enforce regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration of this Part. The Tax Collector and agents designated
by him/her may examine the records of any Employer and/or supposed Employer or
of any Taxpayer in order to ascertain the tax due or verify the accuracy of any return.
Every Employer or supposed Employer and every Taxpayer or supposed Taxpayer
shall give the Tax Collector and any agent designated by him/her all means, facilities
and opportunities for the examination hereby authorized. (Ordinance No. 348,
November 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1010. Collection. The Tax Collector shall collect by suit or otherwise, all
taxes, interest, costs, fines and penalties due under this Part and unpaid. If for any
reason, any tax is not paid when due, penalty at the rate of six percent (6%) per year on
)0CD( - 32
B14625
the amount of unpaid taxes and additional interest of one-half of one percent (1/2 of
1%) of the amount of the unpaid tax, for each month or fraction of month during which
the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever suit is brought for the
recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of collection
as well as for interest and penalties. The Tax Collector may accept payment under
protest of the tax claimed by the Township, in any case where any person disputes the
Township's claim for the tax. If a court of competent jurisdiction thereafter decides that
there has been overpayment to the Tax Collector, such tax collector shall refund the
amount of the overpayment to the person who paid under protest. Any action
instituted for such judicial determination shall be instituted within two (2) years of the
last day of the period for which the tax is disputed or claim made. All refunds shall be
made in conformity with the procedure prescribed by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township. (Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007, Section 1)
Section 1011. Refunds. All requests for the refund of overpaid Local Services
Tax shall be made in writing to the Tax Collector and shall contain sufficient written
evidence, including copies of paystubs, to establish to the Tax Collector that an
overpayment has occurred. The Tax Collector shall make a determination on the
request for a refund within seventy-five (75) days of the request. All refunds shall be
made within seventy-five (75) days of the request. Any appeal of the Tax Collectors
determination shall be made directly to the Board of Supervisors of the Township
within thirty (30) days of the tax Collectors decision. (Ordinance No. 348, November 13,
2007, Section 1)
Section 1012. Penalties.
(A) Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration
or return required by this Part, as amended, any Employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or fails,
neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his employees, any person
who refuses to permit the officer or any agent designated by him to examine his
books, records and papers, and any person who knowingly makes any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to
avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in
order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
Part, as amended, shall, upon conviction thereof before any district justice or
court of competent jurisdiction in Berks County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and costs, and in default of payment of said fine and
costs to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
B14625
(B) The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this Part, as amended, shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
(Ordinance No. 348, November 13, 2007, Section 1)
B14625
Part 11
Recycling Tax
Section 1101. Levy of Tax. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring
adopts the following new rates of taxation upon taxable real estate located within the
Township as follows:
Recycling Tax $40.00 per dwelling unit per annum
(Resolution No. 2006-32, December, 2006; as confirmed by Resolution No. 2007-36,
December, 2007; as confirmed by Resolution No. 2008-24, December, 2008; as confirmed
by Resolution No. 2012-18, December 10, 2012)
AL6520
CHAPTER XXX
TREES
Part 1
Trimming of Trees
Section 101. Definitions
Section 102. Clearance Above Street and Sidewalk
Section 103. Removal and Trimming of Trees
Section 104. Penalty
Section 105. Severability
Part 2
Removal of Diseased or Dangerous Trees
Section 201. Owner to Cut and Remove Trees
Section 202. Notice; Failure to Comply
Section 203. Cost of Cutting and Removal
Section 204. Word Usage
AL6520
AL6520
Part 1
Trimming of Trees
Section 101. Definitions. The word "person," as used in this Part, shall mean and
include any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation. The singular
shall include the plural; the plural shall include the singular; and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter. (Ordinance 216, December 10, 1990, Section 1)
Section 102. Clearance Above Street and Sidewalk. Every owner of improved or
cultivated lands located in the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania shall be
required to keep limbs and branches of all shrubs and/or trees growing upon such
lands and along the street and/or sidewalk, abutting upon such lands, trimmed so that
no part of such limbs and/or branches or of the foliage growing thereupon, shall have a
clearance of less than seven (7) feet above the surface of the sidewalk and less than
twelve (12) feet above the surface of the roadway of any street. (Ordinance 216,
December 10, 1990, Section 2)
Section 103. Removal and Trimming of Trees. It shall be the responsibility of
property owners in the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, to conform to
the requirements of this Part as to shrubs and/or trees upon property owned by them,
along streets, and/or sidewalks abutting upon such property, and, upon notice from the
Code Enforcement Officer of the said Township of Spring to trim or cut the branches or
limbs of shrubs and/ or trees as required by Section 2 hereof. Any person failing to
comply with any such notice, within the time limit stated therein, shall be guilty of a
violation of this Part and, following the expiration of such time limit, the Code
Enforcement Officer of the said Township of Spring shall have the authority to cause
the work required by such notice to be done by the said Township of Spring or under
contract therewith, and to collect the cost of such work, with an additional amount of
ten (10%) percent from such property owner in default. (Ordinance 216, December 10,
1990, Section 3)
Section 104. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than six hundred ($600.00) dollars, and in default of the payment of the fine and
costs shall be committed and sentenced to the Township lockup for a period not
exceeding five (5) days, or to the county jail, or workhouse for a period not exceeding
thirty (30) days. (Ordinance 216, December 10, 1990, Section 4)
Section 105. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Part is
for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionally
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby declared as the intent of the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, that this
)00( - 3
AL6520
Part would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included herein. (Ordinance 216, December 10,
1990, Section 6)
AL6520
Part 2
Removal of Diseased or Dangerous Trees
Section 201. Owner to Cut and Remove Trees. Each owner of property located
within the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall cut and remove trees
located on such property if the condition of the trees through disease or otherwise,
unreasonably affects or interferes with the health, safety or welfare of the public or the
right of the public to the unobstructed use of public roads or property. (Ordinance 258,
June 23, 1997, Section 1)
Section 202. Notice; Failure to Comply. Within thirty (30) days after the date of
notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to remove such tree, the property
owner has not complied with that order, the Board of Supervisors of Spring may enter
the premises and remove the tree. (Ordinance 258, June 23, 1997, Section 2)
Section 203. Cost of Cutting and Removal. The cost of cutting and removal of
such tree by the Township of Spring shall be charged to the property owner. The
charge shall be a lien against the real estate of the property owner and should be
collected in the same manner as other municipal liens. (Ordinance 258, June 23, 1997,
Section 3)
Section 204. Word Usage. The use of a word or words in the singular shall be
interpreted in this Part so as to mean a word or words in the plural. (Ordinance 258,
June 23, 1997, Section 4)
CHAPTER XXXI
WATER
(Reserved for Future Use)
B15488
Section 101. Title
Section 102. Short Title
Section 103. Purpose
Section 104. Application
Section 105. Exemptions
Section 106. Interpretation
CHAPTER XXXII
ZONING
Part 1
General Provisions
Part 2
Definitions
Section 201. General Interpretation
Section 202. Definitions
Part 3
Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Section 301. Establishment of Zoning Districts
Section 302. Application of District Regulations
Section 303. Zoning Map
Section 304. Rules for Interpreting District Boundaries
Section 305. Rural Holding Area District (RHA)
Section 306. Rural Conservation District (RC)
Section 307. Rural/Suburban District (RS)
Section 308. Low Density Suburban District (LDS)
Section 309. Moderate Density Suburban District (MDS)
Section 310. Suburban/Semiurban District (SS)
Section 311. Urban District (U)
Section 312. Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District (NC)
Section 313. Planned Highway Commerce District (PHC)
Section 314. Planned Highway Interchange District (PHI)
Section 315. Planned Highway Transitional District (PHT)
Section 316. Planned Office/Business District (POB)
Section 317. Planned Business and Residential District (PBR)
XXXII-l
B15488
Section 318. Planned Industry/Business District (PIB)
Section 319. Extractive Industry District (E)
Section 320. Fuel Storage District (FS)
Section 321. Compliance and Performance Standards for Certain Principal Uses
Section 322. Special Exception Uses
Section 323. Conditional Uses
Section 324. Accessory Uses
Part 4
General Regulations
Section 401. Limit of One Principal Use
Section 402. Principal Buildings
Section 403. Maximum Height of Buildings
Section 404. Buildings to Have Access
Section 405. Special Lot and Yard Requirements/Sight Distances and Buffer
Yards
Section 406. Establishment of Ultimate Right-of-Way Widths for Streets
Section 407. Frontage Development Along Arterial and Collector Streets
Section 408. Nonconformities
Section 409. Site Plan Review
Section 410. Easements
Section 411. Historic Buildings
Section 412. Airport Zoning
PartS
Environmental Protection
Section 501. Environmental Preservation Required
Section 502. Prohibited Nuisances
Section 503. Slope Controls
Section 504. Areas with High Water Table
Section 505. Development Along Water Bodies
Section 506. Floodplain Regulations
Section 507. Filling, Excavation and Grading
Section 508. Tree Preservation
Section 509. Outdoor Storage Control
Section 510. Sewage Waste Treabnent and Disposal Contract
Section 511. Noise Control
Section 512. Dust, Dirt, Smoke, Vapors, Gases and Odors Control
Section 513. Light, Glare and Heat Control
XXXII-2
B15488
Section 514. Electric, Diesel, Gas or Other Power
Section 515. Control of Radioactivity, Electrical Emissions and Electrical
Disturbances
Section 516. Manufacturing and Storing of Dangerous Material Prohibited
Section 517. Wetland Buffers
Section 518. Riparian Buffers
Part 6
Signs
Section 601. Scope and Applicability
Section 602. General Sign Regulations
Section 603. Permitted Signs
Section 604. Signs Prohibited in All Districts
Section 605. Off-Premises Signs
Section 606. Electronic Changeable Copy Signs
Section 607. Area of Sign
Section 608. Supplemental Sign Regulations
Section 609. Sign Permits
Part 7
Off-Street Parking and Loading
Section 701. Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces
Section 702. General Regulations Applying to Required Off-Street Parking
Facilities
Section 703. Design Standards for Off-Street Parking Facilities
Section 704. Access Drives and Driveways
Section 705. Off-Street Loading
Section 706. Parking Lot Landscaping
Section 707. Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations
Part 8
Administration
Section 801. General Procedure
Section 802. Permits and Certificates
Section 803. Zoning Officer
Section 804. Zoning Hearing Board
Section 805. Zoning Hearing Board Functions
XXXII-3
B15488
Section 806. Conditional Uses
Section 807. Hearings
Section 808. Challenge to the Validity of Ordinance or Map
Section 809. Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinions
Section 810. Amendments
Section 811. Curative Amendments
Section 812. Filing Fees and Costs
Section 813. Remedies and Penalties
Section 814. Savings Gause
Part 9
Appendices
Section 901. Open Space Developments
Section A.101. Purpose
Section A.l02. Qualifying Conditions
Section A.l03. Permitted Uses
Section A.l04. Lot Size Requirements
Section A.l0S. Slope Controls
Section A.l06. Net Density and Area Regulations
Section A.l07. Design Standards
Section A.l08. Uses Allowed Within Common Open Space Areas
Section A.l09. Common Open Space Ownership and Maintenance
Standards
Section A.ll0. Additional Requirements
Section 902. Street Classification Map
Section 903. Zoning Map
XXXII-4
B15488
Part 1
General Provisions
Section 101. Title. A Chapter dividing the Township of Spring into districts and
regulating the use of land and the location, use and density of buildings within these
districts and providing for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter. This
Chapter permits, prohibits, regulates, restricts and determines the uses of land,
watercourses and other bodies of water; the size, height, bulk, location, erection,
construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of structures; the
areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and
structures, as well as areas, courts, yards and other open spaces and distances to be left
unoccupied by uses and structures; and the density of population and intensity of use;
and further the Chapter contains provisions for special exceptions and variances to be
administered by a Zoning Hearing Board; provisions for administration and
enforcement and such other provisions as may be necessary to implement the
requirements of this Chapter. Pursuant to the authority conferred by the State Act 247
(the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code), as amended, the Township
Supervisors of the Township of Spring do hereby ordain as follows. (Ordinance No.
335, March 26, 2007, Section 101 of Section 2)
Section 102. Short Title. This Chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the
"Township of Spring Zoning Ordinance of 2006." (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Section 102 of Section 2)
Section 103. Purpose.
(A) This Chapter is hereby adopted in accordance:
(1) With the requirements of Act 247 (the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code), as amended.
(2) With the community development objectives of the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
(3) With consideration for the character of the Township, its
various parts and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses
and structures.
(B) In addition to carrying out the objective of the Comprehensive
Plan, this Chapter is designed:
B15488
(1) To promote, protect and facilitate one (1) or more of the
following: the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated
and practical community development, proper density of population, civil
defense, disaster evacuation, airports, and national defense facilities, the
provisions of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking
and loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, public grounds
and other public requirements.
(2) To prevent one (1) or more of the following: overcrowding
of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of
health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
(3) To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering
topography, soil type and classification, and present use.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 103 of Section 2)
Section 104. Application.
(A) No building, structure or land shall be used, occupied, erected,
moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations
of this Chapter.
(B) This Chapter regulates:
(1) The location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other
structures.
(2) The relation of such buildings or structures to streets and
highways, their intersections and interchanges, to steep slopes and natural
bodies of water, to public buildings and public grounds, to airports and
heliports, to historic buildings and places, and to Identified Floodplain
Areas.
(3) Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be
occupied by uses and structures; the percentage of a lot that may be
occupied, the size and use of yards, courts and other open spaces.
(4) The density and distribution of population and intensity of
use.
(5) The uses of land, buildings and structures for residents,
trade, industry and other purposes.
B15488
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 104 of Section 2)
Section 105. Exemptions. This Chapter shall not apply to any existing or
proposed building or extension thereof which is used or is to be used by a public utility
corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission decides after a public hearing that the present or proposed situation of the
building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the
public. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 105 of Section 2)
Section 106. Interpretation.
(A) Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this Chapter shall be
interpreted as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety,
morals and general welfare. Where this Chapter conflicts with any rule,
regulation or ordinance, the greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises, upon the height or bulk of a building or upon requiring larger open
spaces shall prevail, regardless of its source.
(B) Exemplary Lists. Any list of permitted or prohibited uses is not an
exhaustive list, but is included to clarify, emphasize and illustrate, by example,
uses which are desirable or undesirable.
(C) Time Limitations. In the event any time limitations as herein stated
do not conform with Act 247, or any other statute, the time limitation in Act 247,
or any other statute, shall prevail.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 106 of Section 2)
B15488
Part 2
Definitions
Section 201. General Interpretation. For the purposes of this Chapter, words and
terms used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
(A) Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(B) The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(C) The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter
and vice-versa.
(D) The word "shall" is always mandatory, and the word "may" or
"should" is always permissive.
(E) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied."
(F) The word "person" includes "individual," "company,"
"unincorporated association," "corporation" or other similar entities.
(G) Any word or term not defined in this Chapter shall be used with a
meaning of standard usage.
(Fl)
meaning.
The words "street," "road" and "highway" shall have the same
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 201 of Section 2)
Section 202. Definitions. When used in the Chapter, the following words, terms
and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABUT - contiguous properties sharing a common property boundary and
properties across the street or streets from one another or directly across a
natural feature or right-of-way.
ACCESS DRIVE - a privately owned, constructed and maintained
vehicular access from a public or private street.
B15488
ACCESSORY BUILDING - a building (such as a private garage, garden
shed, private toolhouse or children's playhouse or a noncommercial greenhouse)
which is subordinate and accessory to a principal building on the same lot and
which is used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal
building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE - a structure serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the use of the principal building and located on the same lot as the
principal building.
ACCESSORY USE - a use subordinate and customarily incidental to the
principal use on the same lot.
ACRE - 43,560 square feet.
ADJACENT - a state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one
another.
ADULT BUSINESS USE - any adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult
theater, adult video rental and sales store, or adult mini-motion picture theater,
as defined below, and which, under the State Obscenity Code, as amended, must
exclude minors or may not knowingly disseminate to a minor.
ADULT BOOKSTORE - an establishment, having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock in trade (for sale or rental) books,
magazines, and other materials which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined by the State
Obscenity Code.
ADULT CABARET - a cabaret, tavern, theater or club which
features strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers
who exhibit, display or engage in nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse, as defined by the State Obscenity Code.
B15488
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER - an enclosed
building offering video presentations distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons within
private viewing booths and/or by use of token or coin-operated viewing
booths and/or by use of token or coin-operated projectors or other video
machines as defined by the State Obscenity Code.
ADULT THEATER - any business, indoor or outdoor, which
exhibits a motion picture show or other presentations which, in whole or
in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct, sadomasochistic abuse as defined
by the State Obscenity Code, as amended.
ADULT VIDEO RENTAL AND SALES - an establishment that has
25% or more of its stock in videos for rental or sales, which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or an establishment
with a designated segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material.
MASSAGE PARLOR - any commercial place or establishment
where one person performs exercises upon another person by rubbing,
kneading, stroking or tapping with the hand or hands or with any
mechanical device. This shall include but not be limited to activities
conducted by a health care professional licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This use shall not include any place of
business where any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation
engages in, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on any
method of pressure on, friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing,
tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities or engaging in sexual activity as a business as
prohibited by relevant provisions of the State Obscenity Code.
OTHER ADULT USES - any business, activity or use including or
similar to or of the general nature of "Adult Bookstores", "Adult Motion
Picture Theaters", "Adult Video Sales and Rentals", or "Adult
Entertainment Cabarets" that provide goods or services distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on "Specified Sexual Activities" or
"Specified Anatomical Areas", such as escort bureaus, nude wrestling
studios, phone sex services, internet sex services and studios, or similar
businesses, activities or uses.
B15488
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
ADULT USES, OTHER - any business, activity or use similar to or of the
general nature of "Adult Bookstores", "Adult Motion Picture Theaters", "Adult
Entertainment Cabarets" or "Adult Massage Parlors" that provides goods or
services distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on "Specified Sexual
Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas", such as escort bureaus, nude
wrestling studios, phone sex services, internet sex services and studios, or similar
businesses, activities or uses.
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES - the processing, treating, packing or
storing of agricultural products.
AGRICULTURE, GENERAL - the cultivation of the soil and the raising
and harvesting of the products of the soil. "General Agriculture" includes animal
husbandry, commercial crop storage and orchard, but does not include
commercial forestry, or the extraction of minerals or water from the ground for
any purpose other than in support of the on-site agricultural use.
AGRICULTURE, INTENSIVE - (a) specialized agricultural activities
including, but not limited to, mushroom production, poultry production and dry
lot livestock production, which due to the intensity of production, necessitate
development of specialized sanitary facilities and controls, (b) any agricultural
activity involving more animal equivalent units per acre than specified under
Section 321 for general agriculture.
AIRPORT or AIRSTRIP - an area of land which is designed, used or
intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of airplanes or ultra-light aircraft
and any appurtenant areas which are designed to be used for airplane support
facilities such as maintenance, refueling and parking facilities. Airports and
airstrips shall be approved and shall meet all the applicable State and Federal
regulations.
PRIVATE USE AIRPORT or AIRSTRIP - an airport or airstrip that
restricts usage to the owner and/or operator or to persons authorized by
the owner and/ or operator.
B15488
PUBLIC USE AIRPORT or AIRSTRIP - an airport or airstrip open to
the general public and not requiring prior permission of the owner and/or
operator to land. Public use at commercial airports are covered under the
Airport Zoning Act of October 10, 1980.
ALLEY - a private way affording only secondary means of access to
adjacent property.
ALTERATION - any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in
the existing facilities of a building or structure, or any enlargement thereof,
whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving of
such building from one location or position to another.
AMBULANCE SERVICE - a facility housing ambulance or medical
emergency vehicles and attendant staff, including offices and supply storage.
AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTER - a facility designed to provide
elective surgical care in which the patient is admitted and discharged the same
day.
AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENTS -a building established for the use of
electronic and/or mechanical coin-operated devices, including but not limited to
pinball machines, electronically operated shuffleboards, bowling, video games,
electronically operated tennis, billiards and other similar games of amusement.
ANIMAL EQUIVALENT UNIT - 1,000-lbs. live weight of livestock or
poultry animals, regardless of the actual number of individual animals
comprising the unit. For purposes of such determination, averages may be used,
with such averages being determined by the average weight of the type animal
being considered.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL - a building, structure or area of land where
animals are given medical care, other than the premises where such animals are
boarded. The definition of animal hospital shall include a veterinarian office.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY - the raising and keeping of livestock or poultry
for any commercial purpose. The keeping of livestock or poultry as farm pets
pursuant to the regulations of this Chapter and shall not be construed as animal
husbandry.
ANIMATED SIGN - a sign which uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or to create a visual effect or scene.
B15488
ARCADE - an area contiguous to a street or plaza that is open and
unobstructed, and that is accessible to the public at all times. Arcades may
include building columns, landscaping, statuary and fountains. Arcades do not
include off-street loading/unloading areas, driveways, access drives or parking
areas.
ARTICULATE - to give emphasis to or distinctly identify a particular
element. An articulated façade would be the emphasis of elements on the face of
a wall including a change in setback, materials, roof pitch or height.
AUDITORIUM - a building containing a stage and seating for meetings
and performances. The definition of auditorium shall include a theater and a
motion picture theater; however, shall not include an adult motion picture
theater.
AUTOMOBILE ACCESSORIES - buildings where automobile parts and
supplies are sold at retail, but where no vehicular repairs or services are
conducted. This shall not include the sale of gasoline.
AUTOMOBILE, RECREATION VEHICLE or BOAT SALES AREA - an
open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used
motor vehicles, recreation vehicles or boats in operable condition, and where no
major vehicular or boat repair work is done. A use may combine vehicle sales
with major vehicle repairs only if both uses are permitted in that district.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR STATION - buildings and land where gasoline
and other automobile parts and supplies are sold at retail and where major
vehicular or boat repairs are conducted. The definition of automobile repair
station shall include an automobile body shop. See definitions of "major
vehicular or boat repairs."
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION - buildings and land areas where
gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires or automobile accessories and parts are
supplied and dispensed at retail and where minor automobile repairs and
services are conducted and permitted. See definition of "Minor Automobile
Repairs and Services."
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING - the dismantling or disassembling of used
motor vehicles, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BACK-TO-BACK OR DOUBLE-FACE SIGN - a structure with two (2)
parallel sign faces oriented in opposite directions.
=I -13
B15488
BANK - includes savings and loans, finance companies, credit unions and
other similar enterprises.
BANNER - a sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is attached
at one or more edges or corners to a pole or building.
BASEMENT - a story partly below the finished grade but having at least
one-half (1/2) of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling)
above the average level of the finished grade where such grade abuts the
exterior walls of the building. A basement shall be considered as one (1) story in
determining the permissible number of stories.
BED AND BREAKFAST - a dwelling in which the owner or tenant rents
at least one (1) (but not more than five (5)) rental unit(s) for residential or
lodging purposes, and in which meals are served to overnight guests. For the
purpose of this definition, a rental unit is one (1) or more rooms intended to be
occupied by one (1) family as separate living quarters, but does not contain one
(1) or more of the following: sanitary facilities, kitchen facilities or direct access
from the outside or through a common hall.
BILLBOARD - off-premises advertising signs.
BLOCK - a tract of land or a lot or group of lots, bounded by streets,
public parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies of water, boundary
lines of the Township or by any combination of the above.
BOARD - the Zoning Hearing Board of the Township of Spring.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS - the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring.
BOARDING HOUSE (ROOMING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE) - a
dwelling in which the owner or tenant rents at least one (1) (but not more than
five (5)) rental unit(s) for residential or lodging purposes, regardless of whether
meals are furnished or not. For the purpose of this definition, a rental unit is one
(1) or more rooms intended to be occupied by one (1) family as separate living
quarters, but does not contain one (1) or more of the following: sanitary facilities,
kitchen facilities or direct access from the outside or through a common hall.
BRIGHTNESS OF SIGN - the maximum brightness of a sign, as measured
from the sign's face, in nits (candelas per square meter).
1315488
BUFFER YARD - a strip of land at least twenty (20) feet in width which
may be a part of the minimum setback distance and which is free of any
principal or accessory building, parking, outdoor storage or any other use than
open space.
BUILDING - any combination of materials forming any structure which is
erected on the ground and permanently affixed thereto, designed, intended or
arranged for the housing, shelter, enclosure or structural support of persons,
animals or property of any kind. A multifamily building divided by unpierced
masonry division walls extending from the ground to the underside of the roof
shall not be deemed to be more than one (1) building for purpose of this
Chapter.
BUILDING, ATTACHED - a building which has two (2) or more walls or
portions thereof in common with an adjacent building.
BUILDING, DETACHED - a building which has no parts or walls in
common with an adjacent building.
BUILDING, SEMIDETACHED. a building which has one (1) wall in
common with an adjacent building.
BUILDING COVERAGE - the ratio obtained by dividing the maximum
horizontal cross section of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot by the
total area of the lot upon which the buildings are located, excluding area within
all existing and future or ultimate street rights-of-way.
B15488
BUILDING HEIGHT - the vertical distance from the grade at the front of
the building or the average of the grade of the street fronts, if building faces
more than one (1) street, to the highest point of the roof beams of a flat roof and
to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gabled, hipped and pitched
roofs.
BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE - a line, established by
this Chapter, within a property, defining the minimum distance between any
building or structure or portion thereof to be erected or altered, and an adjacent
right-of-way or street line. Such line shall be measured at right angles from the
street right-of-way line and shall be parallel to said right-of-way line. See
definition of "right-of-way line."
BUILDING MASS - a building's expense or bulk. This term is typically
used in reference to structures of considerable size.
BUS SHELTER - an open, roofed structure used as a shield or protection
from inclement weather conditions by persons awaiting a bus. This shall include
only those structures utilized by a school district or transportation authority.
BUS STATION - any premises for the housing or parking of buses and the
loading and unloading of passengers.
CAMPGROUND - an area used for seasonal occupancy of recreational
vehicles, temporary tents or cabins by transient visitors to the area, in
combination with outdoor recreation and/ or outdoor educational programs.
This term shall only include facilities that are primarily used during warmer
months.
CANDELAS -a unit of luminous intensity, which can be defined as the
amount of luminous flux (total luminous power emitted from a source and
expressed as lumens) per unit solid angle in a given direction.
CARPORT - a building open on two (2) or more sides and used in
conjunction with a dwelling for storage of private vehicles.
CARTWAY - the paved portion of a street or highway designed for
vehicular traffic and paved areas intended for on street parking.
CARWASH -a facility devoted to the washing and waxing of the exterior
of vehicles and the cleaning of their interiors by automated equipment and
employees of the establishment, but where no sale of gasoline, preventive
maintenance or repair to the vehicles shall be offered and performed.
B15488
CATERING ESTABLISHMENT - an establishment in which food and
beverages are prepared for consumption off the premises and are not served to
customers on the premises or to take out.
CELLAR -a story partly below the finished grade, having more than onehalf
(1/2) of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling) below
the average level of the adjoining finished grade where such grade abuts the
exterior walls of the building. A cellar shall not be considered a story in
determining the permissible number of stories.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (NON-ELECTRONIC) - a sign or portion
thereof which has a readerboard of text information in which alphanumeric
character, graphic or symbol is defined by objects, not consisting of an
illumination device and may be changed or re-arranged manually or
mechanically with characters or illustrations which can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face or surface of the sign. A sign which shows the date,
time, and/ or temperature shall not be considered a changeable copy sign.
CHRISTMAS TREE FARM - the raising and harvesting of Christmas trees
for commercial purposes.
CLUB - see "membership club."
COMBINATION OF PERMITTED USES -a grouping of principal uses on
a lot where such uses are otherwise permitted individually in that zoning
district. This does not include a combination of uses within the same building.
(See also multiple use building).
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE - a motor vehicle licensed by the
Commonwealth in a class other than Class I or Class II. For purposes of this
Chapter, a recreational vehicle (see definition) shall not be considered a
commercial motor vehicle.
COMMISSION - the Planning Commission of the Township of Spring.
B15488
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA - any device used for the transmission
or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile
radio service or any other wireless communications signals including, without
limitation, omnidirectional or whip antennae and directional or panel antennae,
owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device. This definition
shall not include private residence mounted satellite dishes or television
antennae or amateur radio equipment including, without limitation, ham or
citizen band radio antennae.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING - an unmanned building
or cabinet containing communications equipment required for the operation of
communications antennae and covering an area on the ground not greater than
two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER - a structure other than a building, such as
a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used to support
communications antennae.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - the document titled "Suburban Berks West
Joint Comprehensive Plan," or any part thereof, adopted by the Board of
Supervisors.
CONDITIONAL USE - certain specified uses which are allowed or denied
by the Board of Supervisors after recommendation by the Planning Commission
pursuant to express standards and criteria set forth in this Chapter.
CONDOMINIUM - real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions, created under either the
Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of July 3, 1963, or the Pennsylvania Uniform
Condominium Act.
CONFERENCE CENTER - an establishment used for the holding of
conventions, seminars, workshops or similar activities, including dining and
lodging facilities for the use of participants, as well as compatible accessory
facilities.
CONSTRUCTION - includes the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastening in a temporary or permanent position; and the
demolition of a preexisting building, provided that further construction be
diligently carried on.
B15488
CONVENIENCE STORE - an establishment where food, tobacco, drugs,
periodicals, or similar items of household convenience are kept for retail sale to
residents of the immediate neighborhood. Stores catering primarily to passing
traffic originating outside of the surrounding neighborhood are not included in
this definition.
CONVERSION - to change or adapt land or structures to a different use,
occupancy or purpose.
CONVENTIONAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT - a residential use of
land that includes the division of property into building lots based upon the
standard provisions within a zoning district for lot area, width, building
coverage and minimum yard requirements. This definition does not include
open space developments or planned residential developments.
CORRECTIONAL AND PENAL INSTITUTIONS - a facility, the primary
purpose of which is to house or confine those held in lawful custody as a result
of allegation, convictions, or adjudications of criminal or delinquent conduct.
COUNTY - the County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION - the Berks County Planning
Commission.
CREMATORIUM - a building fitted with the proper appliances for the
purposes of the cremation of human remains and includes everything incidental
or ancillary thereto.
CULTURAL CENTER - a building and/or land open to the public which
contains exhibits of a cultural interest, such as a museum, nature study area, etc.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT - a proposed zoning amendment made to the
Board of Supervisors by any landowner who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of an ordinance which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest.
CUSTOMER SERVICE WINDOW - an opening on the exterior of a
building through which the customers receive goods or services in exchange for
monetary compensation.
DAY CARE CENTER - a facility where care is provided at any one time
for seven (7) or more children under the age of twelve (12), where the child care
B15488
area(s) are not being used as a family residence and where full-time adult
supervision is provided.
DEMOLITION - the dismantling, tearing down, removal or razing of the
exterior of a building, in whole or in part; provided such changes do not alter the
structural integrity of the building. This term shall not include changes to the
interior of a building.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT - the absence of routine maintenance and
repair which leads to structural weakness, decay and deterioration in a building
to a point that causes a need for major repair or may cause a need for total
demolition of the structure.
DENSITY - unless otherwise stipulated in this Chapter, the term "density"
shall mean gross density which shall be determined by dividing the total
number of dwelling units by the total amount of land in the tract to be
developed minus all land within the ultimate right-of-way of existing and
proposed streets.
DETACHED - a state of being surrounded on all sides by yards.
DISTRICT (or ZONING DISTRICT) - a portion of the territory of the
Township within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or
various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Chapter.
DRIVE-IN -a business establishment so developed that its retail or service
character is dependent upon providing an access drive approach or spaces for
motor vehicles to service patrons while in or on the motor vehicle, rather than
within a building.
DRIVE-THROUGH - a feature of an establishment which encourages or
permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in or on a
motor vehicle.
DRIVE-THROUGH CUSTOMER WINDOW - see customer service
window.
DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT - see restaurant, fast food with drivethrough
service.
1315488
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE UNIT - an individual drive-through lane at
a drive-through establishment, which may contain one (1) or more components
(such as menu boards, pay windows, pickup windows, etc.). When multiple
vehicles are able to be served simultaneously, the number of units is equal to the
number of simultaneously served vehicles.
DRIVEWAY - a privately owned, constructed and maintained vehicular
access from a street or access drive to a single dwelling unit or a non-residential
use that has three (3) or less off-street parking spaces.
DWELLING UNIT - one (1) or more living or sleeping rooms together
with separate cooking and sanitary facilities which are accessible from the
outdoors, whether directly or through an entrance hall shared with other
dwelling units and used or intended to be used by a family.
DWELLING - a building designed or used as a living quarters for one (1)
or more families. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include rooming
house, tourist home, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, dormitory, fraternity,
sorority house or other group residence. For purposes of this Chapter, the
following types of dwellings are defined:
(1) Single-Family Detached Dwelling. A detached building
arranged, designed and intended for occupancy exclusively by one (1)
family. The term "single-family detached dwelling" shall be deemed to
include a factory-built "modular home" placed on a permanent perimeter
foundation.
(a) Modular Home Dwelling (defined by the
Pennsylvania Industrialized Housing Act/ Act 70). Any structure
designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or in
substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation, on the building site; housing units defined as mobile
homes are excluded from this definition.
(b) Mobile/Manufactured Home. A transportable,
single-family detached dwelling designed so that it can be used for
permanent occupancy, contained in one (1) unit or in two (2) units
designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may
be used with or without a permanent foundation.
B15488
Mobile/manufactured homes shall be constructed in accordance
with the Safety and Construction Standards of the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development. The term
"mobile/manufactured home" shall not be deemed to include
"recreation vehicle" nor a "modular home" placed on a permanent
perimeter foundation.
(2) Two-Family Semidetached Dwelling. A building arranged,
designed and intended for occupancy by two (2) families living
independent of each other in separate dwelling units which are entirely
separated by vertical walls and which are unpierced except for access to
the outside. This type of dwelling is commonly called a twin or a
semidetached dwelling.
(3) Two-Family Detached Dwelling. A building arranged,
designed or intended for occupancy by two (2) families living
independently of each other in separate dwelling units that are separated
primarily by horizontal floors as opposed to vertical walls. This type of
dwelling is commonly called a duplex.
(4) Multiple-Family Building. A building arranged, designed
and intended for three (3) or more dwelling units and which include the
following housing types:
(a) Garden Apartment. A multifamily building in which
the individual dwelling units have entrances from common
hallways. The building is on a lot which is held in single and
separate ownership which have yards in common but which may
also have other joint facilities and services.
(b) Single-Family Attached Dwelling. A dwelling unit
within a building which has no more than six (6) attached dwelling
units (including the end unit). Each unit is arranged, designed,
intended for and occupied exclusively by one (1) family. Each
dwelling unit is separated by unpierced vertical fire walls and has
at least one (1) separate entrance. Each internal dwelling unit has
no side yards and each end unit has one (1) side yard. This
includes most dwellings commonly referred to as "townhouses" or
"row houses."
NOTE: See following page for sketches that illustrate the types of dwelling units.
B15488
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED
TWO FAMILY DETACHED
GARDEN APARTMENTS
TWO FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED
TOWNHOUSES OR
SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED
DWELLINGS
B15488
ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN - a sign or portion thereof
that displays electronic text information, static images, static graphics, static
pictures, or any combination thereof, defined by a small number of matrix
elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED's), fiber
optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area where the
message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, repixilization
or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include
computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital
displays. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include official or time and
temperature signs. Electronic changeable copy signs include projected images or
messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
FACADE - the portion of any exterior elevation on a building extending
from grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and extending the entire
length of a building on all sides.
FADE - a mode of message or image transition on an electronic
changeable copy sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first
message or image gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible
and the subsequent massage or image gradually increases in intensity to the
point of legibility.
FAMILY - one (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, foster
relationship or adoption (or a group of not more than three (3) persons not
related by blood, marriage or adoption) living together in a single dwelling and
maintaining and functioning as a common household. The term "family" shall
be deemed to include any domestic employees or gratuitous guests, but shall not
include any roomer, boarder, lodger nor persons residing in a group home.
FARM ANIMALS - animals that are customarily kept only on a farm or
where agricultural activities take place, including but not limited to horses,
cattle, pigs, swine, sheep, goats, poultry, rabbits, or similar animals.
FARM POND - a manmade body of water at least two thousand (2,000)
square feet in area used for agricultural or recreational purposes.
FENCE - a manmade barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation
between lots or to enclose a lot or portion thereof. The term "fence" shall be
deemed to include a wall.
FLASHING SIGN - a directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion
thereof that exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide
intermittent illumination that changes light intensity in sudden transitory burst
III -24
B15488
and creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by streaming, graphic bursts
showing movement, or any mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
twinkling or sparkling. Illuminated signs which indicate the date, time, and/ or
temperature, or other similar information, shall not be considered a flashing sign.
FLOODPLAIN AREA - as defined in the Township of Spring Floodplain
Ordinance (Chapter X).
FLOOR AREA (GROSS FLOOR AREA) - the total space of all floors, as
measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls (or from the center line of
party walls separating two (2) buildings), but excluding cellars, crawl spaces,
garages, carports, attics without floors, open porches, balconies and terraces.
FORESTRY - the management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes.
FREE-STANDING SIGN - an in-ground of surface-mounted sign which is
constructed to be independent of all adjoining structures or which is supported
or suspended from a free-standing column or other support located in or upon
the ground surface.
FUEL STORAGE TANK FARM - an establishment primarily engaged in
the bulk storage and distribution of petroleum, gasoline, fuel oil, gas or other
similar inflammable products in fuel storage tanks.
FUNERAL HOME - a building designed for the purpose of furnishing
funeral supplies and services to the public and includes facilities intended for the
preparation of the dead human body for internment or cremation.
GLARE -a situation created when illumination sources shine with visibly
harsh, uncomfortably bright light which: causes discomfort; distracts attention;
or leads to reduction or loss of visibility or visual performances (up to and
including situations of blinding glare, as defined in the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America's current Lighting Handbook). These situations are
typically caused by insufficiently shielded light sources, or high luminance
(luminance that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are
adapted).
GOVERNING BODY - the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring.
B15488
GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES - municipal, County, State or Federal
government buildings or facilities designed and intended to be occupied by the
government or designed and intended for public use sponsored by such
governments or its designee, but not including group homes.
GRADE - (a) the elevation of existing or finished ground or paving, (b)
the slope of existing or finished ground or paving. See definition of "slope".
GROUP HOME - a building occupied as a residence by no more than six
(6) residents who receive twenty-four (24) hour resident supervision, licensed
under the applicable State program. Such use shall not include facilities
occupied by those convicted of or being detained on criminal charges or
adjudicated on charges of delinquency.
GUN CLUB - a facility used for target shooting, trap or skeet, including
rifle and pistol clubs.
HEALTH CLUB - A private or public indoor facility utilized for
recreational activities, including sports, exercise, and athletic contests, but not
including athletic or other performances for viewing by more than twenty-five
(25) spectators at any one time. All activities relating to an adult business shall
be prohibited within a health club.
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER - the vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications
tower, including antennae mounted on the tower.
HEIGHT OF SIGNS OR OTHER STRUCTURES - the vertical distance
measured from the grade at the front of the structure or sign to its highest point.
The highest point in the case of a sign shall include the supporting structure.
HELIPORT - any area of land, water or a structural surface which is
designed, used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
and any appurtenant areas which are designed to be used for helicopter support
facilities such as maintenance, refueling and parking. All heliports shall be
approved and shall meet all the applicable State and Federal regulations for their
use.
PRIVATE USE HELIPORT - any heliport that restricts usage to the
owner and/or operator or to persons authorized by the owner and/or
operator.
B15488
PUBLIC USE HELIPORT - any heliport open to the general public
and not requiring prior permission of the owner and/ or operator to land.
HOLIDAY TREE SALES - the offering of holiday trees for sale to the
public from a temporary structure or from a location out-of-doors where goods
are not normally displayed as part of a permanent, ongoing retail establishment.
HOME OCCUPATION - an accessory use which:
(1) Is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling
unit.
(2) Is carried on only within the dwelling unit.
HOME-RELATED BUSINESS - an accessory use which:
(1) Is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling
unit.
(2) Is not carried on within a dwelling unit, like a home
occupation, but may be administered out of the dwelling unit.
HOSPITAL OR MEDICAL CENTER - an institution providing physical or
mental health services or medical or surgical care to the sick, handicapped or
injured, including facilities for overnight accommodation of patients. This
definition does not include an animal hospital.
HOSPITAL STAFF DORMITORY - a structure providing residential
accommodations (including cooking facilities) for employees or students of the
hospital.
HOTEL (MOTEL) - a building or group of buildings which contains six
(6) or more rental units for overnight lodging of travelers or for the temporary
occupancy of transients, licensed under applicable laws.
B15488
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA - as described in the Township of
Spring Floodplain Ordinance (Chapter X).
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE - the percentage of the total area of a lot,
excluding area within all existing and future or ultimate street rights-of-way, that
is covered by surfaces (such as bituminous paving) that has a runoff coefficient
of 0.8 or greater and by buildings or other nonporous structures. In addition,
areas covered by gravel or stone that are intended for vehicular movement or
parking shall be considered to be impervious for the purposes of this Chapter.
INTERIOR SERVICE AND CONVENIENCE USES -a use which is clearly
incidental to the principal use of a building, and which is located within the same
building and primarily serves the occupants of said building. Interior service
and convenience uses include, but are not limited to, eating and drinking places,
specialized retail food sales, barber/beauty shop, photo copy service, pharmacy,
optician, daycare/nursery, and fitness center.
JUNK - any and all discarded material or articles; including scrap metal,
junk motor vehicles, glass, industrial waste, paper, abandoned machinery,
equipment, containers, structures, used plumbing supplies and other used
building materials.
JUNKYARDS - a lot, land or structure or parts thereof used for the
collection, storage, dismantling, salvage or sale of used and discarded materials
including, but not limited to, waste paper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap,
salvage or discarded material, vehicles or machinery. The deposit or storage of
two (2) or more unlicensed, wrecked or disabled vehicles shall be deemed to be
a junkyard.
KENNEL - any lot on which six (6) or more adult (over six (6) months of
age) dogs or cats are kept at any one time. This use may also include breeding
of dogs and cats within the limitations of this definition. Any such use shall
fully comply with State Act 225 of 1982.
KITCHEN - an area or room within a dwelling or structure containing
kitchen facilities. All three amenities defined as kitchen facilities must be
present for the area or room to be considered a kitchen.
KITCHEN FACILITIES - all the following shall be included: sink with
piped water, a permanent cookstove and a refrigerator.
B15488
LANDOWNER - the owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such
option or contract is subject to any condition) or a lessee (if he is authorized
under the lease to exercise the right of the landowner), or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIVING UNIT FOR THE ELDERLY -a dwelling unit in which at least one
resident shall be at least 60 years of age.
LODGING HOUSE - see "boarding house."
LOT - a tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint
ownership, not necessarily a lot or lots shown on a duly recorded map, which is
occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures and accessory
building, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required. The
term lot shall also mean parcel, plot, site or any similar term.
(1) Corner Lot. A lot situated at and abutting the intersection
of two (2) streets having an interior angle of intersection not greater than
one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
(2) Interior Lot. A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which
do not abut a street.
(3) Through Lot. An interior lot having frontage on two (2)
parallel or approximately parallel streets
(4) Flag Lot or Keyhole Lot. An irregularly shaped lot
characterized by an elongated extension from a street to the principal part
of the lot. The flag or keyhole shape of the lot is normally intended to
provide for access to an otherwise land- locked interior parcel.
LOT AREA - the space contained within the lot lines, excluding space
within all existing and future or ultimate street rights-of-way.
LOT DEPTH - the mean average horizontal distance between the front
and the rear lot lines.
B15488
LOT LINES - any line dividing one (1) lot from another.
FRONT LOT LINE (STREET LINE) - a lot line separating the lot
from a street right-of-way. The front lot line shall be the same as an
existing or ultimate right-of-way line (whichever establishes a greater
width).
REAR LOT LINE - a lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line. (A three (3) sided lot has no rear lot line.)
SIDE LOT LINE - any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A
"side street lot line" is a side lot line separating a lot from a street.
S1REET
sigizusux--Jr=VALUSES___
LOT WIDTH - the horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at the minimum front yard setback lines. (See §405(G), Exceptions to
Minimum Lot Areas, Lot Widths and Yards.) In no case shall the minimum
street frontage be less than one-half (1/2) of the required lot width
Note: See Terms for Lot Requirements on Next Page.
B15488
CARTWAY
F REQUIRED FRONT
YARD DEPTH
1---- SIDE LOT LINES --.1
LOT WIDTH
Ni I
17-F '
ST Er 7 I
REQUIRED FRONT
YARD DEPTH
(OR GREATER)
TERMS FOR LOT REQUIREMENTS
For General Illustrative Purposes Only
REAR LOT UNE
SIDE LOT UNEREQUIRED
REAR YARD
F-1
REQ. ° REQ!)
SIDE YARD SIDE YARD
LOT WIDTH
FRONT LOT LINE
(STREET LINES)
LOT UNE
BUILDING UNE OR
BUILDING SETBACK UNE
REQUIRED FRONT YARD
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY UNE
FRONT LOT UNE OR
STREET UNE
STREET CENTER UNEJ
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY UNE
XXXII-3 1
B15488
FRONT LOT ME
(STREET LINES)
LUMENS - the luminous flux emitted per unit solid angle from a uniform
point source whose luminous intensity is one (1) candela.
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR - work that does not alter the appearance
or harm the stability of exterior features of a building.
MAJOR VEHICULAR or BOAT REPAIRS - include major mechanical and
body/hull work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding/patching,
storage of vehicles or boats not in operating condition, or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found in automobile service stations.
MEDICAL LABORATORY -a facility providing medical analysis services
including the taking, analyzing and testing of physical samples and specimens
for the diagnosis and treatment of patients.
MEDICAL OFFICE OR MEDICAL CLINIC - a place, building or portion
of a building used exclusively by physicians, optometrists, chiropractors,
dentists, physical therapists, massage therapists, or other drugless practitioners
involving non-surgical treatment, care, examination and diagnosis, and
preventative health services, including inoculation and educational services to
outpatients. This definition does not include veterinarian offices.
B15488
MEMBERSHIP CLUB - an area of land or building owned, leased or
occupied by an association of persons, operated solely for a recreational, social,
fraternal, religious, political or athletic purpose and whose activities are
confined to the members and guests and are not extended to the general public.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the definition of "membership club" shall not
include a tavern or restaurant unless a tavern or restaurant is also permitted in
that district.
MINERAL EXTRACTION - a site where a mineral, stone, sand, gravel or
topsoil is excavated.
MINOR AUTOMOBILE REPAIRS AND SERVICES - Includes:
(1) Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries and distributors
and distributor parts.
(2) Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving.
(3) Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hoses, fan
belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield
wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and
the like.
(4) Radiator cleaning and flushing.
(5) Washing and polishing and sale of automotive washing and
polishing materials.
(6) Greasing and lubrication.
(7) Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil filters and lines.
(8) Minor servicing and repair of carburetors.
(9) Emergency electrical repairs.
(10) Adjusting and repairing brakes.
(11) Minor motor adjustment not involving removal of the head
or crankcase or racing the motor.
B15488
(12) Mini grocery store with sales of packaged foods, beverages,
tobacco and similar convenience goods for filling station customers, as
accessory to principal operation.
(13) Provision of street maps and other informational material to
customers, provision of restroom facilities.
(14) Safety and emission inspections.
MOBILE/ MANUFACTURED HOME PARK - a parcel of land under
single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of
two (2) or more mobile homes for nontransient residential use.
MOTEL - see "hotel."
MULTIFAMILY - includes the following dwelling types: single-family
attached dwellings and garden apartment dwellings. These are described under
"dwelling types."
MULTIPLE-USE BUILDING - a building for two (2) or more principal
uses that are either permitted by right or by condition in the zoning district
where this Chapter permits a multiple-use building.
MULTI-VISION SIGN - a sign composed in whole or in part of a series of
vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that produces a different image and when
functioning properly allows on a single sign structure the display at any given
time of one of two or more images.
NIGHTCLUB - a type of tavern that offers the sale of liquor in
conjunction with live entertainment and/or dancing.
NITS -a photometric unit defined as cd/m2 (candelas per square meter).
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS - a business or commercial'
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer,
client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or
removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use.
B15488
NONCONFORMING LOT - a lot which does not meet with the minimum
lot width, or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is situated,
but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this Chapter or is
legally established through the granting of a variance by the Board.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE or BUILDING - a structure or
building, or part thereof, which does not meet the applicable provisions or
requirements of the district in which it is located, either at the time of enactment
of this Chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto, where such
building or structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or amendment. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE - a building, structure, sign or use of land
which does not conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is
located, either at the time of the enactment of this Chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments thereto, but which did not violate any applicable use
regulations prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendments. However,
no existing use shall be deemed nonconforming solely because of the existence
of less than the required off-street parking spaces.
NUISANCE - the unreasonable, unwarrantable or unlawful use of public
or private property which causes injury, damage, hurt, inconvenience,
annoyance or discomfort to any person in the legitimate enjoyment of his
reasonable rights of person or property.
NURSERY/GREENHOUSE - the raising of trees (for transplanting),
ornamentals, shrubs, flowers or houseplants for any commercial purpose.
NURSING HOME - an establishment containing sleeping rooms used by
persons who are lodged and furnished with meals and are provided with
needed support services, including the availability of basic nursing care. Such a
facility may or may not include skilled nursing or medical care, but shall not
include surgery or other treatments which are customarily provided in hospitals.
This definition shall be limited to facilities licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a nursing center or personal care center.
OFFICE - a use that involves administrative, clerical, financial,
governmental and professional operations and operations of a similar character.
This use shall not include retail or industrial uses.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL - a building in which services are performed
by a member of a profession including, but not limited to, an accountant,
)00CII-35
B15488
architect, author, community planner, dentist, engineer, insurance agent,
landscape architect, lawyer, minister, notary, optometrist, physician, realtor or
undertaker.
OFFICIAL MAP - the official map as adopted or amended by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with Act 247, as amended.
OFFICIAL STREET CLASSIFICATION MAP - the map as adopted or
amended by the Board of Supervisors classifying the streets of the Township
into functional categories.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP - the map as adopted or amended by the Board
of Supervisors which designates the location and boundaries of zoning districts.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN - a sign which directs attention to an object,
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business
located or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is located, or
to which it is affixed.
OFF-STREET PARKING SETBACK - the distance that any paved area is
required to be set back from the existing street right-of-way line. This shall not
apply to driveways, sidewalks or curbs.
OFF-TRACK BETTING PARLOR - a commercial use where persons can
wager upon, and observe by remote television, the outcomes of events that are
taking place elsewhere.
ON-PREMISES SIGN - a sign which directs attention to an object, product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business located or
offered on the premises upon which the sign is displayed or to which the sign is
affixed.
OPEN AIR RETAIL - buildings or open areas in which stalls or sales areas
are set aside, and rented or otherwise provided, and which are intended for use
by various individuals for the selling of homemade, homegrown, homecrafted,
old, new or antique retail goods. This definition would include a "flea market".
OPEN SPACE - the area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory
structures, streets, driveways or parking areas; but includes areas occupied by
walkways, patios, porches without roofs, playgrounds, outdoor recreation or
play apparatus, gardens or trees.
B15488
OPEN SPACE, COMMON - a parcel or parcels of land, or an area of
water or a combination of land and water within a development site which is
open space designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development or the Township.
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT - a development design option which
allows the minimum lot area and yard requirements to be reduced so that
buildings and lots can be grouped together in a more efficient and environmental
sensitive configuration, provided that the remaining area is set aside and
preserved as common open space in compliance with the regulations contained
in Section 901 (Appendix A).
ORCHARD - the raising and keeping of tree crops for any commercial
purpose.
ORDINANCE - the "Spring Township Zoning Ordinance," including the
official zoning map, official street classification map and any amendments
enacted by the Board of Supervisors.
PADEP - the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
PARALLEL SIGN - a sign which is attached to or is part of the facade of a
building and does not extend more than one foot (1') from such facade.
PARALLEL SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF - the entire area within a
single continuous perimeter composed of rectangles which enclose the extreme
limits of the emblems and/ or design together with any frame or background
which is used to differentiate such sign from the wall against which it is placed.
If a parallel sign is comprised of emblems, designs, words or
numerals with separate background or frames, the intervening air space
between the background frames shall not be included in the sign area
calculations.
Where a sign consists only of individual letters, monograms,
numerals, symbols or similar components and is painted on or attached
flat onto the wall of a building, and where such individual components
are without integrated background definition and are not within a
circumscribed frame area. The total area of the sign shall be the sum of
the areas of the squares or rectangles surrounding each individual sign
component.
B15488
PARENT TRACT - a lawful lot of record, that is held in single ownership
as of the date of adoption of this Chapter, according to the Office of Recorder of
Deeds of Berks County.
PARKING FACILITIES - outdoor areas or specially designed buildings or
garages used for the storage of vehicles.
PATIENT HOSTEL -a residential facility for the sole use of patients of a
hospital or medical center and their immediate families. The facility may include
a shared dining facility which is restricted to use by the hostel occupants.
PERMANENT - having a life span of six (6) months or more at a
particular location.
PERMIT - a document issued by the appropriate Township authority
authorizing the applicant to undertake certain activities.
BUILDING PERMIT - a permit indicating that a proposed
construction, alteration or reconstruction of a structure is in accordance
with the construction provisions of any building code which may be
adopted by the Township which authorizes an applicant to commence
with said construction, alteration or reconstruction.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT - a permit issued upon completion of the
construction of a structure, or change in use of structure or parcel of land
or reoccupancy of a structure or land indicating that the premises comply
with the provisions of this Chapter and may be used for the purposes set
forth in the occupancy permit.
ZONING PERMIT - a permit issued indicating that a proposed
use, building or structure is in accordance with this Chapter which
authorizes an applicant to proceed with said use, building or structure.
PERM11 LED BY RIGHT USE - a use which does not require zoning
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the Board of Supervisors before a
zoning permit is granted by the Zoning Officer, although a site plan review is
required for many uses under this Chapter.
PERSON - an individual, partnership, organization, association, trust or
corporation. When used in a penalty provision, "person" shall include the
members of such partnership, the trustees of such trust and the officers of such
organization, association or corporation.
B15488
PERSONAL SERVICE - an establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs which does not involve primarily retail sales of goods or
professional advisory services. Personal services include barber and beauty
shops, shoe repair shops, household appliance repair shops , laundromats,
laundry and dry cleaning shops (but not laundry or dry cleaning plants), tailor
and seamstress shops, and other similar establishments.
PLACE OF WORSHIP - buildings, synagogues, churches and shrines used
principally for religious and/or spiritual worship. Such facilities may include
religious education, social and day care facilities provided that such facilities are
clearly accessory uses and not a principal use.
PLANNED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT - a development containing one
or more of a variety of specified nonresidential uses and approved by the Board
of Supervisors as a Conditional Use complying with specified standards within
the Planned Highway Interchange District (PHI).
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) - an area of land
controlled by a single landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwelling units in a variety of housing types, and which has a
development plan that does not comply with regulations on lot size, bulk or
type of dwelling, density, lot coverage or required open space and which further
complies with §301 and all other applicable provisions of the Township of Spring
PRD ordinance (Chapter )0(I).
PLANNING COMMISSION - the Planning Commission for the Township
of Spring.
PORTABLE SIGN - a sign designed to be transported, including but not
limited to signs transported by wheels, signs converted to A-frames, menu or
sandwich board signs, balloons used as signs, and signs attached to or painted
on vehicles that are parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said
vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of a business.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING - the building in which the principal use of a lot
is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE - the single dominant use or single main use on a lot.
PROJECTING SIGN -a sign which is attached to the facade of a building
and extends more than one foot (1'), but not more than six (6') feet, from such
facade.
BI5488
PUBLIC NOTICE - notice required by Act 247, the Pennsylvania
Municipality Planning Code. Currently Act 247 requires notice to be given not
more than thirty (30) days and not less than fourteen (14) days in advance of any
public hearing required by this Chapter. Such notice shall be published once
each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER - a structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead electricity
transmission lines.
RADIO/TV TRANSMITTER - any structure used for the transmission or
retransmission of a commercial radio or television broadcast signal.
RECREATION - three (3) types of recreation are classified for this
Chapter:
NONPUBLIC INDOOR RECREATION - this includes recreation
uses that do not meet the definition of public recreation and that are
primarily within a building. This includes uses owned by commercial
ventures or by nonprofit organizations. This includes indoor miniature
golf, amusement establishments, indoor membership clubs, indoor
swimming clubs, indoor tennis clubs, racquetball clubs, health clubs,
exercise clubs and closely similar uses. See also definitions of
"amusement establishment" and "membership club."
NONPUBLIC OUTDOOR RECREATION - this includes recreation
uses that do not meet the definition of public recreation and that are
primarily conducted outside of a building. This includes uses owned by
commercial ventures or by nonprofit organizations. This includes golf
courses, chip and putt courses, picnic groves, camps, campgrounds,
outdoor membership clubs, outdoor swimming clubs, outdoor tennis club
and closely similar uses. This definition specifically does not include
motor vehicle race tracks.
B15488
PUBLIC RECREATION - this includes indoor or outdoor and active
or passive recreation facilities that are owned by a Federal, State, County
or Township agency for recreation purposes. A fee may be charged for
admittance and such facilities may be operated by a private contractor.
This shall include publicly owned parks, golf courses, playgrounds and
swimming pools.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - a vehicle (regardless of size) which is
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses
(regardless of whether it is self-propelled or is designed to be towed or carried
by another vehicle). "Recreation vehicle" includes campers, pickup coaches,
travel trailers, motor homes or vans designed principally for recreational use.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - this includes the following zoning districts:
Rural/Suburban, Low Density Suburban, Moderate Density Suburban,
Suburban/ Semiurban and the Urban Districts.
RESTAURANT - four (4) types of restaurants are classified for this
Chapter:
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT WITH DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE -
a fast food restaurant as defined below that also provides service to
customers remaining seated in automobiles, either though an exterior
window or service area or through serve to parked automobiles.
FOOD STAND - a fast food restaurant as defined below, but with
no inside seating facilities. This shall include a snack bar or ice cream
stand.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD - an establishment that principally
sells food, frozen deserts and nonalcoholic beverages in a ready- toconsume
state primarily in disposable containers, in bags or on trays. The
customer primarily orders and receives the food at an inside counter or
outdoor walk-up window without the assistance of a waiter or waitress.
A cafeteria-style restaurant shall be considered a standard restaurant.
RESTAURANT, STANDARD - a restaurant that does not meet the
definition of a fast food restaurant or food stand. This includes
restaurants where the majority of the food is consumed within the
restaurant at tables.
B15488
RETAIL STORE - a building in which retail merchandise is sold or rented,
including a furniture store, a gift shop, and an establishment for the sale of
automobile accessories. This shall not include an adult business use.
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY -a development consisting of a building or
group of buildings designed and used specifically for the residence and care of
elderly and disabled persons.
RIDING STABLE - the commercial boarding or renting of horses.
RIGHT-OF-WAY - land reserved for the public or others for use as a
street or other purpose.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE - land reserved for the public or others for
future use as a street or other purposes. The ultimate right-of-way line is usually
wider than the official legal existing right-of-way that is currently owned by the
Township or PennDOT.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE - the line that separates the street right-of-way
from the lot. In cases where an area has been required to be reserved for future
dedication as an ultimate right-of-way, this ultimate right-of-way shall be used
as the basis for all building setbacks.
RIPARIAN BUFFER - a strip of land adjacent to any stream or
watercourse, within which woodland disturbances or land disturbances are
limited.
ROOMING HOUSE - see "boarding house."
SANITARY FACILITIES - all of the following facilities having piped
water: sink, a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
SCREEN - a fence or natural obstruction of sufficient height (but not less
than six (6) feet high) to effectively visually obscure the area being screened from
adjoining areas.
SEASONAL ROADSIDE PRODUCT MARKET - an accessory use for the
sale of dairy, farm, greenhouse or nursery products.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY- a building or group of buildings divided
into individual separate access units which are rented or leased forth storage of
personal property.
B15488
SETBACK - see "building line" and "off-street parking setback."
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - a system designed to collect, treat and
dispose of sewage from users in compliance with regulations of the appropriate
State agency and of the Township.
CENTRALIZED SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM -a sewage disposal
system which collects, treats and disposes sewage from more than one (1)
dwelling, principal use or lot.
ONLOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - a sewage disposal system
which collects, treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only
one (1) dwelling, principal use or lot.
SHOPPING CENTER -a group of commercial establishments built on a
site that is planned, developed, owned and managed as a single operating unit
related in location, size and type of shops and distinguished from a commercial
area comprised of unrelated individual uses.
SIGN - Any object, device display, or structure that is used to advertise,
identify, display, direct, or attract attention, including structural elements, bases,
sign faces, trim and borders.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF - the entire area within a single
continuous perimeter composed of rectangles enclosing the extreme limits of a
sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of the
sign. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing
elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of
the display. More descriptive definitions are provided for freestanding and
parallel signs.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING IN COMBINATION WITH A
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY - the utilization of a lot, tract or parcel of land for a
single-family detached dwelling and a commercial principal use permitted by
right, by condition or by special exception in a Zoning District where this
Chapter permits a single-family detached dwelling in combination with a
commercial activity.
SITE ALTERATION - includes regrading the existing topography, filling
lakes, ponds, marshes or floodplains, clearing vegetation or altering
watercourses.
B15488
SLOPE - the rate of vertical change of ground surface expressed as a
percentage and determined by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal
distance.
SOLAR ACCESS - the capability of receiving direct sunlight between 9:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m. (solar time) on any area of a lot not within required yard
areas.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA or FACILITY - a place including, but
not limited to, a sanitary landfill where garbage, trash or junk is disposed of or
is processed or recycled for disposal or reuse. Such use shall not include the
disposal or processing of hazardous or radioactive materials.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE - a use for which the Zoning Hearing Board
may grant permission following a public hearing and findings of fact consistent
with this Chapter, provided the use complies with the conditions and standards
required by this Chapter.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region or female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - human male genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or
female breast.
STACKING SPACE, OFF-STREET - an area, separate from or in addition
to the required parking area, reserved for the temporary retention of vehicles
which are queuing up or utilizing the services of a drive-through service unit.
STATE OBSCENITY CODE - 53 Pa.C.S. §5901, et seq., as amended.
STEEP SLOPE AREA - those areas having slopes of fifteen percent (15%)
or more.
STEEP SLOPE LOT - a lot having an average slopes of fifteen percent
(15%) of more.
B15488
STORY (and HALF-STORY) - that portion of a building, included
between the surface of any floor and the ceiling next above it, having a vertical
distance of not less than seven (7) feet shall be considered a full story. Any such
portion of a building having a vertical distance of less than seven (7) feet shall be
considered a half-story. Basements shall be considered full stories while cellars
shall not be considered as being stories or half-stories.
STREET - a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property and contains a right-of-way area (in
addition to the cartway); including avenue, place, way, parkway, lane,
boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley, access
drive or driveway. The official street classification map in this Chapter shall be
used to define each street by its function.
ARTERIAL STREET - streets designed primarily to carry medium
to heavy volumes of traffic at moderately high speeds and generally
should not provide access to land which would interfere with their
primary traffic functions.
COLLECTOR STREET - streets designed to carry a moderate
volume of traffic between local streets and arterials at moderate speeds
and provide only limited vehicular access to the abutting properties.
EXPRESSWAY - a high-speed street with access available only
using ramps at interchanges.
LOCAL STREET - streets designed to provide direct access from
abutting properties to collector and arterial streets.
STREET LINE - see "right-of-way line."
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION - any change in the structural parts of a
structure such as walls, columns, beams, girders, floors, roof or ceiling or any
addition to any structure; or the moving of a structure from one location to
another. "Structural alteration" does not include normal maintenance, minor
repairs or interior alterations.
STRUCTURE - any manmade object having an ascertainable, stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land or something
located on the land. The term "structure" shall include: buildings, signs, fences,
walls, towers, swimming pools, porches, garages and similar structure.
"Structure" shall be interpreted as including the words "or part thereof."
B15488
SUBTERRANEAN BUILDING - a building covered by land on at least
fifty percent (50%) of the total surface of its walls and roof.
SWIMMING CLUB - an area containing a swimming pool which is used
by the public or by members for a fee.
SWIMMING POOL - a body of water or receptacle for water having a
depth at any point greater than twenty-four (24) inches which is primarily used
or intended to be used for swimming or bathing.
TAVERN - a building or part thereof where, in consideration for payment
therefore, liquor, beer or wine or any combination thereof are served for
consumption on the premises, with or without food.
TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES - the offering of goods for sale to the public
from a temporary structure or from a location out-of-doors where goods are not
normally displayed as part of a permanent, ongoing retail establishment.
Examples of temporary retail sales include the selling of flowers before and on
holidays such as Mother's Day and the sale of fireworks on July 4. This term
does not include holiday tree sales.
TEMPORARY SIGN - a sign which is not permanently mounted or affixed
to the ground, building, or display window and which is displayed for a specific
period of time.
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN - any sign which displays exclusively
current time and temperature information.
TOWNHOUSE - see "dwelling types, single-family attached dwelling."
TOWNSHIP - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
TRACT SIZE - for the purposes of regulating the minimum land area of
certain types of development, the tract size is the amount of land area that the
applicant presently owns or has an option to purchase. The Township may
allow land controlled by more than one (1) applicant to qualify as a tract if there
is clear evidence of a commitment to very closely coordinate the development of
their lands. To be considered a tract, land must be proposed to be developed in a
well laid out, coordinated and comprehensive manner, especially in terms of
traffic access and internal circulation.
TRAILER - see "mobile home" (listed under "dwelling") and "recreation
vehicle."
XXXII-46
B15488
TRANSITION -a visual effect used on an electronic changeable copy sign
to change from one message or image to another.
TRAVEL TRAILER - see "recreation vehicle."
TREE FARM (CROP)- the raising and harvesting of trees for commercial
purposes that were specifically planted for that purpose. This shall include a
Christmas tree farm. See also the definition of " forestry."
TRUCK TERMINAL - the building plus contiguous space to which freight
is brought for transfer, collection and sorting for shipment by motor truck.
USE - the specific purpose for which land, sign, structure or building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it maybe occupied or maintained, or
any activity, occupation, business or operation which may be carried on thereon
or therein. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE - the granting of permission by the Zoning Hearing Board to
use or alter land or structures which requires a variation from the strict
application of a requirement of this Chapter. A variance shall only be granted if
the situation complies with State Act 247 of 1968, as amended, especially §912.
VEHICLE WASH PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE CENTER - a facility
devoted to the washing and waxing of the exterior of vehicles and the cleaning of
their interiors by automated equipment and employees of the establishment
where minor preventive maintenance to the vehicles shall be offered and
performed, including specifically oil and filter changes, brake replacement,
headlamp and other light bulb replacement, replacements of belts, supplying
fluids used by the vehicles and other similar preventive maintenance not
involving body work and /or major repairs. Customer lounges with customer
services shall be permitted at the facility. Sale of gasoline and other fuels shall
not be permitted at the facility.
VETERINARIAN OFFICE - see "animal hospital."
VIDEO DISPLAY SIGN - a sign that changes its message or background in
a manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery,
which may or may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to
imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a
progression of frames which give the illusion of motion, including but not
limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or
expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs.
III -47
B15488
Video display signs include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
V-TYPE SIGN - a structure or structures with two (2) or three (3) given
sign faces, forming the shape of the letter "V" or a triangle when viewed from
above, with an angle between any two (2) faces of not more than ninety (90)
degrees.
WALL SIGN - a sign which is attached parallel to a building wall with the
face of said sign extending no more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the
wall.
WAREHOUSE and WHOLESALE TRADE - a building or group of
buildings primarily used for the commercial storage, transfer and distribution of
products and materials.
WATERCOURSE - a channel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM - a system designed to transmit water from a
source to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate State
agencies and the Township.
CENTRALIZED WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM - a water supply
system which transmits water from a common source to more than one (1)
dwelling, principal use or lot.
ONLOT WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM - a water supply system which
transmits water from a source on the lot to one (1) dwelling, principal use
or lot.
WETLAND - any area meeting the official wetland definition of the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers or the PADEP, as amended. In the event that the
definition of a wetland accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers conflicts
with the definition of a wetland accepted by the PADEP, the more restrictive
definition shall apply.
WETLAND BUFFER - a strip of land at least thirty-five (35) feet in width,
adjacent to any jurisdictional wetland, within which removal of vegetation, earth
moving activities, structures, and impervious surfaces are limited.
B15488
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY - includes nature center, outdoor education
laboratory, woodland preserve or arboretum.
WINDOW SIGN - a sign affixed to or visible through a window from the
exterior of a building.
WOODLAND -a tree mass or plant community in which tree species are
dominant or co-dominant, and the branches of the trees form a complete, or
nearly complete, aerial canopy. For the purposes of this Chapter, the extent of
any woodland plant community, or any part thereof, shall be measured from the
outer-most drip line of all the trees within the community. Woodland shall
include any area where timber has been harvested within the previous three
years, and/or woodland disturbance has occurred within the previous three
years, which would have met the definition of woodland prior to timbering or
disturbance. Woodlands do not include orchards.
WOODLAND DISTURBANCE - any activity which alters the existing
structure of a woodland or hedgerow. Alterations include the cutting or removal
of canopy trees, subcanopy trees, understory shrubs and vines, woody and
herbaceous woodland floor species as well as removal of humus or duff from the
ground. Woodland disturbance includes any land disturbance within a
woodland or hedgerow.
YARD - an open space on the same lot with a structure (or a group of
structures) which lies between the structure (or a group of structures) and a lot
line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except
as herein permitted.
FRONT YARD - a yard extending the full width of the lot between
a structure and the front lot line. On lots abutting more than one (1) street
other than an alley, the front yard requirements shall apply fronting each
street, unless otherwise specified in this Chapter.
REAR YARD - a yard extending the full width of the lot between a
structure and a rear lot line.
SIDE YARD - a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a structure and the nearest side lot line.
B15488
The following graphic provides an illustrative example of different types
of yards:
REAR LOT UNE--
SIDE LOT UNEREQUIRED
REAR YARD
RECI'D REM)
SIDE YARD SIDE YARD
LOT WIDTH
LOT UNE
BUILDING UNE OR
BUILDING SETBACK UNE
REQUIRED FRONT YARD
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY UNE
FRONT LOT LINE OR
STREET LINE
CARTWAY<
STREET CENTER UNE---"*"...°-
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY
ZONE - see "district."
ZONING HEARING BOARD - see "Board."
ZONING OFFICER - the administrative officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 202 of Section 2; amended by
Ordinance No. 366, January 12, 2009, Sections 1 & 2)
B15488
Part 3
Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Section 301. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
(A) For the purpose of this Chapter, zoning districts are hereby
established as follows:
RHA Rural Holding Area
RC Rural Conservation
RS Rural/Suburban
LDS Low Density Suburban
MDS Moderate Density Suburban
SS Suburban/Semiurban
U Urban
NC Neighborhood Convenience Commercial
PHC Planned Highway Commerce
PHI Planned Highway Interchange
PHT Planned Highway Transitional
POB Planned Office/ Business
PBR Planned Business and Residential
PI/ B Planned Industry/ Business
EI Extractive Industry
FS Fuel Storage
(B) For the purposes of this Chapter, the zoning districts named in
Subsection (A) above shall be of the number, size, shape and location shown on
the official zoning map adopted and included in its entirety as a part of this
Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 301 of Section 2)
Section 302. Application of District Regulations.
(A) Unless otherwise provided by law or specifically in this Chapter,
no land or building or structure shall be used or occupied except for a use
permitted in the zoning district within which the land or building or structure is
located.
(B) The regulations set by this Chapter shall apply uniformly to each
class or kind of structure or land, except as provided for in this Chapter.
B15488
(C) No building, structure or land shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, and no building or
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be used or occupied unless it is in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the use and district in which
it is located.
(D) No part of yard, or other open space, or off -street parking or
loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose
of complying with this Chapter, shall be included as part of a yard, open space or
off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
(E) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Chapter shall
be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Chapter shall meet at
least the minimum requirements established by this Chapter.
(F) Any territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Township
shall be classified as the zoning district of the Township most similar to the
zoning of such territory before annexation (as determined by the Zoning Hearing
Board) until otherwise classified.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 302 of Section 2)
Section 303. Zoning Map.
(A) A map entitled "Zoning Map for the Township of Spring"
accompanies this Chapter and is declared a part of this Chapter.
(B) The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors attested by the Township Secretary and
shall bear the adoption date of this Chapter and the seal of the Township under
the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map
adopted (date) as part of the Spring Township Zoning
Ordinance."
(C) Changes of any nature to the official zoning map shall be made in
conformity with the amendment procedures set forth in this Chapter. All
changes shall be noted by date with a brief description of the nature of the
change.
(D) Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official
zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official
zoning map shall be located in the Township Office and shall be the final
XVGI-52
B15488
authority on boundaries and districts. The Zoning Officer shall have a certified
copy of the official zoning map for official use.
(1) If the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret because of changes and additions, the Board
of Supervisors may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map which
shall supersede the prior official zoning map.
(2) The new official zoning map may include corrections of
drafting or clerical errors or omissions from the prior Official Zoning
Map, but shall not include any amendment or boundary change without
completing the procedures required under Act 247.
(3) The new official zoning map shall be identified by the
signatures of the Board of Supervisors, attested to by the Township
Secretary and bearing the following words: "This is to certify that this
Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map
adopted (date) as part of the Spring Township Zoning
Ordinance."
(4) Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has
been totally destroyed, the prior map or any part or parts thereof
remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 303 of Section 2; As Amended by Map
Amendment Only Ordinance No. 357, April 28, 2008, Section 1)
Section 304. Rules for Interpreting District Boundaries.
(A) Zoning boundaries drawn approximately following the center lines
of streams, drainageways, streets, alleys, railroads or other rights-of-way shall be
construed to follow such center lines. In the event of any change in the center
line, the zoning boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual center
line.
(B) Boundaries approximately following property lines shall be
construed as following such property lot lines.
(C) Where a district boundary line does not follow such a line, position
is shown on the official zoning map by reference to an ordinance describing such
lines or by a specific dimension expressing its distance, in feet, from a street
center line or other boundary line as indicated and running parallel thereto.
III -53
B15488
(D) Where physical features existing on the ground vary with those
shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by
subsection (A) through (C) above, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the
district boundaries.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 304 of Section 2)
Section 305. Rural Holding Area District (RHA).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Holding Area District is to
retain this area's rural character and scenic landscape while providing an
opportunity for families and others to live in single-family dwellings that are on
large lots. The preservation of forests, watercourses, underground water, steep
slopes and other natural features and resources are emphasized in this area.
Open space developments on smaller lots to preserve the natural environment is
encouraged. Land uses that are compatible with a rural living environment are
also provided in this district.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Rural Holding Area District by
the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Agriculture, general**.
(2) Agricultural industry.
(3) Commercial stable or riding academy*,**.
(4) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communication equipment buildings*,**.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(Appendix
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
Golf course*,**.
Greenhouse/ nursery**.
Open Space Development in accordance with Section 901
A)*.
Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
Picnic grove**.
Recreation, public*, .
Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §305(F), §305(G), and §321 **.
(13) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(14) Wildlife sanctuary**.
B15488
*Site plan review required. (see §409)
"See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural Holding Area District by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in §322 of this
Chapter:
(1) Agriculture, intensive*.
(2) Bed and breakfast*.
(3) Boarding House *.
(4) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(5) Cemetery or Mausoleum*.
(6) Cultural center.
(7) Fire station*.
(8) Gun club/target range*.
(9) Kennel*.
(10) Nursery school/ day care center*.
(11) Open air retail sales of agricultural products.
(12) Place of Worship*.
(13) Private airstrip and airport*.
(14) Public utility facility*.
(15) Recreation, nonpublic outdoor (other than golf courses and
picnic groves, which are permitted by right)*.
(16) School, public/private*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural Holding Area District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §323 of this Chapter:
(1) Heliport *.
(2) Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §305(F), §305(G), and §321
(3) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
B15488
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Rural Holding Area District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §305(G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Rural Holding Area District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(i)
(k)
(1)
provisions
(m)
(n)
(o)
(13)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
(v)
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Horse barn.
Keeping animals and fowl.
No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
of Section 324(C)(9).
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Recreational vehicle.
Seasonal roadside produce market.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pool (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
Tennis court.
Storage in an accessory structure.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural
Holding Area District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
B15488
Minimum Minimum
Lot Area* Lot Width**
Principal Use (acres) (feet)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By Total
By Impervious
Buildings Cover
Any use 5 300 5
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
10 2 -1/2 30
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 305.(G) for the particular
use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural Holding Area District,
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Front Yard*
Principal Use (feet)
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Any Use 50 25 60 30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 305 of Section 2)
Section 306. Rural Conservation District (RC).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Conservation District is to
encourage low density single-family dwellings on lots large enough to provide
for both onlot sewage disposal and water supply while providing for the
opportunity to have somewhat smaller lots if public water and sewage facilities
are provided off the lot. Open space developments are provided in this district
to provide a desirable alternative to conventional single-family developments.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Rural Conservation District by
the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
B15488
(1)
(2)
(3)
Agriculture, general**.
Agricultural industry.
Commercial stable or riding academy*,**.
(4) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment building*,**.
(5) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(6) Golf course*,**.
(7) Greenhouse/ nursery**.
(8) Open Space Development in accordance with Section 901
(Appendix
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
A)*.
Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
Picnic grove*".
Recreation, public*.
Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §306(F), §306(G), and §321 **.
(13) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(14) Wildlife sanctuary**.
* Site plan review required. (See §409)
** See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural Conservation District by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in §322 of this
Chapter:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
buildings*.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
Agriculture, intensive*.
Cemetery or mausoleum*.
College or university*.
Communications towers and communications equipment
Community center.
Convalescent/nursing home*.
Cultural center.
Fire station*.
Nursery school/ day care center*.
Open air retail sales for agricultural products*.
Place of worship*.
Public utility facility*.
Recreation, nonpublic outdoor* (other than golf courses and
picnic groves, which are permitted by right)
(14) School, public/private*.
XXXII-58
B15488
(15) Swimming club*.
(16) Tennis club*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural Conservation District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards of §323
of this Chapter:
(1) Mobile home park*.
(2) Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §306(F), §306(G), and §321 **.
(3) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Rural Conservation District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §306(F), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Rural Conservation District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(1)
provisions
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Horse barn.
Keeping animals and fowl.
No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
of Section 324(C)(9).
XXXII-59
B15488
(m) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(n) Outdoor storage shed.
(o) Private greenhouse.
(p) Recreational vehicle.
(q) Seasonal roadside produce market.
(r) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(s) Swimming pools (noncommercial).
(t) Temporary retail sales.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural
Conservation District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
B15488
Principal Use
Single-Family
Detached Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
Mobile/ Manufact
ured Home Park
Any Other
Permitted Use:
-With Both
Centralized
Sewer/ Water
-With Onlot
Sewer or Onlot
Water
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* Lot Width** By Impervious
(sq. ft.) (feet) Buildings Cover
(In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
(In accordance with the Township PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
(In accordance with §323(E)(4) of this Chapter and the Township's
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter )00/II))
20,000 150
130,680 200
(3 acres)
10 20
5 10
2-1/2 30
2-1/2 30
**
use.
Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 306.(G) for the particular
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural Conservation District,
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Front Yard*
(feet)
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Any Permitted Use 50 25 60 30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
B15488
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 306 of Section 2)
Section 307. Rural/Suburban District (RS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Rural/Suburban District is to provide
for low to moderate density (depending upon the availability of centralized
water and sewer) residential areas which are protected from incompatible land
uses. Single-family homes are encouraged in this district. Open space
developments are also provided as a desirable alternative to conventional singlefamily
developments.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Rural/Suburban District by the
Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional and all other applicable
requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Agriculture, general*,**.
(2) Agricultural industry.
(3) Commercial stable or riding academy*,**.
(4) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings*,**.
(5)
(6)
(7)
Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
Greenhouse/ nursery*.
Open Space Development in accordance with Section 901
(Appendix A) *.
(8) Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
(9) Picnic grove**.
(10) Recreation, public*.
(11) Single -family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §307(F), §307(G), and §321 **.
(12) Township-owned use, including Township park.
* Site plan review required (see §409).
** See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural/Suburban District by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in §322 of this
Chapter:
III -62
B15488
(1) Campground (private)*.
(2) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(3) College*.
(4) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(5) Community center.
(6) Convalescent/nursing home*.
(7) Fire station*.
(8) Nursery school/day care center*.
(9) Open air retail sales for agricultural products*.
(10) Place of worship*.
(11) Public utility facility*.
(12) Retirement community*.
(13) School, public/private, not including trade school*.
(14) Swimming club*.
(15) Tennis club*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural/Suburban District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §323 of this Chapter:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §307(F), §307(G), and §321 **.
(2) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Rural/Suburban District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §307(G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Rural/Suburban District only if such use complies with the relevant
standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
B15488
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(0
(i)
(k)
(1)
provisions
(m)
(n)
(o)
(13)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Horse barn.
Keeping animals or fowl.
No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
of Section 324(C)(10).
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Recreational vehicle.
Seasonal roadside produce market.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pool (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Rural/Suburban District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
B15488
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* Lot Width** By Impervious
Principal Use (sq. ft.) (feet) Buildings Cover
Single-family (In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Detached Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter )0(I))
Mobile/ Manufact (In accordance with §323(E)(4) of this Chapter and the Township's
ured Home Park Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII))
Any Other
Permitted Use:
-With Both
Centralized
Sewer & Water
15,000
-With On lot 43,560
Sewer or On lot
Water
100
150
25 40
10 20
2-1/2 30
2-1/2 30
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §307(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural/Suburban District, except
as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
B15488
Principal Use
Front Yard*
(feet)
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Any Use:
-With Both
Centralized Sewer &
Water
50 10 25 30
-With On lot Sewer or
On lot Water
50 20 50 30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 307 of Section 2)
Section 308. Low Density Suburban District (LDS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Low Density Suburban District is to
provide for relatively low density single-family residential development and to
allow for the natural expansion of those areas which have the potential for being
served by public water and sewer facilities.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Low Density Suburban District
by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(2) Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
(3) Public recreation.
(4) Single-family detached dwelling.
(5) Township-owned use, including Township park.
**See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Low Density Suburban District by
B15488
the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in §322 of
this Chapter:
(1) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(2) College or university*.
(3) Convalescent/ nursing home*.
(4) Fire station*.
(5) Nursery school/day care center.*
(6) Place of worship*.
(7) Public utility facility*.
(8) School, public/private, not including trade school*.
(9) Swimming club*.
(10) Tennis club*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Low Density Suburban District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §323 of this Chapter:
(1) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Low Density Suburban District
shall comply with the minimum yard requirements contained in §308(G),
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Low Density Suburban District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a) Bus shelter.
(b) Energy systems, solar.
(c) Energy systems, wind generated.
(d) Farm pond.
(e) Fence and wall.
(f) Garage.
(g) Holiday tree sales.
(h) Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
(i) Home occupation, including day care center.
III -67
B15488
0)
(k)
(1)
provisions o
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
Horse barn.
Keeping animals or fowl.
No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
f Section 324(C)(9).
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Recreational vehicle.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pool (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Low
Density Suburban District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted
Use With Both
Centralized
Sewer/Water
Any Permitted
Use Without Both
Centralized
Sewer/Water
Single-Family
Detached Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
10,000
43,560
Minimum
Lot Width*
(feet)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By Total
By Impervious
Buildings Cover
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
80 40 55 3 30
150 25 40 3 30
(In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 308.(G) for the particular
use.
B15488
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Low Density Suburban District,
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Side Yard
Front Yard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Permitted Use 30 8 20 30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 308 of Section 2)
Section 309. Moderate Density Suburban District (MDS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Moderate Density Suburban District
is to provide for moderate density single-family residential development and to
allow for the natural expansion of those areas which have the potential for being
served by public water and sewer facilities.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Moderate Density Suburban
District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all
other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(2) Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
(3) Public recreation, including Township park.
(4) Single-family detached dwelling.
(5) Township-owned use, including Township park.
** See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Moderate Density Suburban District
by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in §322
of this Chapter.
(1) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
)00c11-69
B15488
(2) College or university*.
(3) Community center.
(4) Convalescent/nursing home*.
(5) Fire station*.
(6) Group home*.
(7) Nursery school/ day care center*.
(8) Picnic grove*.
(9) Place of worship*.
(10) Public utility facility*.
(11) School, public/private, not including trade school*.
(12) Swimming club*.
(13) Tennis club*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Moderate Density Suburban District
when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §323 of this Chapter:
(1) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Moderate Density Suburban
District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of §309(G),
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Moderate Density Suburban District only if such use complies with
the relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a) Bus shelter.
(b) Energy systems, solar.
(c) Energy systems, wind generated.
(d) Fence and wall.
(e) Garage.
(f) Holiday tree sales.
(g) Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
(h) Home occupation, including day care center.
(i) Keeping animals or fowl.
B15488
(j) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 324(C)(9)
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Recreational vehicle.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pools (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(P)
(q)
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Moderate Density Suburban District, except as specifically provided for this
Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted
Use with Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
Lot Width**
(feet)
8,000 70
Any Permitted 43,560
Use Without Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Single-Family
Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
150
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By Total
By Impervious
Buildings Cover
45 60
20 40
(In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
3 30
3 30
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §309(G) for the particular use.
B15488
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Moderate Density Suburban
District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Side Yard
Front Yard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Permitted Use 30 8 20 30
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 309 of Section 2)
Section 310. Suburban/Semiurban District (SS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Suburban/Semiurban District is to
provide opportunities for single-family and two-family dwellings at moderate to
high densities to retain and continue the existing suburban/ serniurban character.
Single-family cluster and planned residential development are provided as a
desirable form of residential development that will permit the preservation of
open space.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Suburban/Semiurban District
by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Garden apartment*,**.
(2) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(3) Public recreation.
(4) Retirement community*,*".
(5) Single-family attached dwelling*.
(6) Single-family detached dwelling.
(7) Single-family to multifamily conversions*.
(8) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(9) Two-family detached dwelling*.
(10) Two-family semidetached dwelling*.
*Site plan review required. (see §409)
'"'See §321 for additional requirements.
B15488
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Suburban/Semiurban District by
the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in §322 of
this Chapter:
(1) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(2) College or university*.
(3) Community center.
(4) Fire station*.
(5) Group home*.
(6) Nursery school/ day care center*.
(7) Place of worship*.
(8) Public utility facility*.
(9) School, public/private*.
(10) Swimming club*.
(11) Tennis club*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Suburban/Semiurban District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §323 of this Chapter:
(1) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(2) Each accessory use in the Suburban/Semiurban District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §310(H), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(3) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Suburban/Semiurban District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a) Bus shelter.
(b) Energy systems, solar.
(c) Energy systems, wind generated.
(d) Fence and wall.
(e) Garage.
XXXII-73
B15488
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(1)
provisions
(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(P)
(9)
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Keeping animals or fowl.
No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
of Section 324(C)(9)
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Recreational vehicle.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pool (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Suburban/Semiurban District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted
Use with Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Permitted
Use Without Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Planned
Residential
Development
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
Lot Width'
(feet)
5,000 50
43,560 150
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By Total
By Impervious
Buildings Cover
50 70
20 40
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
3 30
3 30
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §310(H) for the particular use.
(G) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Restrictions for
Single-Family Attached Dwellings and Garden Apartments. The requirements
XXXII-74
B15488
listed in §321 under "Garden Apartment or Single-Family Attached Dwellings"
shall apply, except the following additional standards shall also apply within the
SS District:
(1) Numbers of Units Attached. A maximum of six (6) singlefamily
attached and/or garden apartment dwelling units shall be
attached in any form.
(2) Maximum Gross Density. A maximum gross density of
seven (7) units per acre shall apply for garden apartments or singlefamily
attached dwellings in the SS District rather than the maximum
gross density stated in §322 for garden apartments and single-family
attached dwellings.
(3) Setback of Garden Apartments From an Exterior Lot Line. A
garden apartment shall be located a minimum of eighty (80) feet from any
exterior lot line of a development.
(H) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Suburban/Semiurban District,
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Side Yard
Front Yard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Permitted Use 30 5 15 25
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
**If two (2) side yards exist.
(I) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 310 of Section 2)
B15488
Section 311. Urban District (U).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Urban District is to provide for more
intensively developed residential areas where a wide variety of housing types
are encouraged including single-family attached dwellings and apartments.
Maintaining sufficient open area within residential developments in this district
is encouraged to permit the dwellings to blend with the land's natural features
and to ensure the new dwellings will be compatible with existing housing.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Urban District by the Zoning
Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other applicable
requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(2) Garden apartments*,**.
(3) Retirement community*,**.
(4) Single-family attached dwelling*,**.
(5) Single-family detached dwelling.
(6) Two-family semidetached dwelling*.
(7) Two-family detached dwelling*.
(8) Single-family to multifamily conversions*.
(9) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(10) Public recreation.
*Site plan review required (see §409).
** See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Urban District by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in §322 of this
Chapter:
(1) Bed and breakfast*.
(2) Boarding house*.
(3) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(4) College or university*.
(5) Community center.
(6) Fire station*.
(7) Group home*.
(8) Nursery school/ day care center*.
(9) Nursing home*.
(10) Orphanages*.
III -76
B15488
(11) Picnic grove*.
(12) Place of worship*.
(13) Public utility facility*.
(14) School, public/private*.
(15) Swimming club*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Urban District shall comply with
the minimum yard requirements in §311(F), except as specifically
provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Urban District only if such use complies with the relevant standards
contained in §324 of this Chapter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Keeping of animals or fowl.
No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 324(C)(9).
(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(13)
(q)
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Recreational vehicle.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pool (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
(E) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Urban
District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
B15488
Principal Use
Any Use Other
Than Garden
Apartments or
Single-Family
Attached
Dwellings
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
Lot Width**
(feet)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By Total
By Impervious
Buildings Cover
3,500 35 50 70
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
3 30
Garden (See "Garden Apartments and Single-Family Attached Dwellings" in
Apartments or §321.)
Single-Family
Attached
Dwellings
*For residential uses, this shall be the minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §311(F) for the particular use.
(F) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Urban District, except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Front Yard*
(feet)
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Any Permitted Use
Other Than Garden
Apartments or
Townhouses
20 5 15 20
Garden Apartments See "Garden Apartments and Townhouses" in §321.
or Townhouses
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
If two side yards exist.
If one side yard exists, the side yard shall be ten (10) feet.
B15488
(G) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 311 of Section 2)
Section 312. Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District (NC).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District is to provide opportunities for small retail, personal and
professional service uses which provide convenience goods and services to
Township residents and others. This district, which would be located at selected
existing highway/ street intersections, will have development controls to ensure
sign control, attractive setbacks and landscaping.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type,
dimensional and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Automobile accessories.
(2) Business office*.
(3) Convenience stores*,**.
(4) Cultural center*.
(5) Financial establishment*,**.
(6) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(7) Government office*.
(8) Laundry/laundromat*,**.
(9) Medical clinic or medical office*,**.
(10) Medical laboratory or blood donor station*,**.
(11) Membership club or lodge*,**.
(12) Musical instrument sales*.
(13) Nursery school/ day care center*,**.
(14) Personal service establishment*.
(15) Professional office*.
(16) Recreation, public.
(17) Restaurant, fast food*,**.
(18) Restaurant, standard*,**.
(19) Retail nurseries/ supply stores*,**.
(20) Retail store*,**.
(21) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(22) A combination of uses permitted by right*,**.
* Site plan review required (see §409).
** See §321 for additional requirements.
XXXII-79
B15488
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
standards contained in §322 of this Chapter:
(1) Animal hospital*.
(2) Automobile service station*.
(3) Bakery.
(4) Carwash*.
(5) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(6) Civic, social, fraternal association*.
(7) Community center.
(8) Convalescent/nursing home*.
(9) Energy systems, wind generated.
(10) Fire station*.
(11) Health club*.
(12) Orphanages*.
(13) Place of worship*.
(14) Printing/publishing establishment*.
(15) Public utility facility*.
(16) Recreation, nonpublic indoor*.
(17) Recreation, nonpublic outdoor*.
(18) School, public/private*.
(19) A combination of permitted uses, where one or more are
special exception uses*.
* See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Neighborhood Convenience Commercial
District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
standards contained in §323 of this Chapter.
(1) Shopping center*.
(2) Single-family detached dwelling.
(3) Two-family semidetached dwelling.
* See §321 for additional requirements.
B15488
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements
of §312(G), except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District only if such use
complies with the relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
provisions
(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(P)
(c1)
(r)
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Home occupation.
Interior service and convenience uses.
Keeping of animals or fowl.
No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
of Section 324(C)(9).
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pool (non-commercial).
Temporary retail sales.
Warehousing and storage in an accessory structure.
Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District, except as otherwise provided
for in this Chapter:
B15488
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
Lot Width**
cfeet)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By Total
By Impervious
Buildings Cover
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Any Use with 10,000 40 60 75 2-1/2 30
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Use without 43,560 100 40 60 2-1/2 30
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §312(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District, except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Front Yard*
Principal Use (feet)
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Any Permitted Use 25 10 20 25
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 312 of Section 2)
Section 313. Planned Highway Commerce District (PHC)
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Highway Commerce District
is to accommodate a wide variety of commercial activities which provide goods
and services to the Township residents and others. This district includes
commercial uses which will benefit from the proximity to the proposed highway.
This district permits low density single family dwellings on lots large enough to
provide for both on-lot sewage disposal and water supply while providing for
XXXII-82
B 15488
the opportunity to have somewhat smaller lots if public water and sewage
facilities become available. Development controls will ensure sign control,
attractive landscaping, traffic control and desirable setbacks.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Highway Commerce
District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all
other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Ambulatory surgical center*,**.
(2) Animal hospital*,**.
(3) Art, photography or dance studio*.
(4) Automobile accessories.
(5) Beverage distributor*.
(6) Bakery*.
(7) Business office*.
(8) Catering establishment.
(9) Construction company*.
(10) Convenience store*,**.
(11) Cultural center*.
(12) Day care/ nursery school*,**.
(13) Financial establishment*,**.
(14) Food stand*,**.
(15) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(16) Fuel oil company*,**.
(17) Funeral home*.
(18) Government office*.
(19) Holiday tree sales.
(20) Hospital or medical center*,**.
(21) Hotel/motel*,**.
(22) Laundry/ laundromat*,**.
(23) Medical clinic or medical office*,**.
(24) Medical laboratory or blood donor station*,".
(25) Membership club or lodge*,**.
(26) Multiple use building*,**.
(27) Musical instrument sales*.
(28) Office equipment sales and service*,**.
(29) Open air retail*,**.
(30) Personal service establishment*.
(31) Pet grooming establishment*. **.
(32) Printing/ publishing establishment*,**.
(33) Professional office*.
(34) Recreation, public.
XXXII-83
B15488
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
(40)
(41)
(42)
(43)
(44)
(45)
(46)
Restaurant, fast food*,**.
Restaurant, fast food with drive-through service*,**.
Restaurant, standard*,**.
Retail nursery/greenhouse*,".
Retail store*,**.
Self storage facility*,**.
Single family detached dwelling.
Tanning salon*.
Tavern*,**.
Temporary retail sales.
Township-owned use, including Township park.
A combination of uses permitted by right*,**.
* Site Plan Review required (see Section 409)
** See Section 321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Highway Commerce
District by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in accordance with
the standards contained in Section 322 of this Part.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
commercial
(19)
(20)
(21)
Automobile repair*.
Automobile sales*.
Automobile service station*.
Bed and breakfast*.
Boarding house*.
Carwash*.
Cemetery*.
Drive-in theater*.
Fire station*.
Group home*.
Health club*.
Lumber yard*.
Massage parlor.
Place of worship*.
Public utility facility*.
Recreation, non-public indoor*.
Recreation, non-public outdoor*.
Single family detached dwelling in combination
activity*.
Swimming club*.
Taxi Terminal.
Tennis club*.
XXXII-84
with a
B15488
(22) Trade school.
* See Section 321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Highway Commerce District
when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §323 of this Chapter.
(1) Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use.
(2) Shopping center*.
(3) Race tracks, automobile or horse, with related wagering
* See Section 321 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Planned Highway Commerce
District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of
Section 313(G), except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Planned Highway Commerce District only if such use complies with
the relevant standards contained in Section 324 of this Part.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
0)
(k)
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Interior service and convenience uses.
Keeping animals or fowl.
No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 324(C)(9).
(1) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(m) Outdoor storage shed.
(n) Private greenhouse.
(o) Recreational vehicle.
(p) Seasonal roadside produce market.
III -85
B15488
(q) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(r) Swimming pool (non commercial).
(s) Temporary retail sales.
(t) Tennis court.
(u) Warehousing and storage in an accessory structure.
(v) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage, and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Highway Commerce District, except as provided for in this Chapter.
Maximum Land Maximum Building
Coverage (%) Height
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* Lot Width** By Impervious (Stories) (Feet)
Principal Use (sq. ft.) (feet) Buildings Cover (Whichever is Less)
Any Use with 10,000 100 40 75 2 -1/2 30
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Use without 43,560 150 25 60 2-1/2 30
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 313.(G) for the particular
use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned Highway Commerce
District, except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Side Yard
Front Yard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Permitted Use 25 10 20 25
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
B15488
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
Section 317(H) shall apply.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses from Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in Section 317(I) shall apply.
(J) Setbacks of Non-residential Buildings from Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 316(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 313 of Section 2)
Section 314. Planned Highway Interchange District (PHI).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Highway Interchange
District is to accommodate a variety of commercial activities which principally
rely upon vehicular use. The District provides opportunities for office buildings
and other compatible businesses that will serve industries/businesses as well as
the needs for medical, financial, legal, engineering, architectural and other
professional services.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right . Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Highway Interchange
District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all
other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied. These uses are
permitted by right whether or not a Planned Business Development has been
approved for the property on which these uses are proposed:
(1) Automobile accessories*.
(2) Automobile repair*,**.
(3) Automobile Service Station*,**.
(4) Bakery*.
(5) Business office*.
(6) Carwash*,*
(7) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communication equipment buildings*,**.
(8) Food stand*,**.
(9) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(10) Government office*.
(11) Holiday tree sales.
(12) Personal service establishment*.
(13) Professional office*.
(14) Recreation, non-public indoor*,**.
III -87
B15488
(15) Recreation, non-public outdoor *, * *.
(16) Recreation, public.
(17) Retail nursery/greenhouse*,".
(18) Self storage facility*,**.
(19) Tanning salon*.
(20) Temporary retail sales.
(21) Township-owned use, including Township park.
*' Site Plan Review required (see Section 409) See Section 321 for additional requirements.
(C) Uses Permitted by Right (Within a Planned Business
Development). Each of the following principal uses and their accessory uses are
permitted by right by the Zoning Officer within a Planned Business
Development, for which Conditional Use approval has been obtained in the
Planned Highway Interchange District, provided that the use, type, dimensional,
and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied. See definition
of Planned Business Development in Part 2:
(1) Ambulatory surgical center*,**.
(2) Animal hospital*,**.
(3) Automobile sales*,**.
(4) Convenience store *, * *.
(5) Day care/nursery school *, * *.
(6) Financial establishment*,".
(7) Hospital or medical center*,**.
(8) Hotel/motel*,**.
(9) Laundry/laundromat*,**.
(10) Medical clinic or medical office *, * *.
(11) Medical laboratory or blood donor station*,**.
(12) Musical instrument sales*.
(13) Office equipment sales and service*,**.
(14) Off -track betting parlor*,**.
(15) Printing/ publishing establishments*,".
(16) Restaurant, fast food*,**.
(17) Restaurant, fast food with drive-through service *, * *.
(18) Restaurant, standard*,".
(19) Retail store*,**.
(20) Shopping center*,**.
(21) Tavern*,".
* Site Plan Review required (see Section 409)
** See Section 321 for additional requirements.
III -88
B15488
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses may be
permitted within the Planned Highway Interchange District when authorized by
the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards of Section 323 of this
Chapter.
(1) Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use.
(2) Planned Business Development. See Section 314(G).
(E) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Highway Interchange
District by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in accordance with
the standards contained in Section 322 of this Chapter.
(1) Auditorium*.
(2) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(3) Conference center*.
(4) Cultural center
(5) Fire station*.
(6) Health club*.
(7) Lumber yard*.
(8) Public utility facility*.
(9) Taxi terminal.
* See §321 for additional requirements.
(F) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Planned Highway Interchange
District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of
Section 314(I), except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Planned Highway Interchange District only if such use complies with
the relevant standards contained in Section 324 of this Chapter.
(a) Bus shelter.
(b) Energy systems, solar.
(c) Energy systems, wind generated.
(d) Fence and wall.
(e) Garage.
)00CII-89
B15488
(f) Holiday tree sales.
(g) Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
(h) Home occupation, including day care center.
(i) Interior service and convenience uses.
(j) Keeping animals or fowl.
(k) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(1) No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 324(C)(9).
(m) Outdoor storage shed.
(n) Private greenhouse.
(o) Recreational vehicle.
(p) Seasonal roadside produce market.
(q) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(r) Swimming pool (non-commercial).
(s) Temporary retail sales.
(t) Tennis court.
(u) Warehousing and storage in an accessory structure.
(v) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(G) Standards for Approval of a Planned Business Development. To
assure that the intent and requirements of the Planned Highway Interchange
District are complied with, review and approval of a Planned Business
Development is required, where specified, as a conditional use.
(1) Minimum Tract Size. 10 acres. See definition of tract size in
Part 2.
(2) Retail and Shopping Center. No more than 10 acres of the
Planned Business Development shall be devoted to retail and shopping
center uses.
(3) Site Plan. A Site Plan is required. See Section 409.
(4) Information. The applicant shall present all available
information on the types of tenants or uses that are intended or expected
within the different portions of the development.
(5) Relationship to Surroundings. The applicant shall show
how the development will be coordinated with access and utilities of other
existing or proposed developments in the vicinity.
B15488
(6) Open Space and Landscaping. The application shall include
an overall plan of open spaces and landscaping. The plan shall be
implemented through a series of deed restrictions on each lot.
(7) Access.
(a) Coordinated access. Any Planned Business
Development shall make the absolute maximum use possible of the
interior streets, as opposed to numerous driveways entering onto
existing public streets. Deed restrictions shall be placed on any
individual lots that are created, to require access to the interior
street system only.
(b) Easements for Access. The Board of Supervisors may,
at the time of approval of a subdivision or land development
within a Planned Business Development, require a lot or tract to
provide an easement, stub street extension and/ or street right of
way extension for vehicular traffic to adjoining tracts to allow an
efficient interior access system.
(8) Traffic Impact Study. When the proposed development
would meet the criteria for a traffic study specified in the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII), or when determined
necessary by the Township Engineer, an application for a Planned
Business Development shall include a Traffic Impact Study addressing the
anticipated impact of the proposed development.
(9) Staged Construction. If development is to occur in
progressive stages, each stage shall be planned and occur so that the
purposes and requirements of this Chapter are fully complied with at the
completion of each stage. Each stage shall be shown on the plan.
(10) Lot Regulations. Any lot proposed to be created presently or
in the future within a Planned Business Development shall be capable of
complying with the Lot and Yard requirements of Sections 314(J) and (K)
of this Chapter.
(11) Information on Covenants. A Planned Business
Development shall include a reasonable set of deed restrictions or
covenants imposed by the developer on each lot. These covenants should
cover types of uses, maintenance of lots and commercial operations, with
a proper means for enforcement. The covenants shall also be written to
carry out the purposes and requirements of a Planned Business
XI -91
B15488
Development. The language of these covenants shall be presented to the
Township before a Planned Business Development is approved.
(12) Sewer and Water. All lots within a Planned Business
Development shall be provided with centralized sewer and water services.
(H) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage, and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Highway Interchange District, except as provided for in this Chapter:
Maximum Land Maximum Building
Coverage (%) Height
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* Lot Width** By Impervious (Stories) (Feet)
Principal Use (sq. ft.) (feet) Buildings Cover (Whichever is Less)
Any Use with 10,000 100 60 75 3-1/2 60
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Use without 43,560 150 40 60 3-1/2 60
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
* Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 314(I) for the particular
use.
(I) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned Highway Interchange
District, except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
Side Yard
Front Yard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Use 50 20 40 30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(J) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
Section 317(H) shall apply.
B15488
(K) Setbacks of Industrial Uses from Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in Section 317(I) shall apply.
(L) Setbacks of Non-Residential Buildings from Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 316(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 314 of Section 2)
Section 315. Planned Highway Transitional District (PHT)
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Highway Transitional
District is to provide an area to allow for a smooth transition between the uses
permitted within the Planned Highway Interchange District and the adjoining
residential districts. This District permits low density single family dwellings on
lots large enough to provide for both on-lot sewage disposal and water supply
while providing for the opportunity to have somewhat smaller lots if public
water and sewage facilities become available. This District also permits selective
commercial development to promote a compatible mix of professional, business
and residential uses. Open space developments and planned residential
development are also provided as a desirable alternative to conventional single
family developments.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Highway Transitional
District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all
other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility, transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communication equipment buildings*,**,
(2) Day care/nursery school*,**.
(3) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(4) Golf course**.
(5) Open Space Development in accordance with Section 901
(Appendix
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A)*.
Recreation, non-public indoor*,**.
Recreation, nonpublic outdoor*,**.
Recreation, public.
Retail nursery/ greenhouse*,**.
Single family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §315(F), §315(G), and §321 **.
B15488
(11) Township-owned use, including Township park.
* Site Plan Review required (see Section 409)
** See Section 321(B) for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Highway Transitional
District by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in accordance with
the standards contained in Section 322 of this Chapter.
(1) Animal hospital*.
(2) Business office.
(3) Bus terminal*.
(4) Cemetery*.
(5) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(6) Community center.
(7) Conference center*.
(8) Financial establishment*.
(9) Fire station*.
(10) Health club*.
(11) Lumber yard*.
(12) Medical clinic or medical office*.
(13) Medical laboratory or blood donor station*.
(14) Picnic grove*.
(15) Place of worship*.
(16) Professional office.
(17) Public utility facility*.
(18) School, public/private, not including trade school *.
(19) Swimming club*.
(20) Tennis club*.
* See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted within the Planned Highway Transitional
District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
standards contained in Section 323 of this Chapter.
(1) Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use.
B15488
(2) Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §315(F), §315(G), and §321 **.
*' Site Plan Review required (see Section 409) See Section 321 for additional requirements
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Planned Highway Transitional
District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of
Section 315(G), except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Planned Highway Transitional District only if such use complies with
the relevant standards contained in Section 324 of this Chapter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
provisions
(o)
(13)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
(v)
(w)
(x)
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Horse barn.
Interior services and convenience uses.
Keeping animals or fowl.
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
No-impact home-based business, subject to the
of Section 324(C)(9).
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse
Recreational vehicle.
Seasonal roadside produce market.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Storage in an accessory structure.
Swimming pool (non-commercial).
Temporary retail sales.
Tennis court.
Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
B15488
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage, and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Highway Transitional District, except as provided for in this Chapter.
Principal Use
Single-Family
Detached
Dwelling &
Mobile/ Manufact
ured Home:
-With Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Single-Family
Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
All Other
Permitted Uses
with Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
- Per Lot
Any Permitted
Uses Without
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
20,000
Minimum
Lot Width**
(feet)
150
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By Total
By Impervious
Buildings Cover
10 20
(In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
2-1/2 30
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter )0(I))
20,000
130,680 (3
acres)
150
200
10 20
5 10
2-1/2 30
2-1/2 30
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 315(J) for the particular
use.
B15488
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned Highway Transitional
District, except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Side Yard
Front Yard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Permitted Use 50 25 60 30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
Section 317(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 315 of Section 2)
Section 316. Planned Office/Business District (POB).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Office/Business District is to
provide opportunities for modern office buildings, residential uses and other
compatible businesses that will serve industries/businesses as well as the needs
for medical, financial, legal, architectural and other professional services.
Development controls will ensure sign control, attractive landscaping, desirable
setbacks, traffic control and compatibility with adjacent residential uses.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Office/ Business
Commercial District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type,
dimensional and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied.
(1) Art, photography or dance studio*.
(2) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment buildings*,**.
(3) Business office, including banking facilities.
(4) Conference/training center*,**.
(5) Cultural center*.
(6) Government office*.
(7) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(8) Financial establishments, including banking and banking
operations center and automated banking machines*,**.
(9) Medical office or medical clinic*,**.
)00C1-97
B15488
(10) Medical laboratory or blood donor station*,".
(11) Multiple use building*,**.
(12) Nursery school/ day care center.
(13) Professional office building*.
(14) Recreation, non-public indoor*,**.
(15) Recreation, non-public outdoor*,**.
(16) Recreation, public, including golf courses.
(17) Township-owned use, including Township park.
* Site plan review required. (see §409)
** See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Office/ Business
Commercial District by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
standards contained in §322 of this Chapter:
(1) Ambulatory surgical center*.
(2) Animal hospital*.
(3) Auditorium*.
(4) Cemetery/mausoleum*.
(5) Colleges or universities, including dormitories as a clearly
accessory use, restricted to students of such college or institution*.
(6) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(7) Fire station*.
(8) Personal service establishment.
(9) Place of worship*.
(10) Printing/publishing establishments*.
(11) Public utility facility*.
(12) Research, engineering or testing*.
(13) School, public/private*.
(14) Scientific/ electronic instruments manufacturing*.
(15) Tennis, exercise or racquetball clubs and closely similar
recreational facilities*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Office/ Business Commercial
District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
standards contained in §323 of this Chapter:
B15488
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Automobile accessories.
Health club*.
Heliport*.
Hospital or medical center*.
Hotel, motel including restaurants*.
Office equipment sales/service*.
Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use.
(8) Restaurants, standard*.
(9) Retail nursery/greenhouse.
(10) Retail store*.
(11) Shopping center*, including restaurants and health clubs.
(12) Single-family detached dwellings*.
(13) Vehicle wash preventive maintenance center*.
* See §321 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Planned Office/Business District
shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of §316(G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Planned Office/Business District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
provisions
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(1)
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Fence and wall.
Holiday tree sales.
Interior service and convenience uses.
No-Impact home-based businesses, subject to the
of Section 324(C)(9).
Off-street parking.
Outdoor storage shed.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Temporary retail sales.
Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use
B15488
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Office/Business Commercial District, except as specifically provided for in this
Chapter:
Principal Use
Single-Family
Detached
Dwelling &
Mobile/Manufact
ured Home: With
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
Single-Family
Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
All Other
Permitted Uses
with Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
- Per Lot
Any Use Without
Centralized
Water and Sewer
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
10,000
Minimum
Lot Width**
(feet)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By Total
By Impervious
Buildings Cover
70 40 55
(In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
2-1/2 30
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter )0(I))
10,000 100 60 75 3-1/2 60
43,560 150 40 60 3-1/2 60
(whichever is less)
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §316(G) for the particular use.
B15488
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use of the Planned Office/Business
Commercial District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Side Yard
Principal Use
Front Yard*
(feet)
One
(feet)
Both
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Non-Residential Use 50 20 40 30
Residential Use
-SFD 30 8 20 30
-SFD Cluster 20 5 10 30
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in §317(I) shall apply.
(J) Setbacks of Nonresidential Buildings From Residential Uses. Any
nonresidential buildings shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet
from the property boundary line of any existing principally residential use and
from the boundary of any residential district, and furthermore, wherever a
zoning district boundary line exists between a planned office business (PO/B)
zoning district and any residential zoning district which does not coincide with a
property boundary, the aforementioned setback shall be measured from the
portion of the property boundary line located within the residential zoning
district, which does not coincide with the zoning district boundary line. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to industrial buildings and/or uses
(see §316(I)).
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 316 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 354, March 10, 2008, Sections 1 and 2)
B15488
Section 317. Planned Business and Residential District (PBR).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Business and Residential
District is to provide opportunities for a compatible mixture of retail, personal
service, other business and residential uses. Development controls will ensure
sign control, attractive landscaping, desirable setbacks and compatibility
between adjoining uses.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Business and
Residential Commercial District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use,
type, dimensional and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter are
satisfied. Permitted uses are subject to the performance standards contained in
Part 5.
(1) Any use listed as permitted by right in the Rural
Conservation, Rural/Suburban, Suburban/Semiurban Residence Districts,
Neighborhood Convenience Commerce District, the Planned
Industry/ Business Industrial District and the Urban District.
(2) Art, photography or dance studio*.
(3) Funeral home.
(4) Holiday tree sales.
(5) Multiple use building*,**.
(6) Open air retail*,**.
(7) Pet grooming establishment.
(8) Temporary retail sales.
* Site plan review required (see Section 409)
** See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Business and Residential
Commercial District by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
standards contained in §322 of this Chapter:
(1) Cemetery*.
(2) Fire station*.
(3) Open air retail sales of agricultural products*.
(4) Public utility facility*.
(5) Single family detached dwelling in combination with a
commercial activity*.
* See §321 for additional requirements.
XXXII -102
B15488
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Business and Residential
Commercial District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the standards contained in §323 of this Chapter:
(1) Shopping Center*.
* See §321 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Planned Business and Residential
Commercial District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements
of §317(G) except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Planned Business and Residential Commercial District only if such use
complies with the relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter.
(a) Any uses listed as accessory in the Rural
Conservation, Rural/Suburban, Suburban, Suburban/Semiurban
Residence Districts, Neighborhood Convenience Commerce
District, the Planned Industry/ Business Industrial District and the
Urban Districts.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Business and Residential Commercial District, except as specifically provided for
in this Chapter:
B15488
Principal Use
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* Lot Width** By Impervious
(sq. ft.) (feet) Buildings Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Residential Uses 5,000 50 50 70 2-1/2 30
With Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Commercial Uses 20,000 100 40 75 2 -1/2 30
With Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Industrial Use 20,000 150 60 75 2-1/2 30
With Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Open Space (In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Development
Any Permitted 43,560 150 60 75 2-1/ 2 30
Use Without Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §317(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned Business and
Residential Commercial District, except as specifically provided for in this
Chapter:
B15488
Principal Use
Front Yard*
(feet)
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Residential Use 30 5 15 25
10** 10**
Any Other Permitted 25 50 100 50
Use
Industrial Use 50 25 50 25
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
**If only one side yard.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback
(1) An off-street parking setback shall apply to all
nonresidential uses and to garden apartments.
(2) No off-street parking shall be located within ten (10) feet of
the existing right-of-way line of any public street.
(3) In addition, if a lot or a tract has an average width greater
than two hundred and fifty (250) feet, a front yard improvement setback
of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required from the existing right-of-way
line of any arterial street.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. No industrial
structure or use, loading or unloading area, truck parking area nor outside
storage area shall be located within one hundred and twenty (120) feet of the lot
line of an existing principally residential use and the boundary of an RS, LDS,
MDS, SS or U District, unless the property owner of that adjacent land
specifically waives their right to the setback in writing.
(J) Setbacks of Non-Residential Buildings from Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 316(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 317 of Section 2)
B15488
Section 318. Planned Industry/Business District (PIB).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Industry/Business District is
to provide opportunities for light industrial uses and for a variety of compatible
businesses, offices and appropriate commercial uses. Development controls will
ensure excellence in site planning, stringent traffic control and attractive and
compatible development.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Industry/ Business
Industrial District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type,
dimensional and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Auditorium*,**.
(2) Bottling industry*,**.
(3) Bulk photo processing*.
(4) Business office*.
(5) Ceramic products industry*.
(6) Day care center*,**.
(7) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment buildings*,**.
(8) Financial establishment*,".
(9) Food processing*.
(10) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(11) Furniture manufacturing*.
(12) Government office*.
(13) Greenhouse/nursery*,**.
(14) Health club*,**.
(15) Manufacturing*.
(16) Medical laboratory or blood donor station*,**.
(17) Medical office or medical clinic*,''`*.
(18) Multiple use building*,**.
(19) Printing/ publishing establishment *,**.
(20) Professional office*.
(21) Recreation, public*.
(22) Research, engineering or testing*,**.
(23) Restaurant, standard*,**.
(24) Scientific/electronic instruments manufacturing*,**.
(25) Self storage facility*,**.
(26) Textile/ garment industry*.
(27) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(28) Warehouse*,**.
III -106
B15488
(29) Wholesale*,**.
*Site plan review required (see §409).
**See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Industry/ Business
Industrial District by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
standards contained in §322 of this Chapter:
(1) Animal hospital*.
(2) Assembly and packaging establishment.
(3) Automobile accessories.
(4) Bakery.
(5) Bus terminal*.
(6) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(7) Construction company.
(8) Fire station*.
(9) Lumber yard*.
(10) Metal fabrication.
(11) Millwork and other wood products.
(12) Office equipment sales and service*.
(13) Public utility facility*.
(14) Retail stores*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Industry/Business Industrial
District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
standards contained in §323 of this Chapter:
(1) Heliport*.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Planned Industry/ Business
Industrial District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of
§318(G), except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
B15488
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Planned Industry/Business Industrial District only if such use
complies with the relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Interior service and convenience uses.
No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 324(C)(9).
(j)
(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
(0)
(p) Warehousing or storage in an accessory structure.
(q) Retail use accompanying an industrial use for the sale
of the product(s) manufactured, produced or stored in the same
building.
(r) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Temporary retail sales.
Tennis court.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Industry / Business Industrial District, except as specifically provided for in this
Chapter:
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* Lot Width** By Impervious
Principal Use (sq. ft.) (feet) Buildings Cover
Any Permitted 87,120 200
Uses
50 75
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
3-1/2 50
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §318(G) for the particular use.
B15488
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned Industry/ Business
Industrial District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Side Yard
Front Yard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Permitted Use 50 25 50 25
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Improvement Setbacks. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in §317(I) shall apply.
(J) Setbacks of Non-residential Buildings from Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 316(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 318 of Section 2)
Section 319. Extractive Industry District (EI).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Extractive Industry District is to
provide opportunities for uses which depend upon open areas for mining,
manufacturing or storage. Development controls will ensure these uses are
located, operated and maintained so as not to adversely affect either adjoining
properties or the public health, safety and welfare of present and future
Township residents.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Extractive Industry District by
the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Bulk photo processing*.
(2) Commercial stable or riding academy*,**.
(3) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment buildings*,".
(4) Food processing*.
XXXII-109
B15488
(5) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(6) Fuel oil company*,**.
(7) Furniture manufacturing*.
(8) Greenhouse/nursery*,**.
(9) Manufacturing*.
(10) Membership club or lodge*,**.
(11) Metal fabrication*.
(12) Mineral extraction*,**.
(13) Orchard.
(14) Picnic grove (private)**.
(15) Recreation, public*.
(16) Research, engineering or testing*,**.
(17) Sawmill/planing mill*,**.
(18) Self storage facility*, **
(19) Textile/ garment industry*.
(20) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(21) Warehouse*,**.
(22) Wildlife sanctuary**.
*Site plan review requirements (See §409).
**See §321 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Extractive Industry District by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in §322 of this
Chapter:
(1) Assembly and packaging establishment.
(2) Automobile wrecking or junkyard*,**.
(3) Bottling industry*.
(4) Ceramic products industry.
(5) Chemical products industry.
(6) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(7) Construction company.
(8) Fire station*.
(9) Paper/ pulp mill.
(10) Public utility facility*.
(11) Single-family detached dwelling.
(12) Slaughterhouse.
(13) Solid waste disposal area facility*.
(14) Swimming club*.
(15) Tennis club*.
XXXII-110
B15488
(16) Other industrial uses not listed above.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Extractive Industry District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §323 of this Chapter:
(1) Heliport*.
See §321 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Extractive Industry District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §319(G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Extractive Industry District only if such use complies with the relevant
standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
provisions
(1)
(j)
(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
(o)
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Interior service and convenience uses.
No-impact home-based business, subject to the
of Section 324(C)(9).
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Temporary retail sales.
Warehousing or storage in an accessory structure.
Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
B15488
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Extractive Industry District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Maximum Land Maximum Building
Coverage (%) Height
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* Lot Width"' By Impervious (Stories) (Feet)
Principal Use (acres) (feet) Buildings Cover (Whichever is Less)
Any Permitted 5 500 60 75 3-1/2 50
Use
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §319(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Extractive Industry District,
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Side Yard
Front Yard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Permitted Use 20 100 200 100
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setbacks. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in §317(I) shall apply.
(J) Setbacks of Non-residential Buildings From Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 316(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 319 of Section 2)
B15488
Section 320. Fuel Storage District (FS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Fuel Storage District is to provide an
area to accommodate fuel storage facilities. Special performance standards,
attractive landscaping and screening and other development controls will help
ensure the safe operation of uses in this district and help ensure compatibility
with adjoining land uses.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Fuel Storage Industrial District
by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Business office*.
(2) Communications antennae mounted on an exiting public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment building?*.
(3) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harvesting *, * *.
(4) Fuel oil company*,**.
(5) Fuel storage tank farm or fuel products terminal*,**.
(6) Greenhouse/ nursery*,**.
(7) Orchard.
(8) Recreation, public.
(9) Self storage facility*, **
(10) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(11) Warehouse*,**.
**Site Plan review requirements (See Section 40
**See Section 321 for additional requirements
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Fuel Storage Industrial District by
the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in §322 of
this Chapter:
(1) Adult business use*.
(2) Assembly and packaging establishment.
(3) Chemical products industry.
(4) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(5) Fire station*.
(6) Metal fabrication.
(7) Public utility facility*.
XXXII -1 1 3
B15488
(8) Truck terminal*.
(9) Other industrial uses not listed above.
See §321 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Fuel Storage Industrial District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §323 of this Chapter:
(1) Heliport.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Fuel Storage Industrial District
shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of §320(G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Fuel Storage Industrial District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in §324 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
provisions
0)
(k)
(1)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
customary
Bus shelter.
Energy systems, solar.
Energy systems, wind generated.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Interior service and convenience uses.
No-impact home-based business, subject to the
of Section 324(C)(9).
Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
Outdoor storage shed.
Private greenhouse.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Temporary retail sales.
Warehousing or storage in an accessory structure.
Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
and incidental to the principal use.
B15488
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Fuel
Storage Industrial District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
Maximum Land Maximum Building
Coverage (%) Height
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* Lot Width** By Impervious (Stories) (Feet)
Principal Use (acres) (feet) Buildings Cover (Whichever is Less)
Any Permitted 5 500 60 75 3-1/2 50
Use
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §320(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Fuel Storage Industrial District,
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Side Yard
Front Yard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Permitted Use 50 30 60 50
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off -Street Parking Setbacks. The same requirements as are listed in
§317(H) shall apply.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in §317(I) shall apply.
(J) Setbacks of Non-residential Buildings from Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 316(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 320 of Section 2)
B15488
Section 321. Compliance and Performance Standards for Certain Principal Uses.
(A) Compliance Required. Each of the following principal uses shall
also comply with the additional requirements for that use listed in this Section.
(A site plan may be required per §409).
(B) Additional Requirements.
(1) Adult Business Use.
(a) No such use shall be located within five hundred
(500) lineal feet of the boundary of any residential district or the
property boundary line of any existing principally residential use,
public or private school, day care center, place of worship,
playground or public recreation facility or another adult business
use.
(b) A thirty (30) foot buffer yard shall be provided along
the side and rear lot lines in accordance with §405(I).
(c) No adult business use shall be conducted in any
manner that permits the observation of any material depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas from outside the establishment or business. This
provision shall apply to any display decoration, sign, show
window, door or other opening.
(d) No adult business use shall be conducted in a manner
that violates any of the provisions of this Chapter or any other
Federal, State, County or Municipal regulation.
(e) Precautions shall be made to prohibit minors from
entering the premises.
No such use shall be combined with the sale of
alcoholic or intoxicating beverages.
(g) No adult business use may change to another type of
adult business use except upon application to and approval by the
Zoning Hearing Board of such change as a Special Exception.
B15488
(h) If employees or patrons of an adult business use
promote, solicit, allow or engages in acts of prostitution on the
premises, as charged by the appropriate law enforcement
authorities, then the zoning permit shall be suspended. Should
said employees or patrons be convicted or plead guilty to said
charges of prostitution as described above, then the zoning permit
shall be revoked.
(2) Agriculture, General.
(a) The minimum size of a farm shall be three (3) acres,
except that five (5) acres shall be required in the RHA District and
ten (10) acres shall be required wherever the agricultural activity
includes animal husbandry.
(b) Farm outbuildings for agricultural activities not
involving animal husbandry, other than a dwelling, shall not be
constructed closer than seventy-five (75) feet to any exterior
property line.
(c) When the agricultural activities involve animal
husbandry, barns, animal shelters, stables, feed yards, slaughter
areas or manure storage areas, such activities shall not be located
closer than five hundred (500) feet from all exterior property lines
and dwellings except the dwelling of the owner or lessee.
(d) When the agricultural activities involve animal
husbandry, additions to existing barns, animal shelters, stables,
feed yards or manure storage areas, such activities shall not be
located closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from all exterior
property lines
(e) All grazing or pasture areas utilized for this purpose
shall be fenced.
(f) Crop storage areas shall not occupy any part of the
required front, side or rear yards. The applicable outdoor storage
control provisions of §509 shall be met.
(g) A farm use shall be maintained in a way which does
not create a danger to public safety or health. The fact that a farm
use creates an annoyance or inconvenience shall not be deemed a
danger to public safety or health.
)00CII-117
B15488
(h) Any new or expanded structure or concentrated
feeding areas for the keeping of livestock or poultry shall be located
a minimum of: (1) 1000 feet from any lot line of an existing
dwelling and from the boundary of a residential district; (2) 300 feet
from any other exterior lot line.
(i) The setbacks from property lines in this Section shall
not apply from dwellings or residential lots owned by: (1) the
owner or operator of the livestock use; or (2) affected property
owners providing a written notarized letter waiving such setback.
A waiver of the setback by the current owner shall be binding upon
future owners. The Township may require that such waiver be
recorded with the deed.
(j) Any agricultural use that exceeds an average of 2 or
more "animal equivalent units" ("AEUs") per acre shall be
regulated as an intensive agriculture use. The following minimum
contiguous acreage in common ownership shall be required for the
following average AEUs per acre:
Acres of Contiguous Land
Less than 10 acres
10 to 25 acres
(See intensive agriculture)
Acres of Contiguous Land
Less than 10 acres
10 to 25 acres
More than 25 acres
(See intensive agriculture)
Maximum Average AEUs per
Acre If the Use does not Primarily
Involve Swine or Ducks
0.5
2.0
Greater than 2.0
Maximum Average AEUs per
Acre If the Use Primarily Involves
Swine or Ducks
0.5
1.5
2.0
Greater than 2.0
The term "primarily" shall be based upon the weight of the
animals. Therefore, if a lot includes 20,000 pounds of swine and
10,000 pounds of chicken, it shall be considered to primarily
involve swine.
B15488
(k) The following intensive agriculture activities shall be
prohibited:
1) The construction or operation of a separate
building for the cultivation of mushrooms.
2) The raising of pigs and poultry, if such activity
constitutes more than one-third (1/3) of all farm income.
3) The ownership of horses, donkeys, mules,
cows, sheep, goats and pigs, if the total number of such
animals shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) the number of
farm acres.
4) The seasonal display and sale of farm
products. See §324, "Seasonal Roadside Produce Market."
(3) Agriculture, Intensive. Intensive agriculture activities
include, but are not limited to, mushroom farms, poultry and egg
production and dry lot farms, wherein the character of the activity
involves a more intense use of land than found in normal farming
operation.
(a) A minimum lot size of ten (10) acres is required for
intensive agricultural activities; which shall be so located on the lot
as to provide front, side and rear yards of two hundred (200) feet.
The maximum height of buildings used for intensive agricultural
use is thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2 1/2) stories,
excluding appurtenances.
(b) A minimum lot size of 25 acres is required for
intensive agricultural activities not primarily involving swine or
ducks having an average AEU per acre exceeding 5.0.
(c) A minimum lot size of 25 acres is required for
intensive agricultural activities involving swine or ducks having an
average AEU per acre exceeding 2.0
(d) A fence shall be maintained along the property lines.
Where Zoning Hearing Board approval is necessary, the Board may
require fencing along streams where necessary to control water
pollution and erosion from animals.
XXXII -119
B15488
(e) Commercial composting is prohibited. Any onsite
composting shall be limited for use on the premises on which such
composting is made and produced.
(f) Solid and liquid wastes shall be disposed of daily in a
manner to avoid creating insect or rodent problems, or a public
nuisance. No emission of noxious, unpleasant gases shall be
permitted in such quantities as to be offensive outside the lot lines
of the tract occupied by an intensive agricultural user.
(g) Dry lot feeding situation shall be permanently paved.
(h) The raising of mushrooms shall comply with the
PADEP publication entitled "Best Practices for Environmental
Protection in the Mushroom Farm Community", (1997) or its
successor publication. Such document is hereby incorporated by
reference. Any raising of mushrooms shall use bunker composting
within a substantially enclosed building using positive aeration or a
method that the applicant proves has a similar reduction on odors.
Any area used for the storage, loading, processing and/or
packaging of septage or spent mushroom compost as part of the
raising of mushrooms shall be setback a minimum of: (1) 1000 feet
from any lot line of an existing dwelling and from the boundary of
a residential district; (2) 500 feet from any other exterior lot line,
unless written permission for a smaller setback is obtained from the
adjoining property owner(s).
(i) Any new or expanded structure or concentrated
feeding areas for the keeping of livestock or poultry shall be located
a minimum of: (1) 1000 feet from any lot line of an existing
dwelling and from the boundary of a residential district; (2) 500 feet
from any other exterior lot line, unless written permission for a
smaller setback is obtained from the adjoining property owner(s).
(j) The setbacks from property lines in this Section shall
not apply from dwellings or residential lots owned by: (1) the
owner or operator of the livestock use; or (2) affected property
owners providing a written notarized letter waiving such setback.
A waiver of the setback by the current owner shall be binding upon
future owners. The Township may require that such waiver be
recorded with the deed.
B15488
(k) For any new or expanded operation regulated under
the State Nutrient Management Act, the applicant shall provide
evidence to the Township that the Nutrient Management Plan and
other requirements of the Act and accompanying regulations are
being complied with.
(1) New or expanded manure storage facilities or
structures or concentrated feeding areas used for the keeping of
livestock or poultry shall:
1) not be located within the Identified Floodplain
Area;
2) not be located within 100 feet of a perennial
stream, river, Watercourse, spring, lake, pond or reservoir;
3) comply with all State, County and local
requirements, including all PADEP wellhead protection
provisions.
4) Not be located within 100 feet of an active
public drinking well or an active intake for a public water
supply.
(m) New or expanded manure storage and composting
facilities shall not be located within 200 feet of a property-line. The
outer perimeter of the land area onto which waste is applied from
a lagoon from a swine farm shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any
lot line.
(n) The following additional requirements shall apply to
an Intensive Agricultural use:
B15488
1) A site plan shall be submitted to the Township
showing the locations of all features regulated by this
Chapter. The applicant shall submit the plans to the County
Conservation District and the Berks County Cooperative
Extension for review. A soil conservation plan shall be
submitted to the Conservation District. A stormwater
management plan shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer, who shall provide a review to the Zoning Hearing
Board and/or Zoning Officer. The applicant shall be
responsible to pay for the costs of such reviews;
2) A written plan shall be submitted, and
complied with, describing methods that will be used to
control odors, insects, rodents, health hazards, surface water
pollution and, groundwater pollution, including methods to
avoid and contain accidental spills. Such plan shall be
complied with, as a condition of any Township approval.
Solid and liquid wastes will be disposed of in a manner that
minimizes insect, odor and rodent nuisances. The best
available management practices shall be used to minimize
odor nuisances, however, an applicant shall not be required
to completely eliminate all odors at property lines. Such
plan shall describe methods that will be used to properly
dispose of dead animals;
3) The applicant shall show compliance with
applicable State and Federal environmental regulations;
4) When special exception approval is required,
the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that:
a. The location of the facility is based upon
a consideration of prevailing wind patterns.
b. A 50 feet wide area of substantial new
and/or preserved trees and shrubs shall be provided
abutting or across a street from any lot line of an
existing dwelling. This landscaping shall only be
required if all of the following conditions exist: a) the
dwelling existed at the time of adoption of this
Section, b) the dwelling is within 250 feet of the
intensive agriculture operations and c) the intensive
III -122
B15488
agriculture buildings are visible from the dwelling.
The landscaping plan shall be subject to approval as
part of the special exception, and shall be designed to
substantially filter views between homes and the
agricultural operations. A solid continuous evergreen
screen is not required. A mix of species shall be used,
and straight rows shall be avoided.
c. The driveway, driveway entrance and
adjacent roads will be suitable to accommodate the
amounts and sizes of truck traffic that will be
generated by the use. The Board may require that the
driveway be improved as necessary to control dust.
A turnaround and maneuvering space shall be
provided so that trucks do not need to back out onto
or obstruct a public road.
d. Sufficient water supplies are available to
serve the facility so as to not cause insufficient water
supplies for existing and prospective on-site water
users within the vicinity during dry periods, based
upon a study by a professional hydrologist. A test
well shall be used, and permission shall be sought to
examine the impact upon neighboring wells.
e. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have
the authority to establish a maximum average level of
Animal Equivalent Units per acre, as the Board deems
necessary to protect public health and safety, protect
water quality and moderate nuisances upon the
community.
5) The applicant shall provide a written
comparison of the proposed methods of controlling
nuisances and avoiding pollution to standard guidelines on
such matters published by the State Department of
Agriculture, PADEP, Pennsylvania State University and
industry associations, including Penn State University's
Manure Management Manual and "Environmental
Standards for Production for Large Pork Producers."
(4) Ambulatory Surgical Center
B15488
(a) An ambulatory surgical center shall have a minimum
lot area of five (5) acres.
(b) An ambulatory surgical center shall be located on a
lot abutting and having direct vehicular access onto an arterial or
collector street as defined in this Chapter.
(c) Sewer and Water. All buildings within a hospital or
medical center shall be provided with centralized sewer and water
services.
(d) An ambulatory surgical center may include various
accessory uses that are customarily incidental to and in direct
support of the primary health care mission of the ambulatory
surgical center. Such accessory uses shall be located within the
same building as the ambulatory surgical center and could include
the following facilities, which shall be integrated with the hospital
facilities:
Medical and administrative offices.
Medical laboratory.
Interior service and convenience uses.
(e) Services provided shall be those that do not require
overnight stay; however, overnight accommodations may be
provided for patients when unanticipated medical circumstances
would require that the patient remain overnight.
(f) Only the accessory uses listed above or those
associated with a commercial district shall be permitted.
(g) Parking. Where an ambulatory surgical center
contains any of the accessory uses listed above (regardless of
whether each use is listed in Table 7.1 or is an unlisted use), the
number of parking spaces required shall be the sum of the parking
requirements for each separate principal and accessory use.
(h) The facility shall comply with all applicable Federal,
State, County and local regulations and shall be licensed as
required by the State.
(i) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall comply with the requirements of §513 and §703(E).
)COUI-124
B15488
(5) Amusement Establishments.
(a) The lot or property line of any such establishment
shall be no closer than three hundred feet (300') to the lot or
property line of any place of worship, school, playground or other
recreation area, day care center, nursery or public library.
(b) The lot or property line of such establishment shall
not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any similar
establishment or business.
(c) Amusement machines shall not be operated or played
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(d) The use shall comply with the requirements for
Recreation, Nonpublic Indoor listed in this Section.
(e) All buildings shall be adequately sound proofed so
that sounds generated with the buildings cannot be perceived at
the lot lines.
(6) Animal Hospital.
(a) A minimum lot size of at least two (2) acres shall be
required for those animal hospitals treating small animals (e.g.,
dogs, cats, birds, exotic animals). A minimum lot size of at least
three (3) acres shall be required for those animal hospitals treating
large animals (e.g., cattle, horses, etc.).
(b) All buildings in which animals are housed or
provided care shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from
all lot lines. Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that
sounds outside the building will be imnimized and not result in a
nuisance.
(c) Outdoor animal runs may be provided for small
animals so long as a visual barrier at least four (4) feet in height is
provided between the runs and a double evergreen screen at least
six (6) feet in height is provided around the runs. No animal shall
be permitted to use the outdoor runs from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
B15488
(d) An animal hospital shall not include animal shelters
or kennels.
(e) Animals may be kept overnight on a limited basis,
usually for a single night as a follow-up to specific treatment that
requires such a stay. Animals that are kept overnight must remain
inside the building and may be taken outside for a limited time
only by office staff.
(7) Apartments, Garden. See "Garden Apartments" and "Single-
Family Attached Dwellings" in this Section.
(8) Auditorium.
(a) A twenty (20) foot buffer yard shall separate an offstreet
parking area from an adjoining lot line.
(b) Lighting which is perceptible beyond the property
line shall be minimized in accordance with §514 of this Chapter.
(9) Automobile, Motorcycle, Boat, Recreational Vehicle, Trailer
or Farm Equipment Sales.
(a) New or used automobile, motorcycle, boat,
recreational vehicle, trailer sales, farm equipment and other similar
activities are subject to the following conditions:
1) Such uses shall meet all of the minimum lot
size, yards and building coverage and height requirements
of the district.
2) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided
on the same lot as the building or activity served. All
parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of §703.
3) Access drives and driveways shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of §704.
4) Means of ingress and egress to any public
street, other than a property access street, shall not be
located closer than two hundred (200) feet from an
intersecting street.
III -126
B15488
5) No vehicles or items for sale, rent or display
shall be placed within the existing road right-of-way or the
improvement setback required by this Chapter.
(10) Automobile Repair Station.
(a) All repair and paint work shall be performed within
an enclosed building.
(b) All provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, vibration, light or electrical interference to adjacent
lots.
(c) Outdoor storage of automobiles and other vehicles
shall not exceed three (3) times the indoor repair area, shall only be
back of the front building setback line and shall be no closer than
twenty (20) feet from side and rear lot lines.
(d) Outdoor storage of automobile parts and junk shall be
prohibited.
(e) Yard areas adjacent to any residential lot shall be
suitable screened.
(f) Main or accessory buildings shall not be located
closer than fifty (50) feet to any residential district or the lot line of
any existing principally residential use.
(g) No more than five (5) vehicles in nondriveable
condition shall be stored within view of a public street or adjacent
lot.
(h) Any vehicle on the premises longer than seven (7)
days shall be deemed a stored vehicle. No vehicle shall be stored in
excess of forty-five (45) days.
(i) No recreational vehicle that is under repair at a repair
station shall be utilized for temporary dwelling purposes during
the time that it is stored at the repair station.
B15488
(11) Automobile Service Station.
(a) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel
pumps shall be performed within a building.
(b) Fuel pumps shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from
the existing and any required future street right-of-way or fifty (50)
feet from the street center line, whichever is greater.
(c) All automobile parts and dismantled vehicles are to
be located within an enclosed building.
(d) Full body paint spraying or body and fender work
shall not be permitted.
(e) Automobile service stations may also include the sale
of a limited selection of food and common household items as a
clearly accessory use, provided that the total parking requirements
of Part 7 are complied with.
(f) Outside storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles
at service stations is limited to a maximum seven (7) day period of
time for each such vehicle.
(g) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(12) Automobile Wrecking or Junkyard.
(a) All automobile wrecking establishments or junkyards
shall be enclosed with a fence a minimum of six (6) feet in height
with gates. Gates shall be securely locked except during business
hours when an adult attendant is on the premises. This required
fence shall be nonopaque.
(b) No materials shall be piled higher than the height of
the surrounding fence nor closer than ten (10) feet to said fence.
(c) No area used for the storage of junk, automobiles or
automobile parts shall be located within the required front, side or
rear yard.
B15488
(d) A twenty-five (25) foot buffer yard as described in
§405(I) shall completely surround all areas used for the storage of
junk automobiles or automobile parts. No junk, automobiles or
automobile parts shall be stored within this buffer yard.
(e) Burning or melting of any junk, rubbish or refuse is
prohibited.
(f) All junk, automobiles or automobile parts shall be
stored and arranged so as to permit access by firefighting
equipment and to prevent accumulation of stagnant water. Junk or
scrapped automobiles shall not be piled to a height of more than six
(6) feet from the ground.
(g) All gasoline, oil and other fluids shall be drained from
any junked items or scrapped automobiles. Gasoline in an amount
not exceeding ten (10) gallons may be stored aboveground in
approved containers. All other gasoline which is kept on the
premises shall be stored underground and shall be approved by the
governing body and the State Fire Marshall.
(h) No garbage or organic or biodegradable waste shall
be permitted to be stored on any automobile wrecking
establishment or junkyard.
(13) Bed and Breakfast.
(a) The owner of a bed and breakfast establishment shall
be the primary occupant of the establishment.
(b) The operator of a bed and breakfast establishment
may be a family member who is not the owner.
(c) No more than five (5) bed and breakfast units shall be
permitted in any bed and breakfast establishment.
(d) In no case shall meals be served to persons not
staying in a bed and breakfast unit.
(e) Bed and breakfast units shall be located within the
principal building of the bed and breakfast establishment.
B15488
(f) All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing zoning
district for single family dwellings shall apply.
(14) Boarding House.
(a) Shall have a maximum of five (5) rental units.
(b) Shall house a maximum of ten (10) persons.
(c) Shall have a minimum lot size of thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet.
(d) No sign advertising the availability of a room shall be
displayed so as to be visible from outside the dwelling.
(e) No cooking equipment shall be used in a room that is
used for sleeping accommodation.
(15) Bottling Industry. Public sewage disposal facilities and
centralized waters supply facilities shall be provided.
(16) Bus Terminal.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial or collector street
(as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Shall provide an area for the loading and unloading
of buses separate from required off-street parking areas.
(c) May include ticket offices, luggage checking facilities
and similar facilities as accessory uses.
(17) Camp or Campground.
(a) The use shall comply with the requirements for
Recreation, Nonpublic Outdoor listed in this Section.
(b) A maximum of one permanent dwelling shall occupy
the lot on a year-round basis. No other structure shall be occupied
on the lot for more than 6 months in any calendar year.
(c) The only commercial uses within a campground shall
be a store for sales of routine items to campers, recreational
=II- 1 3 0
B15488
facilities for campers, and other uses that meet the requirements of
the applicable zoning district;
(d) A maximum average of six (6) recreational vehicle
sites or 10 tent camping sites shall be allowed per acre.
(e) A buffer yard which complies with the standards of
§405(I) shall be provided around the entire lot. As an alternative,
an applicant may demonstrate that an area having a width of fifty
(50) feet and consisting of natural vegetation shall be maintained so
that a complete year-round visual screen shall be provided around
the entire lot.
(18) Carwash.
(a) Automatic, semi-automatic, and self-service
carwashes are limited to the services of cleaning and waxing
vehicles. Such activities shall be performed only within enclosed
buildings, with the exception of hand drying and finishing
operations.
(b) The lot shall be graded such that process water shall
not run off across the lot, onto any adjacent lot, or onto a public
street.
(c) A grease trap shall be provided within the sewer
hook-up designed in accordance with the requirements of the
plumbing inspector.
(d) Automobile storage and waiting spaces shall be
provided at the rate of not less than five (5) spaces for each bay in a
self-service carwash and not less than ten (10) spaces for each
vehicle which can be accommodated within an automatic or
semi-automatic carwash. All vehicle storage and waiting areas
shall be designed and located so as not to intrude into any required
yard area. Buildings shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet
to any residential district or any existing residential use.
(e) Where a carwash adjoins a residential property or a
residential district, the hours of operation shall not be earlier than
7:00 a.m., prevailing time, nor later than 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
B15488
(f) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(19) Cemetery.
(a) Shall be on a lot at least two (2) acres in area.
(b) May include mausoleums, chapels, and storage
facilities for maintenance and related equipment.
(c) A buffer yard and planting screen in accordance with
the requirements of Section 405.I shall be provided when a
cemetery abuts an existing residential use or a residential district.
(20) Civic, Social, Fraternal Association. See "Recreation,
Nonpublic Indoor."
(21) College or University.
(a) Any dormitory shall be located a minimum of one
hundred fifty (150) feet from any lot line of an existing dwelling or
boundary of a residential district.
(b) Any dormitory shall have a maximum capacity of one
(1) student per five hundred (500) square feet of lot area and shall
be restricted to full-time students of the college or university and
any faculty advisors.
(c) Only a college or university recognized as such by the
Pennsylvania Department of Education and which has received
any required license or registration applicable to such college or
university from such department shall be permitted hereunder.
(22) Combination of Permitted Uses
(a) The uses permitted under this category shall not
include a residential use.
(b) If any of the proposed uses are permitted by either
Special Exception or Condition, approval of the combined uses
must follow the same approval procedures required for the specific
use.
X,C(II-132
B15488
(c) Unless a multiple-use building is permitted within
the Zoning District, each principal use shall be located within a
separate building complying with all provisions of this Chapter,
including the provisions of §402(B) regarding two or more
principal buildings on a lot.
(d) Each use must comply with the specific provisions
listed for that use in this Chapter.
(e) Off-street parking requirements of Part 7 shall be met;
including the requirement that the number of off-street parking
spaces provided shall be the sum of the parking requirements for
each separate use.
(23) Communications Antennae and Associated
Communications Equipment Buildings.
(a) Building mounted communications antennae shall
not be located on any single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling
or multifamily dwelling.
(b) Building mounted communication antennae shall be
permitted to exceed the height limitations of the applicable zoning
district by no more than twenty (20) feet.
(c) Omnidirectional or whip communications antennae
shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and seven (7) inches in
diameter.
(d) Directional or panel communications antennae shall
not exceed five (5) feet in height and three (3) feet in width.
(e) Any applicant proposing communications antennae
to be mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
evidence from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer
certifying that the proposed installation will not exceed the
structural capacity of the building or other structure, considering
wind and other loads associated with the antenna location.
(f) Any applicant proposing communications antennae
to be mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating how the
III -133
B15488
antennae will be mounted on the structure for review by the Code
Enforcement Officer for compliance with the Township of Spring's
Building Code and other applicable law.
(g) Any applicant proposing communications antennae
to be mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to provide
access to the building or structure on which the antennae are to be
mounted so that installation and maintenance of the
antennae and communications equipment building can be
accomplished.
(h) Communications antennae shall comply with
applicable standards established by the Federal Communications
Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic
radiation.
(i) Communications antennae shall not cause radio
frequency interference with other communications facilities located
in the Township of Spring.
(j) All applications shall include a sworn Affidavit from
a licensed Radio Frequency Engineer that the proposed placement
of a Communications Antenna and Associated Communications
Equipment Building, will not interfere with the public safety,
communications, and the usual and customary transmission or
reception of radio, television or other communication services
enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. If
measurable interference does result from the installation and use of
any of the foregoing, the operation of the facility shall cease until
the problem is corrected. If the problem is not correctable, the
facility shall be dismantled and removed from the site.
(k) A communications equipment building shall be
subject to the height and setback requirements of the applicable
zoning district for an accessory structure.
(1) The owner or operator of communications antennae
shall be licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to
operate such antennae.
(m) Communications antennae shall be built, constructed
and erected according to the then-prevailing national standards.
III -1 3 4
B15488
(n) A communications antenna necessary for and clearly
used for emergency communications by a police department, fire
company, emergency medical service, and other similar public
safety organizations is exempt from the requirements of this
Section.
(24) Communication Towers and Associated Communications
Equipment Buildings.
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission to operate a
communications tower, if applicable, and communications
antennae.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
communications tower and communications antennae proposed to
be mounted thereon comply with all applicable standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission
governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
(c) Communications towers shall not cause radio
frequency interference with other communications facilities located
in the Township of Spring.
(d) All applications shall include a sworn Affidavit from
a licensed Radio Frequency Engineer that the proposed placement
of a Communications Tower and Associated Communications
Equipment Building will not interfere with the public safety,
communications, and the usual and customary transmission or
reception of radio, television or other communication services
enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. If
measurable interference does result from the installation and use of
any of the foregoing, the operation of the facility shall cease until
the problem is corrected. If the problem is not correctable the
facility shall be dismantled and removed from the site.
(e) Communications towers shall comply with all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration, Commonwealth
Bureau of Aviation and applicable airport zoning regulations.
(f) Communications Antennas, Communications
Equipment Buildings, Communications Towers, etc. shall be
III -135
B15488
co-located where technically possible, i.e., where there is no
substantial impairment to the quality of service. All facility owners
and operators shall cooperate with other existing communications
providers in co-locating Communications Antennas,
Communications Equipment Buildings, Communications Towers,
etc. in the Township, unless there are substantial electronic,
mechanical, structural or regulatory factors which prevent the
sharing of facilities.
(g) Any applicant proposing construction of a new
communications tower shall demonstrate that a good faith effort
has been made to obtain permission to mount the communications
antennae on an existing building, structure or communications
tower. A good faith effort shall require that all owners of
potentially suitable structures within a one-quarter (1/4) mile
radius of the proposed communications tower site be contacted and
that one (1) or more of the following reasons for not selecting such
structure apply:
1) The proposed antennae and related equipment
would exceed the structural capacity of the existing structure
and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
2) The proposed antennae and related equipment
would cause radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing structure and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
3) Such existing structures do not have adequate
location, space, access or height to accommodate the
proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
4) Addition of the proposed antennae and related
equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation from
such structure exceeding applicable standards established by
the Federal Communications Commission governing human
exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
5) A commercially reasonable agreement could
not be reached with the owners of such structures.
X)0(II- 13 6
B15488
(h) Access shall be provided to the communications
tower and communications equipment building by means of a
public street or easement to a public street. The easement shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be improved to a
width of at least ten (10) feet with a dust-free, all weather surface
for its entire length.
A communications tower may be located on a lot
occupied by other principal structures and may occupy a leased
parcel meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning
district, however, in no case will the size of the leased parcel be
required to be larger than one (1) acre.
(j) Recording of a plat of subdivision or land
development shall be required for a lease parcel on which a
communications tower is proposed to be constructed.
(k) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
height of the communications tower or antennae is the minimum
height necessary to perform its function.
(1) The foundation and base of any communications
tower or antennae shall be set back from a property line (not lease
line) at least one hundred (100) feet.
(m) The foundation and base or any communications
tower or antennae shall be set back a minimum of one thousand
(1,000) feet from any existing dwelling on an adjoining property
and from the district boundary line of any district where such
tower or antennae are not permitted uses.
(n) The base of communications tower or antennae shall
be landscaped to screen the foundation and base and
communications equipment building from abutting properties.
(o) The communications equipment building shall
comply with the required yards and height requirements of the
applicable zoning district for an accessory structure.
(p) The applicant shall submit certification from a
Pennsylvania registered professional engineer that a proposed
communications tower or antennae will be designed and
constructed in accordance with the current "Structural Standards
III -137
B15488
for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures,"
published by the Electrical Industrial Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association and applicable
requirements of the Township's Building Code. The application
shall include an engineering study demonstrating that in the event
of a collapse of the tower, no part will fall beyond a one hundred
(100) foot radius.
(q) The applicant shall submit a copy of its current
Federal Communications (FCC) license; the name, address and
emergency telephone number for the operator of the
communications tower or antenna and a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
one million ($1,000,000) dollars per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of one million
($1,000,000.00) dollars per occurrence covering the communications
tower or antenna.
(r) All guy wires associated with guyed communications
towers and antennae shall be clearly marked to be visible at all
times and shall be located within a locked fenced enclosure.
(s) The site of the communications tower or antenna shall
be secured by a locked fence with a minimum height of eight (8)
feet to limit accessibility by the general public.
(t) Signs or lights shall be mounted on a communications
tower and antenna as may be required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) or any other governmental agency,
including the Township of Spring Zoning Hearing Board.
(u) Communications towers and antennae and associated
communications equipment buildings shall be protected and
maintained in accordance with the requirements of the Township's
Building Code.
(v) If a communications tower or antenna remains
unused for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, the owner
or operator shall dismantle and remove the communications tower
within six (6) months of the expiration of the twelve (12) month
period. Further, the owner or operator of the facility shall post
security in a form acceptable to the Township in a sufficient
XXXI I-138
B15488
amount to cover the facility removal and site cleanup prior to the
issuance of any permits to construct or use said facility. The
security shall be utilized by the Township in the event that the
owner or operator of the facility fails to remove the facility within
six (6) months of the aforesaid notice by the Township to remove
the facility. Exemption: a commercial communications tower or
antenna necessary for and clearly used for emergency
communications by a police department, fire company, emergency
medical service and other similar public safety organizations is
exempt from the requirements of this Section.
(w) A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall
be provided within the fenced area.
(x) Communications towers shall be designed and
constructed to accommodate the future addition of a minimum of
two (2) additional antennas.
(y) Communications towers and communications
buildings shall be designed and constructed to accommodate the
future addition of municipal communications facilities. At the time
of plan submittal the applicant shall demonstrate compliance with
this requirement and shall describe any necessary steps for future
addition of municipal communications facilities.
(z) A commercial communications tower necessary for
and clearly used for emergency communications by a police
department, fire company, emergency medical service, and other
similar public safety organizations is exempt from the requirements
of this Section.
(25) Conference Center.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Shall have a lot area of at least ten (10) acres.
(c) May contain restaurants, lodging facilities, recreation
facilities, gift shops, personal service facilities and similar type uses,
exclusively for the guests. These uses may be located within
separate buildings or combinations of these uses could be located
within a single building. When located within separate buildings,
XXXEI-139
B15488
these uses are exempt from the requirements of §402(B) regarding
two or more principal buildings on a lot.
(d) A buffer yard complying with the standards of §405(I)
shall be provided wherever the lot directly abuts any existing
residential use.
(e) Lighting which is perceptible beyond the property
line shall be minimized in accordance with §513 of this Chapter.
(f) Any restaurant that is associated of a conference
center shall comply with the following regulations:
1) A conference center may contain a standard
restaurant, but not a fast food restaurant. No drive-through
service is permitted.
2) Any waste dumpster shall be screened from
view of adjacent streets, dwellings or residential districts,
and shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet
from the boundary of any residential lot and from any
dwelling or residential district
3) Shall provide landscaping and an all-season
groundcover on all areas not covered by buildings,
structures, parking areas or access drives.
4) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking
areas shall be clearly marked.
(g) Any lodging facilities, hotel or motel shall comply
with the specific provisions for that use listed in this Chapter.
(26) Convenience Store.
(a) The use shall be located on a lot abutting a collector or
arterial street.
(b) The lot shall have a minimum area of one (1) acre,
although such lot may include other permitted uses.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that any outdoor lighting will be placed such
)00(1I-140
B15488
that it will not create a significant nuisance to existing and future
dwellings.
(d) Convenience stores may include fuel pumps, only
upon special exception approval by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(e). All activities except those to be performed at the fuel
pumps shall be performed within a building.
(f) Fuel pumps shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from
any existing and required future street right-of-way or fifty (50) feet
from the street centerline, whichever is greater.
(g) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(h) If a convenience store serves prepared food that is to
be consumed on site, it shall comply with the provisions for a fast
food restaurant included in this Chapter.
(27) Day Care Center. See "Nursery School."
(28) Drive-In (Outdoor) Theater.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Shall have a lot area of at least ten (10) acres.
(c) A buffer yard which complies with the standards of
§405(I) shall be provided around the entire lot.
(d) Shall provide a driveway at least three hundred (300)
feet in length between the point where admission tickets are sold
and the street right-of-way lines.
(e) The parking/viewing area and all structures within a
drive-in (outdoor) theater shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from all property lines and ultimate street right of way lines.
(f) A drive-in (outdoor) theater may include a concession
stand as an accessory use.
B15488
(g) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas
shall be clearly marked.
(h) The drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(29) Fast Food Restaurant, Fast Food Restaurant with Drivethrough
Service, Food Stand.
(a) Any waste dumpster shall be screened from view of
adjacent streets, dwellings or residential districts, and shall be
located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
boundary of any residential lot and from any residential district
and one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any
nonresidential lot.
(b) Shall not include the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(c) Shall provide landscaping and an all-season
groundcover on all areas not covered by buildings, structures,
parking areas or access drives.
(d) May provide an outdoor menu board if drive-through
service is provided from within the building to customers in their
vehicles. Such menu board shall not be considered a sign as long as
its predominant use is clearly for listing food items and their costs
and it is legible only in close proximity to the drive-through area.
(e) Shall provide a buffer yard, complete with a visual
planting screen, in accordance with §405(I) when adjacent to
residential properties.
(f) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of Part 7. Required off-street parking shall take
into account any outdoor dining area.
(g) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
B15488
(h) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas
shall be clearly marked.
(i) Shall comply with all applicable local, state, and
federal requirements. Where such requirements conflict, the more
restrictive requirement shall be met.
(30) Financial Establishment. Any drive-through facilities shall
comply with the Drive-Through Off-Street Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(31) Fire Station. Shall be located on a lot abutting an arterial or
collector street as defined by the official street classification map.
(32) Fuel Oil Company.
(a) Shall meet the applicable outdoor storage control
provisions of §509.
(b) Shall be in accordance with applicable Federal, State
and local fire protection standards.
(c) Where such use includes above-ground, large
containers for the bulk storage of petroleum products and
petroleum-based liquids, it shall comply with the applicable
provisions listed in this Section for a petroleum tank farm.
(33) Garden Apartments or Single -Family Attached Dwellings
(Townhouses).
(a) Uses. Permitted principle uses include dwelling units
permitted in the district. Permitted accessory uses include a rental
office, recreational facilities, off-street parking, indoor vending
machines and laundry facilities. These accessory uses shall be
intended only for the use of the residents of the development.
(b) Sewer and Water. Each dwelling unit shall be served
by a public sewer and centralized water system.
(c) All garden apartment or townhouse developments
shall conform to all of the requirements as herein established:
B15488
Minimum tract size:
Minimum lot width at building line:
Minimum side yard:
Minimum rear yard:
Minimum front yard:
Distance between buildings:
Parking area setback from lot line or
street ultimate right-of-way
Maximum dwelling units per gross
acre
Minimum usable open space (not
induding driveway areas) devoted
solely to recreational use and activities:
Maximum height:
Maximum building coverage:
Maximum impervious coverage:
Garden
Apartment
5 acres
300 feet
75 feet
75 feet
75 feet
See §321(B)
(13)(d)(3)
30 feet
12
15% of the
tracts
2'/z Stories or
35 feet
Single-Family
Attached
Dwellings
3 acres
22 feet
30 feet
30 feet
30 feet
See §321(B)
(13)(d)(3)
30 feet"
10
10% of the
tract"
21/2 Stories or
35 feet"
50% 50%
70% 70%
NOTE: i Minimum width of a townhouse dwelling unit is twenty-two (22)
feet per unit.
ii Applies to end building only.
iii Applies only to parking lots and joint parking areas, not to
separate parking areas for individual townhouses.
iv Usable open space shall not include front, side and/or rear yards
of an individual townhouse or garden apartment.
v Whichever is less.
NOTE: See §324(C) of this Chapter for special standards relating to storage
sheds and other accessory uses, buildings and structures.
XXXII-144
B15488
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of the above
requirements, the following shall also apply:
1) No more than six (6) townhouse dwelling units
shall be attached.
2) The developer should vary architectural
treatments within apartment projects, individual apartments
and between dwelling units in a townhouse development.
Variations may include those of exterior elevation, building
setbacks, provision of balconies, architectural details, pitch
of roof, exterior materials or use of color. Variety and
flexibility in design layout and arrangement of buildings,
parking areas, services, recreation areas, common open
space and planting that fully considers the particular
physical characteristics of the site and natural amenities is
highly desired.
3) A system for pedestrian circulation throughout
the development shall be provided. Paved walkways,
having a minimum width of four (4) feet, shall be provided
for access between buildings and common parking areas,
open space and recreation areas and other community
facilities.
4) The horizontal distance between groups of
townhouses or garden apartments shall be at least:
i) Two (2) times the average height of the
two (2) groups of townhouses and garden apartments
for front or rear walls facing front or rear walls.
ii) One and one-half (1 1/2) times the
average height for front or rear walls facing side
walls.
iii) Equal to the height of the highest
building for side walls facing side walls.
5) The minimum width of any side yard abutting
a street, driveway or parking area should not be less than
thirty (30) feet.
XXXII-145
B15488
6) Parking may be provided on the lot, as
carports, as an integral part of the townhouse or a joint
parking facility for a group of townhouses with such deed
restrictions as are necessary to determine ownership and
maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of
assigning charges for maintaining snow removal and
repairs.
7) Usable open space devoted to recreational use
as herein required shall be designed for use by tenants or
owners of the development and shall be improved and
equipped by the developer in accordance with plans
submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission.
8) Garden apartment buildings shall not exceed
one hundred sixty (160) feet in length.
9) In the event a development is designed to
contain more than one (1) permitted use, the submitted plan
shall indicate an area designed for each such use and shall
designate all requirements of this Chapter for each area.
(e) Number of Spaces. Off-street parking, whether
garage or onlot, shall be provided on the premises at the rate of two
(2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
(1)
follows:
Requirements for off-street parking areas shall be as
1) All access drives and parking areas shall be at
least fifteen (15) feet from any building on the lot and from
exterior lot lines.
2) All parking areas shall be designed in
accordance with requirements of §703.
3) Access drives and driveways shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of §704.
4) All parking areas that include twenty (20) or
more spaces shall be separated from view of any public
street and directly abutting single-family detached residence
III -146
B15488
by a buffer yard as described in §405(I), but with a width of
ten (10) feet. A planting plan specifying type, size and
location of existing and proposed planting material shall be
submitted with the application for approval.
5) No more than fifteen (15) contiguous spaces
shall be permitted in any continuous row without
interruption by landscaping.
6) No more than sixty (60) parking spaces shall be
accommodated in any single parking area.
7) No more than two (2) interconnected parking
areas shall be permitted without having direct access to a
public street or a private street meeting Township street
standards.
8) The total length of any single or combined
parking area shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet. The
length shall be measured from the center line of the public or
private street providing access to the furthest point of the
parking area.
9) In the case of townhouses, no more then fifty
percent (50%) of the required front yard shall be used for
parking.
(g) The developer shall install a storm runoff and
drainage system in accordance with acceptable engineering
practices so as to adequately drain the project site, to adequately
dispose of all runoff and drainage away from the project site, at a
rate no greater than existed prior to development. Plans for such
drainage system shall be submitted and shall be subject to approval
by the Township Engineer of the Township.
(h) All provisions of existing Township ordinances and
subdivision and land development ordinances regarding storm
drainage shall be complied with.
(i) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets and not
to cause any annoyance to building occupants or surrounding
B15488
property owners or residents. All lighting shall comply with the
provisions of §513.
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be
visually screened on three (3) sides and contained in airtight,
vermin-proof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
(k) Each multiple dwelling unit shall be provided with a
minimum of two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet of lockable storage
area in an enclosed room which is not part of the dwelling unit.
(1) No area for such facilities shall exceed more than onehalf
(1/2) the floor area of any single floor.
(m) Swimming Pool.
1) No structure shall be permitted without a
filtering system utilizing chlorinated water.
2) No structure shall be permitted unless a
permanent continuous fence which is four (4) feet minimum
in height surrounds the facilities.
3) No structure shall be within fifty (50) feet of
any property line or easement.
4) No structure shall be constructed between the
building setback line and the street line.
5) No structure shall be permitted unless
surrounded by a paved surface extending a minimum of five
(5) feet from the water line.
6) Lighting shall not create a glare on any
surrounding properties.
7) No persons other than residents and their
guests shall be permitted to use the facility.
8) One (1) parking space for each three (3)
dwelling units shall be provided in addition to the
residential requirements.
B15488
(n) Outdoor Recreation.
1) Such facilities shall be limited to tennis courts,
which are completely surrounded by a fence ten (10) feet in
height, barbecue or other cookout facilities constructed of
permanent material, yards which are completely
landscaped, garden areas for tenant use, playlots, provided
that facilities located in this area are surrounded by fencing
at least four (4) feet in height, with benches for adults;
facilities for such games as shuffleboard or basketball,
provided that a paved surface is provided and that such
facilities are located at least fifty (50) feet from any building.
2) No outdoor recreational facilities, except yards
and garden areas shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any
lot line.
3) No outdoor facilities, except yards, shall be
located between the building setback line and the street line.
(o) No outdoor clotheslines shall be located in any
required side yard, rear yard or between the building setback line
and the street line with permanent metal poles for support.
(p) No activities shall be permitted which create a public
nuisance and/or interfere with the use of adjacent land.
(q) No structure or building shall be permitted
specifically designed for pets.
(r) Garden apartment and townhouse developments
shall be deemed to be a subdivision governed by the provisions
and procedures of the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter )0 VII) and the procedures
established in said ordinance for approval shall be followed.
(34) Golf Course, Chip and Putt Course.
(a) The use shall comply with the requirements for
Recreation, Nonpublic Outdoor listed in this Section.
B15488
(b) A golf course or chip and putt course may include a
standard restaurant, food stand or membership clubhouse as a
clearly accessory use.
(c) Any golf course or chip and putt course shall have a
minimum lot area of ten (10) acres and a maximum impervious
coverage of ten percent (10%).
(d) No fairway, tee box or green shall be located closer
than one hundred (100) feet to the property line of an existing
dwelling or to the existing right-of-way line of any public street.
(35) Greenhouse/ Nursery.
(a) Such use may not include sale of items not primarily
grown on the premises.
(b) No off-road vehicles used for such work shall be
parked within the required minimum front yard.
(36) Group Home.
(a) There shall be no more than six (6) residents.
(b) There shall be twenty-four (24) hour resident
supervision by people qualified by training and experience in the
field for which the group home is intended.
(c) The use shall be licensed under the applicable State
program and shall comply with all applicable State rules and
regulations.
(d) Any medical or counseling services provided shall be
done so only for residents.
(e) The lot on which a group home is located shall be at
least one thousand (1,000) feet from the lot on which another group
home is located; (such distance shall be measured in a horizontal
straight line from the nearest point on one (1) lot to the nearest
point on the other lot).
(f) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of Part 7.
)00(II-150
B15488
(g) There shall be no alteration to the outside of the
structure that would alter the single family character of the
dwelling, be inconsistent with the basic architecture of the
dwelling, or be incompatible with surrounding dwellings.
(37)
(h) No sign for the group home shall be displayed.
Gun Club/Outdoor Target Range.
(a) These provisions shall apply to gun clubs, outdoor
target ranges, archery ranges, sport or skeet shooting areas.
(b) Shall have a lot area of at least ten (10) acres.
(c) All outdoor target ranges shall have a barrier behind
the target area which is of sufficient height and thickness to
adequately provide for the public safety. Such barrier shall prevent
the ball bullet or arrow from traveling more than 15 yards beyond
the target.
(d) The use shall comply with all applicable Federal, State
and local regulations.
(e) No such use shall be located within five
hundred (500) feet of any property boundary line.
(f) Such use shall not operate between one (1) hour
before dusk and 8:00 a.m.
(38) Health Club or Exercise Club.
(a) If such use will be on a lot with its own driveway(s)
onto a collector or arterial street, it shall have a minimum lot area of
one (1) acre.
(b) The use shall comply with the requirements for
Recreation, Nonpublic Indoor listed in this Section.
(39) Heliport.
(a) Such use shall be located a minimum of one thousand
(1,000) feet from an existing dwelling or a residential zoning district
XXXII-151
B15488
other than land that will (i) be retained in ownership by the owner
of the heliport, or (ii) will be permanently deed restricted against
residential use.
(b) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board that the usual approaches, takeoff and flight
patterns to and from the heliport and the maximum number of
flights to and from such heliport will not create a significant noise
or safety hazard for current or future residents.
(c) The Zoning Hearing Board may place reasonable
conditions, to ensure compatibility with neighboring uses, on the
maximum permitted weights of helicopters, number of flights per
week, operating hours and other operations, other than matters
preempted by the State and Federal government.
(40) Holiday Tree Sales.
(a) Holiday Tree Sales may include the sale of other
similar evergreen or live items such as greens and wreaths, or
accessories such as bows, tree bags and tree stands, but shall not
include the sale of miscellaneous retail merchandise.
(b)
per lot.
There shall be one (1) holiday tree sales event per year
(c) Only one (1) holiday tree sales event may take place
on a lot at any given time.
(d) Holiday Tree Sales events must obtain a Temporary
Sales Permit. Permit will be valid between the dates of
November 15 and December 31.
(e) All holiday trees, temporary structures, signage, and
accessories to the holiday tree sale must be removed from the
property by December 31.
(1) No more than ten (10) percent of the required parking
area for the existing uses on the lot may be used for the holiday tree
sales area.
(g) Holiday Tree Sales hours of operation shall be limited
to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
VOU I- 1 5 2
B15488
(h) Holiday Tree Sales areas are limited to designated
parking areas on the lot. In the event that the lot contains no
existing parking facilities, a designated area containing a minimum
of six (6) off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of Part 7 of this Chapter.
(i) Holiday Tree Sales shall not disrupt the daily
operations of the principal business located on the lot.
(j) No holiday tree sales shall be located within any
designated clear sight triangle.
(k) No holiday tree sales shall adversely impact the
health, safety, and welfare of the Township.
(1) Signage must comply with the provisions of this
Chapter. No signage may be displayed until a Temporary Sales
Permit is obtained.
(m) All holiday tree sales shall comply with applicable
building, fire, and electrical codes of the Township.
(41) Hospital or Medical Center.
(a) A hospital or medical center shall have a minimum
tract size of ten (10) acres. Each lot within a hospital or medical
center development shall comply with the minimum lot area and
width requirements of the zoning district within which it is located.
(b) A hospital or medical center shall be located on a lot
abutting and having direct vehicular access onto an arterial or
collector street as defined in this Chapter.
(c) A minimum of two (2) access drives complying with
the width requirements of §704 shall be provided from such arterial
or collector street. However, the hospital or medical center shall
make the maximum use possible of interior streets or access drives,
as opposed to numerous driveways entering onto existing public
streets.
(d) No hospital in a residential district may involve
primarily the treatment of the criminally insane.
XXXII-153
B15488
(e) A hospital or medical center may include various
accessory uses that are customarily incidental to and in direct
support of the primary health care mission of the hospital or
medical center. Such accessory uses could include the following
facilities, which shall be integrated with the hospital facilities:
Medical and administrative offices.
Medical laboratory or blood donor station.
Patient hostel.
Hospital staff dormitory.
Ambulance service.
Methadone clinics and drug rehabilitation facilities.
Pharmacy.
Gift shop.
Teaching facilities.
Research facilities.
Interior service and convenience uses.
(f) The principal and accessory uses comprising the
hospital or medical center may be located in a single building or
may consist of several buildings located on one (1) or more lots. In
the case of multiple buildings on a single lot, the provisions of
§402(B) regarding two or more principal buildings on a lot shall not
apply.
(g) Regardless of the number of buildings on a lot, all
front, rear and side yard building setbacks for the zoning district
within which it is located shall apply.
(h) The hospital or medical center shall be in single
ownership and shall consist of harmonious groupings of buildings,
service and parking areas, circulation and open space.
(i) Only the accessory uses listed above or those
associated with a commercial district shall be permitted.
(j) Off-Street Parking Setback. Parking shall be
permitted in the areas required for front, side and rear yard
setbacks up to a point of twenty-five (25) feet from any front, side
or rear lot line of the hospital or medical center. This setback shall
not be applied along internal lot lines of the hospital or medical
center for common parking areas serving buildings on multiple
VOGI-154
B15488
lots. All parking areas shall be suitably paved with permanent
hard-surface coverings.
(k) Parking. Where a hospital or medical center contains
any of the accessory uses listed above (regardless of whether each
use is listed in Table 7.1 or is an unlisted use), the number of
parking spaces required shall be the sum of the parking
requirements for each separate principal and accessory use.
(1) Sewer and Water. All buildings within a hospital or
medical center shall be provided with centralized sewer and water
services.
(m) The facility shall comply with all applicable Federal,
State, County and local regulations and shall be licensed as
required by the State.
(n) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall comply with the requirements of §513 and §703(E).
(o) Any patient hostel or hospital staff dormitory shall
comply with the following requirements:
1) Permitted accessory uses include off-street
parking, indoor vending machines and laundry facilities.
These accessory uses shall be intended only for use by the
residents of the patient hostel or the hospital staff dormitory.
2) Any hospital staff dormitory shall be located a
minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any lot line of
an existing dwelling or boundary of a residential district.
3) Any hospital staff dormitory shall have a
maximum capacity of one (1) resident per five hundred (500)
square feet of lot area and shall be restricted to hospital staff
members.
(42) Hotel/ Motel:
(a) A minimum lot area of 2 acres shall be required.
B15488
(b) A restaurant may be permitted as an accessory use to
a hotel or motel. In such cases, the appropriate requirements listed
under Section 321(B) for this use shall apply.
(43) Kennel.
(a) All kennels shall provide the minimum area for
kennels required by State regulations.
(b) All buildings in which animals are housed and all
runs shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from all lot
lines.
(c) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that
sounds generated within the buildings cannot be perceived at the
lot lines.
(d) Outdoor runs may be provided so long as a double
evergreen screen at least six (6) feet in height is provided around
the runs. No animal shall be permitted to use the outdoor runs
from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(e) A kennel shall serve a maximum of fifty (50) animals.
(44) Laundry / Laundromat.
(a) Centralized sewage disposal facilities and centralized
water supply facilities shall be required.
(b) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(45) Lumber Yard. Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial or
collector street (as defined by the official street classification map).
(46) Medical Laboratory or Blood Donor Station
(a) A medical laboratory shall comply with the minimum
lot area and width requirements of the zoning district within which
it is located.
B15488
(b) Services provided shall be those that do not require
overnight stay.
(c) A medical laboratory may include administrative
offices, waiting rooms, analysis and testing rooms.
(d) The facility shall comply with all applicable Federal,
State, County and local regulations and shall be licensed as
required by the State.
(e) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall comply with the requirements of §513 and §703(E).
(47) Medical Office or Medical Clinic
(a) A medical office or medical clinic shall comply with
the minimum lot area and width requirements of the zoning
district within which it is located.
(b) Services provided shall be those that do not require
overnight stay.
(c) A medical office or medical clinic may include
administrative offices, waiting rooms, treatment rooms, pharmacies
and dispensaries directly associated with the medical office or
medical clinic.
(d) The facility shall comply with all applicable Federal,
State, County and local regulations and shall be licensed as
required by the State.
(e) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall comply with the requirements of §513 and §703(E).
(48) Membership Club. See "Recreation, Nonpublic Indoor" or
"Recreation - Nonpublic Outdoor."
(49) Mineral Extraction.
(a) Sandpits, gravelpits, removal of topsoil and. the
excavation, extraction or removal of any natural resource from the
land or ground for any purpose, are permitted subject to the
following conditions.
III -157
B15488
(b) Any person who desires to operate a use described
above shall submit land development plans to the Planning
Commission and the governing body complying with the
provisions of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) and including the following
information:
1) A map of the lot indicating the open area
which is to be used and the setback distance, prepared by a
licensed surveyor or engineer.
2) A description of the specific types of material
the applicant proposes to extract from the site, the types of
operations which will be conducted and the procedures
which will be utilized.
3) A statement of qualifications to operate a
quarry, mining or excavation facility.
4) A complete compliance history for any and all
similar facilities owned and/or operated by the applicant.
5) Any and all information provided to the
PADEP or the U.S. EPA regarding the proposed site and/ or
facility.
6) A sketch showing the landscape plan
indicating screening provision.
7) Preliminary specifications and architectural
drawings for all structures and appurtenances to be located
on the site.
8) A photograph of the open area to be used.
9) A site plan for rehabilitation, showing both
existing and proposed final contours, shall be submitted and
approved by the governing body. After any such
operations, the site shall be made reusable for a use
permitted in the Zoning District. Where topsoil is removed,
sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for retention on the
premises and shall be respread over the premises after the
)(Dail- 15 8
B15488
operation is terminated. Except where lakes are created and
retained, the area shall be brought to final grade by a layer of
earth (capable of supporting vegetation) of at least two (2)
feet or to original thickness, whichever is less. Fill shall be a
suitable material approved by the governing body.
(c) All plans shall be submitted to and approved by the
Berks County Conservation District.
(d) The proposed operations shall comply with the
following provisions:
1) The operations shall not adversely affect soil
fertility, drainage and lateral support of abutting land or
other properties, nor shall it contribute to soil erosion.
2) Quarry, mining, excavation andjor mineral
extraction operations shall not be permitted within any
wetlands or within one hundred (100') feet of any body of
surface water.
3) No quarrying, mining or excavation
operations, including drilling and blasting, shall occur on
Sunday and shall not be conducted between 8:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. during the remainder of the week.
4) For any open excavation that would have a
depth greater than ten (10) feet and any slopes greater than
thirty percent (30%), a substantial fence shall be provided
and approved by the Zoning Officer as adequate. Such a
fence shall include gates at appropriate locations for
emergency access.
5) Grading, backfilling and replacement of all
overburden material shall be done in a manner that will
restore the site to the same or more suitable condition and
usable grade as existed on the site prior to the mineral
extraction operations.
6) The sidewalls of any quarrying, mining or
excavation operation that are not completely backfilled shall
have a slope no greater than one (1) foot of vertical distance
for each two (2) feet of horizontal distance.
III -159
B15488
7) Dust and debris from the operation shall not be
permitted to accumulate within any public right-of-way.
8) All operations shall be separated from any
abutting residential uses by a buffer yard as described in
§405.
9) All operations shall be set back a minimum of
fifty (50) feet from all exterior lot lines and one hundred
(100) feet from an existing residential use.
10) All operations shall be reasonably screened
from view of public expressway, arterial or collector streets.
11) Any portion of an access road that is located
within one hundred (100) feet of the lot line of a residential
use or a primarily residential district shall be provided with
a dustless surface.
12) Access roads shall connect to collector or
arterial roads while making every reasonable effort to avoid
travel by heavy trucks through residential areas.
13) At all stages of operations, proper drainage
shall be provided to prevent the collection and stagnation of
water and to prevent harmful effects upon surrounding
properties.
(50) Mobile Home Park.
(a) Such use shall have a minimum tract size of twenty
(20) acres and a maximum overall density of no more than five (5)
mobile homes per acre.
(b) Such use shall have centralized sewer and water.
(c) Such use shall have a twenty (20) foot buffer yard
around the perimeter of the site, as described in §405(I).
(d) All applicable provisions of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII)
shall be met.
XXXII-160
B15488
(51) Mobile/ Manufactured Home.
(a) Shall be constructed in accordance with the Safety
and Construction Standards of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
(b) Shall have a site graded to provide a level, stable and
well-drained area.
(c) Shall have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms
removed.
(d) Shall be placed on a permanent foundation as
described by the following:
1) The foundation system shall consist of ten (10)
inch diameter concrete piers, concrete footing perpendicular
to the main longitudinal frame or equivalent and shall be
installed from ground level to below the frost line (thirty-six
(36) inch minimum). This foundation system shall be placed
on eight (8) feet centers along each of the two (2) main
longitudinal frames for each section of the home with no
more than three (3) feet overhang at each end of the section.
2) One-half (1/2) inch diameter by twelve (12)
inch long eyebolts shall be cast in place at each corner and at
two (2) midpoints in the concrete piers, concrete footing or
equivalent. Concrete blocks shall be used to support the
home on the foundation system and wood shims may be
used for final leveling. The concrete support blocks shall not
be wider than the support foundation.
3) The mobile/ manufactured home shall be
securely anchored or tied down with cable and thin buckles
or equivalent connecting the frame to the case in place
eyebolts on at least four (4) corners and two (2) midpoints.
The tiedown shall also be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations furnished with each
home.
4) Homes shall not be placed more than four (4)
feet above the supporting ground area.
XXXII-161
B15488
(e) Shall be enclosed from the bottom of the home to the
ground or stand using industry-approved skirting material
compatible with the home.
(f) The Zoning Hearing Board may require such
additional fencing, earthen berming and screening as is reasonable.
(52) Multiple Use Building
(a) The uses permitted under this category shall be only
those that are either permitted by right or by condition with the
Zoning District where this Chapter permits a multiple-use
building.
(b) The minimum lot area and width for a multiple-use
building shall comply with the minimum requirements for a nonresidential
building within that Zoning District. In the event that a
larger lot area or width is required under §321(B) for any of the
specific uses within a multiple-use building, the greater
requirement shall apply. In addition, five thousand (5,000) square
feet of additional lot area shall be provided for each specific use
beyond the first use.
(c) If any of the proposed uses are permitted by
Condition, approval of the combined uses must follow the same
approval procedure required for the specific use.
(d) Each use must comply with the specific provision for
that use list in this Chapter.
(e) Where a residential use is proposed within a multiple
use building, only one dwelling unit shall be permitted per
building.
(f) Each separate use within a multiple use building shall
be required to apply for separate zoning and occupancy permits,
through the appropriate required processes.
B15488
(g) Off-street parking requirements of Part 7 shall be met;
including the requirement that the number of parking spaces
required shall be the sum of the parking requirements for each
separate use.
(53) Nursery School/Day Care Center.
(a) The nursery school/ day care center shall be located
and operated in a manner that reduces or eliminates potential
hazards to the children being cared for at the facility. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Township, full compliance with this provision.
(b) No outdoor activity area shall be closer than forty (40)
feet to any lot line.
(c) There shall be a minimum of thirty (30) square feet of
floor space and two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet of air space per
child in the indoor activity area, exclusive of offices, sanitary
facilities, storage spaces and other auxiliary rooms.
(d) There shall be a minimum of sixty-five (65) square
feet of space per child in the outdoor activity area, which area shall
be free of hazards and properly fenced.
(e) Off-Street Parking Spaces. Parking shall comply with
the requirements of Part 7 of this Chapter.
(f) The use shall comply with any applicable County,
State and Federal regulations.
(g) There shall be a two (2) acre minimum lot size.
(54) Nursing/Convalescent Home.
(a) Such use shall only include uses licensed or approved
by an appropriate State agency as a nursing home or personal care
center and shall clearly primarily involve care of persons who are
aged or physically handicapped or who suffer from mental
retardation.
(b) Sewer and Water. Each facility shall be served by a
public sewer and centralized water system.
III -163
B15488
(c) All structures shall be located a minimum of
seventy-five (75) feet from the property lines of the parcel.
(d) No more than 20% of the total area of the parcel shall
be covered by buildings, unless more stringent requirements are
specified, for the Zoning District within which the facility is
located.
(e) No more than 40% of the total area of the parcel shall
have impervious surface unless more stringent requirements are
specified, for the Zoning District within which the facility is
located.
(f) The horizontal distance between groups of buildings
shall be at least:
1) Two (2) times the average height of the two (2)
groups of buildings for front or rear walls facing front or
rear walls.
2) One and one-half (1-1/2) times the average
height for front or rear walls facing sidewalls.
3) Equal to the height of the highest building for
sidewalls facing sidewalls.
(g) No less than 30% of the total area of the parcel shall
be permanently set aside for noncommercial common open space
purposes, such as parks, recreation or conservation of natural
features. The common open space areas shall be suitable for the
designated purpose and contain no structure or parking facility
except as related to and incidental to open space uses.
(h) Number of Spaces. Off-street parking, shall be
provided on the premises in accordance with the provisions of
Part 7.
(i) Requirements for off-street parking areas shall be as
follows:
B15488
1) All access drives and parking areas shall be at
least fifteen (15) feet from any building on the lot and from
exterior lot lines.
2) All parking areas shall be designed in
accordance with requirements of §703.
3) Access drives and driveways shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of §704.
4) All parking areas that include twenty (20) or
more spaces shall be separated from view of any public
street and directly abutting single-family detached residence
by a buffer yard as described in §405(I), but with a width of
ten (10) feet. A planting plan specifying type, size and
location of existing and proposed planting material shall be
submitted with the application for approval.
5) No more than fifteen (15) contiguous spaces
shall be permitted in any continuous row without
interruption by landscaping.
6) No more than sixty (60) parking spaces shall be
accommodated in any single parking area.
7) No more than two (2) interconnected parking
areas shall be permitted without having direct access to a
public street or a private street meeting Township street
standards.
8) The total length of any single or combined
parking area shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet. The
length shall be measured from the center line of the public or
private street providing access to the furthest point of the
parking area.
(j) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets and not
to cause any annoyance to building occupants or surrounding
property owners or residents.
B15488
(k) Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be
visually screened on three (3) sides and contained in airtight,
vermin-proof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
(1) A system of paved walkways a minimum of five (5)
feet in width shall be provided for access between buildings and
common parking areas, open space areas and other community
facilities.
(m) Such use shall have a twenty (20) foot buffer yard
around the perimeter.
(55) Office Equipment Sales/Service. If such use will be within a
lot with its own driveways(s) onto an arterial or collector street, such lot
shall have a minimum of one (1) acre, although such lot may include other
permitted uses.
(56) Off-Track Betting Parlor
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Shall have a lot area of at least ten (10) acres.
(c) The lot on which an off-track betting parlor is located
shall be at least five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of a lot
on which an existing dwelling, a school, a day care center, a
playground, or public recreation facility, a place of worship, or
another off-track betting parlor is located and from the boundary of
a residential district.
(d) No more than one off-track better parlor shall be
located within a single building.
(e) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
use shall not be detrimental to the use of adjoining properties.
(f) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of Part 7.
(g) All off-track betting parlors shall comply with the
Pennsylvania Horse and/or Harness Racing Commission's Rules
III -166
B15488
and Regulations pertaining to Nonprimary Locations, as defined
therein.
(57) Open Air Retail
(a) An open air retail facility shall be permitted only
within the Planned Business and Residential (PBR) District or
within the portion of the Planned Highway Commerce (PHC)
District located along U.5.799
(b) A minimum lot area of at least one (1) acre shall be
required for an open air retail facility.
(c) An open air retail facility may be located inside or
outside of a building, or may be a combination of the two.
(d) Each vendor shall be provided with a minimum
area of four hundred (400) square feet to allow for the display of
items for sale and to provide a parking space for the vendor's
vehicle without disturbing adjacent vendors. The vendor spaces
shall be improved to a mud-free condition.
(e) The vendor spaces shall not be permitted within the
front, side or rear yards as defined for the district in which the open
air retail facility is located.
(f) Outdoor stands shall be portable, shall be maintained
in good condition and shall be removed during days when items
are not being offered for sale.
(g) Parking shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Part 7.
(h) When an open air retail facility is located on a parking
lot servicing another permitted use, the vendor spaces and
associated parking spaces shall not reduce the number of parking
spaces required for the other use below the minimum required by
this Chapter.
B15488
(58) Open Air Retail Sales of Agricultural Products.
(a) An open air retail sales of agricultural products may
take place inside or outside of a building, or may be a combination
of the two.
(b) A minimum lot area of at least one (1) acre shall be
required for open air retail sales of agricultural products.
(c) The building or area where products are displayed or
sold shall be at least fifty (50) feet from an intersection and shall be
at least twenty (20) feet from the cartway.
(d) Parking shall be provided in compliance with the
provisions of Part 7.
(e) When the open air retail sales of agricultural products
operation, or a portion thereof, takes place within a building, it
shall comply with all requirements listed for a retail store.
(59) Open Space Development. Shall comply with the
requirements of Section 901 (Appendix A).
(60) Orphanage. Such use shall have a minimum lot area of five
hundred (500) square feet of land per resident. Shall only involve the care
of person under the age of eighteen (18) who are primarily in need of such
setting because of inability of their natural parents to adequately care for
them.
(61) Pet Grooming Establishment. Such use shall not include
overnight boarding of animals, veterinary services or animal obedience
training.
(62) Fuel Storage Tank Farm or Fuel Products Terminal.
(a) Shall meet the applicable outdoor storage control
provisions of §509.
(b) Shall be in accordance with applicable Federal, State
and local fire protection standards.
(c) All tanks must be equipped with overfill protection
devices. These devices must alert the transfer operator that the
XXXII-168
B15488
tank is 90% full or automatically shut off flow to the tank when the
tank is no more than 95% full. All tanks must be equipped with an
impervious spill containment basin.
(d) All fluid handling piping shall be double-walled
construction and shall include double-walled containment at the
tank and to grade under any dispensing device.
(e) Piping on pressure systems shall be equipped with
leak detection devices that will promptly notify the operator of a
problem in the system in one of the following manners:
1) Give an audible and visible warning through
the tank alarm panel.
2) Completely stop the flow of the material to the
dispenser.
(f) Secondary containment shall be provided around and
under all above ground stationary tanks and shall consist of native
soils, clays, bentonites, or artificially constructed material
equivalent to sixty (60) mil high density polyethylene or greater,
and having an impermeability of at least 10-6 centimeters per
second. Secondary containment must be constructed and
maintained to meet impermeability requirements for the
operational life of the tank(s). Secondary containment must be
capable of containing 110% of the volume of the largest tank.
(63)
(64)
area.
(g) Propane tanks shall be exempt from these standards.
Picnic Grove. See "Recreation, Nonpublic Outdoor."
Place of Worship. Shall be on a lot at least three (3) acres in
(65) Planned Business Development. Shall comply with the
provisions for such use listed under §314.
(66) Planned Residential Development (PRD)
(a) All applicable provisions of the Township PRD
Ordinance (Chapter )0(I) shall be met.
B15488
(b) All requirements of this Chapter and Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) that are not specifically
waived or replaced by the PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI) shall apply.
(c) The Township PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI), as
amended, shall be considered as part of this Chapter.
(67) Printing Establishments and Printing/ Publishing
Establishments. Any loading docks or truck maneuvering areas shall be
placed in such locations that are the maximum distance possible from any
adjacent residential district and from existing residences. The use shall be
able to comply with the noise control standards of Section 511.
(68) Private Airport or Airstrip and Private Heliport.
(a) The use shall comply with all applicable Federal and
State regulations and requirements.
(b) Areas used for landings, takeoffs and ground
circulation shall be located at least one thousand ( 1,000) feet away
from adjacent property lines.
(69) Public or Private School. There shall be a five (5) acre
minimum lot size. No commercial trade school shall be allowed in a
primarily residential district.
(70) Public Utility Facility. If the use is not exempt from this
Chapter under the State Municipalities Planning Code, the applicant shall
prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the use will be
compatible with any adjacent residential uses or adjacent residential
district.
(71) Racetracks, Automobile or Horse, with related Wagering.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Shall have a lot area of at least fifty (50) acres.
(c) Such use shall have centralized sewer and water.
B15488
(d) Such use shall be fully enclosed within a fence a
minimum of six (6) feet in height with gates. Gates shall be
securely locked except during an event.
(e) The lot on which an automobile or horse racetrack is
located shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the
boundary of a lot on which an existing dwelling, a school, a day
care center, a playground or public recreation facility, a place of
worship, or another automobile or horse racetrack is located and
from the boundary of a residential district.
Shall provide for efficient functioning of the proposed
use amid its surroundings without creating undue adverse impacts.
(g) Shall meet all of the performance standards of
Part 5. The applicant shall submit appropriate information
demonstrating how compliance will be ensured.
(h) The use shall be completely surrounded by a sixty
(60) foot wide buffer yard, complete with planting screen, in
accordance with the provisions of §405.
(i) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors that access to the site shall not cause
traffic backup onto adjoining public streets during peak entrance
and exit periods. This shall require special attention to, and
description of, the on-site stacking volumes caused by ticket or
parking booth locations and the number, location, and times of
traffic control personnel posting.
(j) The applicant shall describe methods of fire
protection, policing and security that demonstrate that adequate
fire and police protection is available to serve the proposed use.
The applicant shall also demonstrate that adequate fire protection
and security measures shall be employed on the site to ensure
public safety during and after conduct to the proposed use.
(k) All horse racetracks, with related wagering shall
comply with the applicable Pennsylvania Horse and/ or Harness
Racing Commission's Rules and Regulations.
B15488
(1) Any area where race vehicle engines will be run,
warmed up or tested shall be set back a minimum of one thousand
(1,000) feet from all lot lines of any existing dwelling.
(m) No outdoor storage of unlicensed vehicles, vehicle
parts, lubricants and fuels, or other material or equipment used in
the servicing of motor vehicles shall be permitted.
(72) Recreation, Nonpublic Indoor.
(a) The proposed used shall not adversely affect the
adjoining properties.
(b) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
nonresidential use or from any existing street right-of-way.
(c) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
residential use.
(d) The maximum total building coverage shall be
twenty-five percent (25%).
(e) All such uses shall comply with all applicable
government regulations, specifically State fire safety regulations.
(f) Amusement establishments, health or exercise clubs,
swimming clubs, tennis or racquetball clubs shall also comply with
the additional requirements listed for those uses within this
Chapter.
(73) Recreation, Nonpublic Outdoor.
(a) The proposed use shall not adversely affect the
adjoining properties.
(b) No lot area shall be less than five (5) acres.
(c) All buildings shall be set back a minimum of three
hundred (300) feet from any exterior property line.
B15488
(d) Maximum building coverage shall be ten percent
(10%).
(e) Maximum paved area shall be fifteen percent (15%).
(f) Minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet.
(g) All other area and bull( regulations of the applicable
zoning district shall apply.
(h) Golf courses, chip and putt courses, campgrounds,
swimming clubs and tennis clubs shall also comply with the
additional requirements listed for those uses within this Chapter.
(i) Any outdoor swimming pool shall be entirely
enclosed with a good quality chain-link or wooden fence with a
minimum height of six (6) feet.
(j) The proposed use shall not operate between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(k) All outdoor illumination shall comply with the
requirements of §513.
(74) Research, Engineering or Testing. The applicant shall prove
to the satisfaction of the Township that the use will not create serious
explosive, toxic, genetic or fire hazards.
(75) Restaurants, Standard.
(a) Shall not include any drive-through facilities.
(b) Shall comply with all applicable local, state and
federal requirements. Where such requirements conflict, the more
restrictive requirement shall be met.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of Part 7. Required off-street parking shall take
into account any outdoor dining area.
(d) May include the sale of alcoholic beverages; however,
the total sale of food shall exceed the total sale of alcoholic
beverages.
XXXET- 173
B15488
(e) Any waste dumpster shall be screened from view of
adjacent streets, dwellings and residential districts and shall be
located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
boundary of any residential lot and from any residential district
and one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any
nonresidential lot.
(f) Shall provide landscaping and an all-season
groundcover on all areas not covered by buildings, structures,
parking areas or access drives.
(g) Shall provide a visual planting screen, in accordance
with §405(H) when adjacent to residential properties.
(76) Retail Store:
(a) If such use will be on a lot with its own driveway(s)
onto a collector or arterial street, the lot shall have a minimum area
of one (1) acre, although such lot may include other permitted uses.
(b) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that any outdoor lighting will be placed such
that it shall not create a glare on any surrounding properties and
shall not create a significant nuisance to existing and future
dwellings.
(c) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(d) Any retail store located within the Planned Office
Business District shall not have a floor area greater than fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet.
(e) Any retail store having a floor area greater than fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet shall comply with the following
guidelines:
1) Facades shall be articulated to reduce the
massive scale and the uniform, impersonal appearance and
to provide visual interest that will be consistent with the
community's character and scale. Developments with
Van- 1 74
B15488
facades over one hundred (100) feet in linear length shall
incorporate wall projections or recesses a minimum of three
(3) feet in depth and a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous
feet in length within each one hundred (100) feet of façade
length and shall extend over twenty (20%) percent of the
façade. Stores shall use animating features such as arcades,
display windows, entry areas, or awnings along at least sixty
(60%) percent of the façade.
2) When retail stores having floor areas greater
than 50,000 square feet are attached to smaller, separately
operated stores or similar uses, such as within a shopping
center, the street level facade of such smaller stores or
similar uses shall be transparent between the height of three
feet and eight feet above the walkway grade for no less than
sixty (60%) percent of the building facade of such buildings.
Windows shall be recessed and shall include visually
prominent sills, shutters, or other such forms of framing.
3) Buildings should have architectural features
and patterns that provide visual interest at the scale of the
pedestrian, reduce massive effects, and recognize local
character. Building facades shall include a repeating pattern
that shall include one or more of the following elements : (1)
color change, (2) texture change, (3) material module change,
or (4) expression of architectural or structural bay through a
change in plane of no less than 12 inches in width, such as an
offset, reveal or projecting rib. At least one of these elements
shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at
intervals of no more than thirty (30) feet, either horizontally
or vertically.
4) Variations in roof lines should be used to add
interest to, and reduce the massive scale of large buildings.
Roof lines shall be varied with a change in height every 100
linear feet in the building length. Parapets, mansard roofs,
hip roofs, or dormers shall be used to conceal flat roofs and
roof top equipment from public view.
5) Exterior building materials and colors should
be aesthetically pleasing and compatible with materials and
colors used in adjoining neighborhoods. Predominant
exterior building materials shall be high quality materials
III -1 75
B15488
(77)
and shall include, without limitation: (1) brick, (2) wood, (3)
sandstone or other native stone, (4) tinted, texture, concrete
masonry units, and/or (5) stucco. Façade colors shall be low
reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. The use of
high intensity colors, metallic colors, black or fluorescent
colors is prohibited. Building trim and accent areas may
feature brighter colors, including primary colors, but neon
tubing shall not be an acceptable feature for building trim or
accent areas.
6) Entryway design elements and variations
should give orientation and aesthetically pleasing character
to the building. Each building shall have clearly defined,
highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than
three of the following: canopies or porticos, overhangs,
recesses/projections, arcades, raised corniced parapets over
the door, peaked roof forms, arches, outdoor patios, display
windows, architectural details such as tile work and
moldings integrated into the building structure and design,
or integral planters or wing walls that incorporate
landscaped areas and/or places for sitting.
Retirement Community:
(a) The principal use within the retirement community
shall be living units for the elderly, including Single-Family
Detached Dwellings, Single-Family Attached Dwellings
(townhouses) or Garden Apartments. In addition, common
facilities required to support the needs of persons living within the
community, including the elderly and disabled persons regardless
of age, shall be provided. Such common facilities may include the
following:
1) Dining facilities including kitchens and
accessory facilities for residents and their guests.
2) Social rooms, chapels, meeting rooms and
overnight guest rooms for guests of residents.
3) Health care facilities, including, but not limited
to, clinic, rehabilitation services, nursing care, convalescent
care, intermediate care, extended care, personal care,
laboratory and such other similar facilities required to
III -176
B15488
provide the health care needs of the residents of the
community.
4) Administrative offices used in the management
of the community and health care facilities.
5) Activity, craft and hobby shops, recreation
facilities, gift shops, personal service facilities and similar
type uses, exclusively for the residents and their guests.
6) Accessory buildings and uses customarily
incidental to the above uses.
(b) All retirement communities shall comply with the
following requirements:
1) The minimum tract size shall be twenty (20)
acres.
2) The minimum building setback from all street
rights-of-way and tract boundaries shall be fifty (50) feet.
3) The minimum lot width at the minimum
building setback line shall be three hundred (300) feet.
4) Distances between buildings shall be in
accordance with Section 321(B)(13)(d)(13).
5) The minimum setback for parking areas and
access drives from lot lines or ultimate street rights-of-way
shall be thirty (30) feet.
6) The maximum dwelling units per gross acre
shall not exceed ten (10).
7) The minimum usable open space (not
including driveway areas) devoted solely to recreational
uses and activities shall be 30% of the tract.
8) The maximum building height shall not exceed
2-1/2 stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less.
B15488
9) The maximum building coverage shall not
exceed 30%.
10) The maximum impervious coverage shall not
exceed 50 %.
NOTE: i Minimum width of a townhouse dwelling unit is
twenty-two (22) feet per unit.
ii Applies to end building only.
iii Applies only to parking lots and joint parking
areas, not to separate parking areas for
individual townhouses.
iv Usable open space shall not include front, side
and/or rear yards of an individual townhouse or
garden apartment.
v Whichever is less.
NOTE: See §324(C) of this Chapter for special standards
relating to storage sheds and other accessory uses, buildings
and structures.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of the above
requirements, the following shall also apply:
1) No more than six (6) townhouse dwelling units
shall be attached.
2) The developer should vary architectural
treatments within apartment projects, individual apartments
and between dwelling units in a townhouse development.
Variations may include those of exterior elevation, building
setbacks, provision of balconies, architectural details, pitch
of roof, exterior materials or use of color. Variety and
flexibility in design layout and arrangement of buildings,
parking areas, services, recreation areas, common open
space and planting that fully considers the particular
physical characteristics of the site and natural amenities is
highly desired.
3) A system for pedestrian circulation throughout
the development shall be provided. Paved walkways,
having a minimum width of four (4) feet, shall be provided
for access between buildings and common parking areas,
XXXII-178
B15488
open space and recreation areas and other community
facilities. Such paved walkways shall comply with all
relevant ADA requirements.
(d) Usable open space devoted to recreational use as
herein required shall be designed for use by tenants or owners of
the development and shall be improved and equipped by the
developer in accordance with plans submitted to and approved by
the Planning Commission.
(e) Garden apartment buildings shall not exceed one
hundred sixty (160) feet in length.
(f) In the event a development is designed to contain
more than one (1) permitted use, the submitted plan shall indicate
an area designed for each such use and shall designate all
requirements of this Chapter for each area.
(g) Each retirement community shall be built as a single
entity and shall be retained in single ownership. Fee simple sale of
lots shall be prohibited. All common facilities to provide for the
needs of the residents of the community shall remain in a s ingle
ownership.
(h)
follows:
Requirements for off-street parking areas shall be as
1) The minimum number of parking spaces
provided shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Section 701.
2) All access drives and parking areas shall be at
least fifteen (15) feet from any building on the lot and from
exterior lot lines.
3) All parking areas shall be designed in
accordance with requirements of §703.
4) Access drives and driveways shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of §704.
5) All parking areas that include twenty (20) or
more spaces shall be separated from view of any public
III -179
B15488
street and directly abutting single-family detached residence
by a buffer yard as described in §405(I), but with a width of
ten (10) feet. A planting plan specifying type, size and
location of existing and proposed planting material shall be
submitted with the application for approval.
6) No more than fifteen (15) contiguous spaces
shall be permitted in any continuous row without
interruption by landscaping.
7) No more than sixty (60) parking spaces shall be
accommodated in any single parking area.
8) No more than two (2) interconnected parking
areas shall be permitted without having direct access to a
public street or a private street meeting Township street
standards.
9) The total length of any single or combined
parking area shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet. The
length shall be measured from the center line of the public or
private street providing access to the furthest point of the
parking area.
10) In the case of townhouses, no more then fifty
percent (50%) of the required front yard shall be used for
parking.
11) Parking may be provided on the lot, as
carports, as an integral part of the townhouse or a joint
parking facility for a group of townhouses with such deed
restrictions as are necessary to determine ownership and
maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of
assigning charges for maintaining snow removal and
repairs.
(i) The developer shall install a storm runoff and
drainage system in accordance with acceptable engineering
practices so as to adequately drain the project site, to adequately
dispose of all runoff and drainage away from the project site, at a
rate no greater than existed prior to development. Plans for such
drainage system shall be submitted and shall be subject to approval
by the Township Engineer.
XXXII-180
B15488
(j) All provisions of existing Township ordinances and
subdivision and land development ordinances regarding storm
drainage shall be complied with.
(k) Exterior lighting shall be provided for all buildings,
accessways and parking areas and shall be so arranged as not to
reflect toward public streets and not to cause any annoyance to
building occupants or surrounding property owners or residents.
All lighting shall comply with the provisions of §513.
(1) Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be
visually screened on three (3) sides and contained in airtight,
vermin-proof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
(m) Each multiple dwelling unit shall be provided with a
minimum of two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet of lockable storage
area in an enclosed room which is not part of the dwelling unit.
(n) No area for such facilities shall exceed more than onehalf
(1/2) the floor area of any single floor.
(o) Swimming Pool.
1) No structure shall be permitted without a
filtering system utilizing chlorinated water.
2) No structure shall be permitted unless a
permanent continuous fence complying with all
requirements of the applicable building code surrounds the
facilities.
3) No structure shall be within fifty (50) feet of
any property line or easement.
4) No structure shall be constructed between the
building setback line and the street line.
5) No structure shall be permitted unless
surrounded by a paved surface extending a minimum of five
(5) feet from the water line.
XXXII-181
B15488
6) Lighting shall not create a glare on any
surrounding properties.
7) No persons other than residents and their
guests shall be permitted to use the facility.
8) One (1) parking space for each three (3)
dwelling units shall be provided in addition to the
residential requirements.
(p) Outdoor Recreation.
1) Such facilities shall be limited to tennis courts,
which are completely surrounded by a fence ten (10) feet in
height, barbecue or other cookout facilities constructed of
permanent material, yards which are completely
landscaped, garden areas for tenant use, playlots, provided
that facilities located in this area are surrounded by fencing
at least four (4) feet in height, with benches for adults;
facilities for such games as shuffleboard or basketball,
provided that a paved surface is provided and that such
facilities are located at least fifty (50) feet from any building.
2) All outdoor recreational facilities, except yards
and garden areas shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet
of any lot line.
3) No outdoor facilities, except yards, shall be
located between the building setback line and the street line.
(q) No outdoor clotheslines shall be located in any
required side yard, rear yard or between the building setback line
and the street line with permanent metal poles for support.
(r) No activities shall be permitted which create a public
nuisance and/or interfere with the use of adjacent land.
(s) No structure or building shall be permitted
specifically designed for pets.
(t) A Retirement community shall be deemed to be a
subdivision governed by the provisions and procedures of the
Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
XXXII -182
B15488
(Chapter XXVII) and the procedures established in said ordinance
for approval shall be followed.
(78) Scientific/ Electronic Instruments Manufacturing. Any
loading docks or truck maneuvering areas shall be placed in such
locations that they are the maximum distance possible from any adjacent
residential district or existing residence. The use shall be able to comply
with the noise standards of §511.
(79) Self-Storage Facility.
(a) Structures containing storage units shall be limited to
one story and shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height.
(b)
drive.
Each individual storage unit shall abut a paved access
(c) Access drives shall be at least fifteen feet (15') wide.
(d) No storage outside of individual units shall be
permitted, except for approved vehicle storage areas.
(e) No storage of unlicensed vehicles shall be permitted.
(f) Self-storage facilities hours of operation will be
limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(g) A security fence at least six feet (6') high shall
surround a self-storage facility, and access through such fence shall
be by way of an automatic gate, security guard, or similar means.
A buffer yard including a planting screen shall be provided when a
self-storage facility abuts an existing residential use or a residential
district and shall be in accordance with the standards for such, as
contained in this Chapter. Lighting shall be in accordance with the
provisions of §513.
(h) The use of individual storage units shall be restricted
to household goods and business equipment, supplies, and records.
No storage of perishable items or hazardous, explosive, or highly
flammable materials, or materials that emit noxious odors shall be
permitted. Storage units shall not be used as areas for rehearsals by
musical groups.
B15488
(i) A self-storage facility may include an office/residence
for an on-site manager/care taker as part of the principal use. This
building shall not be used solely as a residence, but must serve, in
part, as an office for the self-storage facility. The building shall be
occupied as a dwelling by only manager/care taker and his family.
(j) The individual structures comprising a self-storage
facility are exempt from the requirements of §402(B) regarding two
or more principal buildings on a lot.
(80) Shopping Centers.
(a) Shopping centers shall be in single ownership or
under a guaranteed unified management control. Shopping centers
shall consist of harmonious selection of uses and groupings of
buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and open space
and shall be subject to the following provisions
(b) Permitted Principal Uses:
1) Stores for the sale of goods at retail or the
performance of customary personal services or services
clearly incidental to retail sales.
2) Business, professional or banking offices.
3) Restaurants, or similar places serving food
and/or beverages.
4) Parking areas for transient motor vehicles, but
not for the storage of new or used motor vehicles for lease or
sale.
(c) Permitted Accessory Uses. Located on the same lot
with the permitted principal use.
1) Only the accessory uses associated with a
commercial district shall be permitted provided they are
limited to the same lot as the principal uses.
(d) Uses Permitted Only by Special Exception:
1) Gasoline service stations.
XXXII-184
B15488
2) Drive-in establishments.
3) New or used automobile or trailer sales and
repair.
4) Convenience stores.
5) Motion picture theater; however, shall not
include an adult mini-motion picture theater or an adult
theater.
(e) Area and Bulk Regulations:
1) Lot Size. The area for development shall be a
minimum of three (3) acres.
2) The maximum size of a shopping center within
a planned Business Development within the PHI District
shall be ten (10) acres.
3) The maximum size of a shopping center within
the PHC District shall be 5 acres.
4) Building Coverage. Twenty-five (25%) percent
maximum.
5) Maximum Building Height. Two (2) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less.
6) Front Yard. Sixty (60) feet minimum.
7) Side Yards. Forty (40) feet minimum each side.
8) Rear Yard. Forty (40) feet minimum.
(f) Off -Street Parking Setback. Parking shall be
permitted in the areas required for front, side and rear yard
setbacks up to a point of twenty-five (25) feet from any front, side
or rear lot line of the shopping center. All parking areas shall be
suitably paved with permanent hard-surface coverings.
XXXII-1 85
B15488
(g) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(h) Buildings of a shopping center shall be located a
minimum of three hundred (300) feet from the lot line of any
existing principally residential use and from the boundary of any
residential district.
(i) Shopping centers located within the Planned Office
Business District shall not contain any retail stores having floor
areas greater than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.
(j) Shopping centers containing retail stores or other uses
with buildings having floor areas greater than fifty thousand
(50,000) sq. ft. shall comply with the provisions for such buildings
listed under the regulations for retail stores in this section.
(k) Access and Traffic Controls. All means of ingress or
egress from the shopping center to any public street or State
highway shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any
other intersecting street or streets and shall be designed to conduct
traffic in a safe manner. The developer shall be responsible for the
purchase and erection of additional acceleration or deceleration
lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or by the Township. The applicant shall prove to
the satisfaction of the governing body that the shopping center will
include the most reasonable coordinated system of traffic access
that is possible and that left-hand turns onto arterial streets will be
minimized and carefully controlled.
(1) Interior Circulation. Interior accessways shall be
designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or
leaving the site. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Township's
satisfaction that the layout of the shopping center, as well as the
interior traffic circulation patterns, shall be such that internal traffic
congestion, vehicle conflicts and vehicle operator confusion shall be
avoided. All routes of internal traffic circulation shall be clearly
marked with appropriate signage to properly direct traffic
throughout the shopping center and to exits. Areas provided for
loading or unloading of trucks and/ or other vehicles or for
servicing of shops for rubbish collection or other services shall be
adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they may be used
XXXII-186
B15488
without blocking or interfering with interior circulation and
parking facilities. The layout of the parking lots and interior
circulation shall be such that customers shall not be required to
walk across streets, interior accessways or drives to travel between
the parked vehicles and the uses on the site.
(m) Lighting. Lighting for buildings, signs, accessways
and parking areas shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward
public streets or cause any annoyance to surrounding property
owners or residents. Lighting shall comply with the provisions of
§513.
(n) Shopping Cart Storage. Establishments furnishing
shopping cars or mobile baskets shall provide definite areas on the
site for the storage of said carts. Storage areas shall be clearly
marked and designated for the storage of shopping carts and/or
mobile baskets.
(o) Screening and Buffer Yard. All lot lines abutting
residential districts (in Spring or an adjoining municipality) shall be
screened by a buffer yard as described in §405(I).
(p) Storage of Trash or Rubbish. Storage areas for trash
and rubbish shall be completely screened and all organic rubbish
shall be contained in airtight, vermin-proof containers. No such
storage area shall be permitted within any required buffer yard..
(q) Signs. Signs shall conform to Part 6 of this Chapter.
(r) Subdivision Process. A proposed shopping center
shall be deemed to be a subdivision governed by the provisions of
the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(Chapter )0(VII).
B15488
(s) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of Part 7. Where
restaurants or other similar uses requiring a greater intensity of
parking spaces are proposed, the shopping center layout shall be
such that the number of off-street parking spaces provided
immediately adjacent to the restaurant or similar use shall comply
with the individual requirements for that use as set forth in Table
7.1. This requirement will not cause an increase to the total number
of off-street parking spaces required within the shopping center as
a whole.
(t) Individual uses within a shopping center, such as
retail stores, offices, restaurants, service stations, automobile sales
and convenience stores, shall also comply with the provisions listed
for that individual use within this Section.
(u) All activities, with the exception of parking and
loading facilities, shall be performed within a building.
(81) Single-Family Detached Dwelling.
(a) Such use located within the RHA District and not
within an open space development, shall:
1) Be a use permitted by right only where it is
located on a parent tract of less than 20 acres in area and no
more than four (4) dwelling units are proposed on the parent
tract.
2) Be a conditional use where it is located on a
parent tract equal to or greater than 20 acres in area, or
where more than four (4) dwelling units are proposed on the
parent tract.
(b) Such use located within the RC or PHT District, and
not within an open space development, shall:
1) Be a use permitted by right only where it is
located on a parent tract of less than 10 acres in area and no
more than four (4) dwelling units are proposed on the parent
tract.
B15488
2) Be a conditional use where it is located on a
parent tract equal to or greater than 10 acres in area, or
where more than four (4) dwelling units are proposed on the
parent tract.
(c) Such use located within the RS District shall:
1) Result in no more than four (4) dwelling units
on a parent tract unless they are located within an open
space development.
2) Where not located within an open space
development, be a use permitted by right only where it is
located on a parent tract of less than 10 acres in area.
3) Where not located within an open space
development, be a conditional use where it is located on a
parent tract equal to or greater than 10 acres.
(d) Such use located within the POB District shall:
1) Be within a development with a minimum
tract size of one (1) acre, but such tract may include lots with
the minimum permitted lot area.
2) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of
the governing body that any residential use will be laid out
and located such that it will be compatible with the uses and
traffic patterns of any existing or future adjacent business
development within the POB District.
(82) Single Family Detached Dwelling In Combination With a
Commercial Activity:
(a) In addition to the minimum lot area requirements
of the Zoning District within which the use is located , an
additional 5,000 sq. ft. is required.
(b) Each principal use shall be located within a
separate building complying with all provisions of this Chapter
including the provisions of §402(B) regarding two or more
principal buildings on a lot.
B15488
(c) The uses permitted under this category shall be only a
single family detached dwelling and a commercial use permitted
by right or by condition within the Zoning District where this
Chapter permits a single family detached dwelling in combination
with a commercial activity.
(d) If the proposed commercial activity is permitted by
Condition, approval of the combined uses must follow the same
approval procedure specified for the specific use.
(e) Each use must comply with the specific provision for
that use list in this Chapter.
Off-street parking requirements of Part 7 shall be met;
including the requirement that the number of parking spaces
required shall be the sum of the parking requirements for each
separate use.
(83) Single-Family to Multi-Family Conversion. Shall comply
with all applicable requirements for multi-family dwellings (single-family
attached dwellings or garden apartments).
(84) Solid Waste Disposal
(a) All solid waste disposal facilities shall be fully
permitted by the PADEP,. the U.S. EPA, and such other Federal or
State Agencies as required under applicable enabling statutes.
(b) All proposed solid waste disposal facilities shall
submit the following information for the site:
1) A description of the specific types of waste the
applicant proposes to accept for storage, treatment,
processing or disposal at the site.
2) A description of the specific technology and
procedures the applicant proposes to treat, process and
dispose of at the facility.
3) Preliminary specifications and architectural
drawings of the proposed facility.
4) An approved site or land development plan.
VOCII-190
B15488
5) A statement of qualifications to operate a waste
disposal facility.
6) A complete compliance history for any and all
facilities owned and/or operated by the Applicant, any
parent, subsidiary or cooperative owner/operator of waste
treatment, processing or disposal facilities, as per PADEP
Form HW-C, Compliance History and Instructions.
7) Any and all information supplied to the
PADEP or the U.S. EPA regarding the proposed site and/or
facility.
8) The names and addresses of any person,
corporation or partnership having any financial interest in
the construction, permitting, operation or closure of such
facility.
9) All insurance policies, closure accounts and/or
documents relating to self-insurance for the subject
application.
10) A proposed siting agreement specifying the
terms, conditions and provisions under which the facility
shall be constructed, maintained and operated, including but
not limited to the following terms, conditions and
provisions:
i) Facility Construction and Maintenance
Procedures.
ii) Operating procedures and practices, the
design of the facility and its associated activities.
iii) Monitoring procedures, practices and
standards necessary to assure and continue to
demonstrate that the facility will be operated safely.
iv) Provisions to prevent migration of waste
from the site onto adjoining properties and streets.
B15488
v) Provision to assure health, safety,
comfort, convenience and social and economic
security of the residents and businesses in the
Township.
vi) Provision to assure the continuing
economic viability of the project.
vii) Provision to assure the protection of
environmental and natural resources.
viii) Provision to provide landowners,
residents, occupants, businesses and industries for
adverse economic impacts demonstrably attributable
to the facility.
ix) Provision to compensate the Township,
the County and/or other agencies for the review costs
incurred due to the applicant's proposal.
x) Provision to provide site access to any
and all Township, County, State, Federal employees
and/or their consultants regarding review of the
proposal or the site.
(85) Stable or Riding Academy, Commercial.
(a) This includes the keeping of horses or similar animals
for use by other than a single household.
(b) The use shall be conducted on a lot no smaller than
five (5) acres in size.
(c) The use shall not operate between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(d) New barns, animal shelters, stables, feed yards or
manure storage areas shall not be located closer than five hundred
(500) feet from all dwellings except the dwelling of the owner or
lessee, or from all residential lots. Manure storage areas shall
comply with the applicable provisions listed under General
Agriculture in the Section.
VCXII-192
B15488
(e) Additions to existing barns, animal shelters, stables,
feed yards or manure storage areas shall not be located closer than
one hundred fifty (150) feet from all exterior property lines.
(f) Outdoor illumination shall comply with the
provisions of Section 513.
(86) Swimming Club.
(a) All outdoor pools shall be entirely enclosed with a
good quality chain-link or equivalent fence of not less than six (6)
feet in height.
(b) If the use will be on a lot with its own driveway(s)
onto a collector or arterial street, the lot shall have a minimum area
of one (1) acre, although such lot may include other permitted uses.
(c) Indoor facilities shall meet the same requirements as
are listed for Recreation, Nonpublic Indoor under Section 321(B).
(d) Outdoor facilities shall meet the same
requirements as are listed for Recreation, Nonpublic Outdoor
under Section 321(B).
(87) Tavern or Nightclubs
(a) Shall comply with all applicable local, state or federal
requirements, particularly State fire safety regulations. Where such
requirements conflict, the more restrictive requirement shall be
met.
(b) Any waste dumpster shall be screened from view of
adjacent streets, dwellings and residential districts and shall be
located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
boundary of any residential lot and from any residential district
and one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any
nonresidential lot.
(c) Shall provide landscaping and an all-season
groundcover on all areas not covered by buildings, structures,
parking areas or access drives.
B15488
(d) Shall provide a visual planting screen, in accordance
with §405(H) when adjacent to residential properties.
(e) The proposed used shall not adversely affect the
adjoining properties.
(f) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
nonresidential use or from any existing street right-of-way.
(g) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
residential use.
(h) Shall comply with the parking provisions of
Part 7. Required off-street parking shall take into account any
outdoor service area.
(i) Shall comply with the Noise Control provisions of
§511 and the Nuisance provision of §502.
(j) New taverns or nightclubs shall not be located within
one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of a property upon
which an existing tavern or nightclub is located.
(88) Temporary Retail Sales
(a) There may be five (5) Temporary Retail Sales events
per year per lot.
(b) Only one (1) Temporary Retail Sales event may take
place on a lot at any given time.
(c) Temporary Retail Sales events must obtain a
Temporary Sales Permit. Permit will be valid for a maximum of
five (5) consecutive days.
(d) No more than ten (10) percent of the required
parking area for the existing uses on the lot may be used for
Temporary Retail Sales.
XXXII-194
B15488
(e) Temporary Retail Sales areas shall have a maximum
sales area of eight hundred (800) square feet with a maximum
width of twenty (20) feet and a maximum depth of forty (40) feet.
(f) Temporary Retail Sales hours of operation shall be
limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(g) Temporary Retail Sales areas are limited to
designated parking areas on the lot. In the event that the lot
contains no existing parking facilities, a designated area containing
a minimum of 6 off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of Part 7 of this Chapter.
(h) Temporary Retail Sales shall not disrupt the daily
operations of the principal business located on the lot.
(i) No Temporary Retail Sales shall be located within
any designated clear sight triangle.
(j) No Temporary Retail Sales shall adversely impact the
health, safety, and welfare of the Township.
(k) Signage must comply with the provisions of this
Chapter. No signage may be displayed until a Temporary Sales
Permit is obtained.
(1) All Temporary Retail Sales shall comply with the
applicable building, fire, and electrical codes of the Township.
(89) Tennis, Exercise or Raquetball Clubs and Closely Similar
Recreational Facilities.
(a) Indoor facilities shall meet the same requirements as
are listed for Recreation, Nonpublic Indoor under Section 321(B)
(b) Outdoor facilities shall meet the same requirements as
are listed for Recreation, Nonpublic Outdoor under Section 321(B).
(c) If the use will be on a lot with its own driveways)
onto a collector or arterial street, the lot shall have a minimum area
of one (1) acre, although such lot may include other permitted uses.
B15488
(90) Timber Harvesting.
(a) These provisions shall apply when timber harvesting
or forestry is the principal use on a property , when it is a
secondary operation to another principal use and when it is
associated with a subdivision or land development of the property.
(b) Timber harvesting or forestry shall be performed only
in accordance with a Forest Management Plan or a Forest
Stewardship Plan prepared by a forester.
(c) The applicant shall submit the following plans and
reports to the Township at least sixty (60) days prior to the
scheduled start of the timber harvesting operations.
1) The Forest Management Plan or Forest
Stewardship Plan addressing ecological considerations,
forest health, soil and water resources, flora and fauna
resources, non-timber forest products, silviculture/timber
management, and infrastructure.
2) A Tree Inventory Report prepared by a
qualified horticulturist, forester, arborist, or landscape
architect addressing tree species and sizes, tree identification
numbers, diameter at breast height (DBH, typically 4.5 feet
from the ground), tree height, distance to dripline, direction
of low or unusual branching, tree condition, suitability for
preservation and maintenance recommendations.
3) An Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Plan (E&SPC Plan) utilizing Best Management Practices
(BMP's) designed to prevent erosion and sedimentation
during and after the timber harvesting operations. Evidence
that the E&SPC Plan has been approved by the Berks
County Conservation District and/or the PADEP shall be
submitted prior to the start of the timber harvest.
(d) The Forest Management Plan or Forest
Stewardship Plan shall contain, at a minimum, provisions
addressing the following :
B15488
1) Design, construction, maintenance and
retirement of the access system, including haul roads, skid
roads, skid trails and landings;
2) Design, construction and maintenance of
surface water control features and structures such as
culverts, broad-based dips, filter strips, water bars and
BMP's. Compliance with all applicable State, County and
local provisions for erosion and sediment pollution control
must be demonstrated;
3) Design, construction and maintenance of
stream and wetland crossings, demonstrating compliance
with the provisions of §517 Wetland Buffers and §518
Riparian Buffers;
4) The general location of the proposed operation
in relation to Township and State roads, including any
points of access to those roads;
(e) The Forest Management Plan or Forest Stewardship
Plan shall be accompanied by a drawing containing , at a
minimum, the following information:
1) Site location and boundaries, including both
the boundary on which the timber harvest will take place,
and the boundaries of the proposed harvest area within that
property;
2) Significant topographical features, including
those related to potential environmental problems;
3) Location of all earth disturbance activities such
as roads, landings, and surface water control measures and
structures;
4) Locations of all crossings of waters of the
Commonwealth;
5) The general location of the proposed operation
to Township and State roads, including any points of access
to those roads.
B15488
(0 Any State approval required as a result of the
proposed timbering operations, including, but not limited to,
stream or wetland encroachments, must be demonstrated prior to
the start of the timber harvest. Any permits required by State laws
and regulations shall be attached to and become part of the Forest
Management Plan or Forest Stewardship Plan.
(g) Routes using Township roads shall be approved by
the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall also set
the maximum gross weight permissible on Township roads.
(h) Pursuant to Title 75 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes, Chapter 49; and Title 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189,
the landowner an the operator shall be responsible for repairing
any damage to Township roads caused by traffic associated with
the timber harvesting operation, to the extent the damage is in
excess of that caused by normal traffic, and may be required to
furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of such damages. No mud
or debris shall remain on public roads.
(i) - Hours during which harvesting can occur are subject
to Board of Supervisors approval.
The Zoning Officer, or other party designated by the
Board of Supervisors, shall be the enforcement officer for this
Section. The Zoning Officer, or other designated party, may enter
upon the site of any timber harvesting operation before, during, or
after the operations, to confirm compliance with the Forest
Management Plan or Forest Stewardship Plan, and compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
(k) No more than thirty percent (30%) of the existing
forest land on any lot may be harvested in any calendar year.
(1) The use of diameter-based cutting methods are not
permitted unless fully justified by the forester preparing the Plan.
Diameter-based cutting methods include, but are not limited to:
Diameter Limit Cut and High Grading.
(m) Clear-cutting is only permitted when the Forestry
Bureau's reservation guidelines are followed and is fully justified
by the forester preparing the Plan as the timber harvest method
XXXII-198
B15488
necessary to improve a forest or stand that contains defective,
decayed, diseased or dying trees.
(n) All cutting, removal, skidding and transporting of
trees shall be planned and performed in such a manner as to
minimize the disturbance of other trees and vegetation.
(o) Roads, trails and landing / staging areas shall be
constructed, maintained and abandoned in such a manner as to
prevent soil erosion and damage to Watercourses.
(p) Stream crossings shall be avoided, but where deemed
necessary, crossings shall be made at a right angle and shall
incorporate appropriate culverts or bridges. Skidding across a live
or intermittent stream is prohibited except by suitable bridges and
culverts.
(q) Buffer zones of fifty (50) feet, within which no timber
harvesting operations shall take place, shall be maintained along all
streets and abutting properties.
(r) Felling or skidding across property of others is
prohibited without the express written consent of the owners of
such property. Felling or skidding across streets is prohibited.
(s) No tops or slash shall be left within fifty (50) feet of
any public street right-of-way or adjoining property, within
twenty-five (25) feet of any stream or historic or scenic trail; or
within ten (10) feet of any drainage ditch or Identified Floodplain
Area.
(t) During periods of abnormal forest fire danger, as
determined by the State Fire Marshal, the Township shall have the
right to order a suspension of all timber harvesting operations until
the danger subsides.
(u) Timber harvesting and tree removal shall comply
with all other applicable provisions of this Chapter, including, but
not limited to, wetland buffers and riparian buffers.
(v) When timber harvesting and tree removal is in
association with a subdivision or land development:
B15488
1) The reports and supplemental information
required by this Section shall be used to determine that most
appropriate layout of the development with consideration
given to trees to be preserved and the species, size and
location of replacement tree planting.
2) Timber harvesting shall not take place prior to
approval of the Final Plan of the subdivision or land
development.
3) The Erosion and Sediment pollution Control
Plan may be incorporated into the overall E&SPC Plan for
the development, provided that all requirements of this
Section are met.
4) Timber harvesting shall only be one of the
following methods: (a) improvement cutting, (b) salvage
cutting, (c) single tree selection method, or (d) other
methods, except diameter limit cut, high grading and clear
cutting, may be permitted by the Township when fully
justified by the forester preparing the plan.
5) Trees included in the Tree Inventory Report
within the area of proposed development i.e., within
proposed street right-of-way, sanitary sewer, water line,
storm sewer easements and initial building site locations
that were considered suitable for preservation with a
Suitability for Preservation rating of Excellent, Good or Fair
and were harvested or removed for development shall be
replaced with trees of the same species or an alternate
species approved by the Township Planning Commission at
the rate of one-half inch replacement diameter per one inch
diameter of harvested or removed trees. Replacement trees
shall have a minimum diameter at breast height (dbh) of
2.5 inches.
6) Trees included in the Tree Inventory Report
that are outside of the proposed development area and
considered suitable for preservation with a Suitability for
Preservation rating of Excellent, Good or Fair and were
harvested shall be replaced in accordance with the Forest
Management Plan or Forest Stewardship Plan submitted as
part of the timber harvest.
XXXII -200
B15488
7) The replacement trees shall be in addition to
any required street trees, buffer screens, and landscaping
trees and shall be located within the development area.
8) The subdivision or land development plan
shall include a Tree Preservation Plan including any trees
scheduled for preservation and measures necessary to
ensure their preservation including but not limited to the
construction of retaining walls, no fill/cut zones, no
construction traffic or stockpile of material zones, and
maintenance recommendations from the Tree Inventory
Report.
9) Any deviation from the Tree Preservation Plan
resulting in impacts to or removal of trees designated for
preservation shall require the approval by the Board of
Supervisors with recommendations from the Planning
Commission and Environmental Advisory Council.
(91) Townhouses. See "Garden Apartments and Single-Family
Attached Dwellings" in this Section.
(92) Truck Freight Terminal.
(a) There shall be a five (5) acre minimum lot size.
(b) A forty (40) foot buffer yard in accordance with the
provisions of §405(I) shall be provided along with exterior lot lines,
except for vehicular and pedestrian access areas traversing the yard
areas.
(93) Vehicle Wash Preventative Maintenance Center
(a) Services performed at a vehicle wash preventative
maintenance center are limited to those services described under
the definition of such use.
(b) Sale of gasoline and other fuels shall not be permitted
at the facility.
B15488
(c) The lot shall be graded such that process water shall
not run off across the lot, onto any adjacent lot, or onto a public
street.
(d) A grease trap shall be provided within the sewer
hook-up designed in accordance with the requirements of the
plumbing inspector.
(e) Automobile storage and waiting spaces shall be
provided at the rate of not less than five (5) spaces for each bay in a
self-service facility and not less than ten (10) spaces for each
vehicle which can be accommodated within an automatic or
semi-automatic facility. All vehicle storage and waiting areas shall
be designed and located so as not to intrude into any required yard
area. Buildings shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any
residential district or any existing residential use.
Where a vehicle wash preventative maintenance
center adjoins a residential property or a residential district, the
hours of operation shall not be earlier than 7:00 a.m., prevailing
time, nor later than 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
(g) All automobile parts are to be located within an
enclosed building. No dismantled, inoperable or unlicensed
vehicles are permitted on the premises.
(h) Full body paint spraying or body and fender work
shall not be permitted.
(i) Vehicle wash preventative maintenance centers may
also include the sale of a limited selection of food and common
household items as a clearly accessory use, provided that the total
parking requirements of Part 7 are complied with.
All provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, vibration, light or electrical interference to adjacent
lots.
(k) Yard areas adjacent to any residential lot shall be
suitable screened.
B15488
(1) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
applicable portions of the Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space
Regulations of Part 7 of this Chapter.
(94) Warehouse or Wholesale.
(a) Truck parking and loading shall meet the minimum
standards of this Part and in unique situations shall be provided
according to maximum standards of the industry for the specific
type of warehouse, wholesale or distribution activity to be
conducted.
(b) Truck or rail access and operations shall not conflict
with the convenience and safety of automobile traffic and parking.
(c) No storage of trash, garbage, refuse, explosive or
flammable materials, hazardous substances, animals, animal
carcasses or skins or similar items shall be permitted.
(d) A warehouse facility shall have a minimum lot size of
three (3) acres. A wholesale facility shall have a minimum lot size
of five (5) acres.
(95) Wildlife Sanctuary.
(a) The use shall be conducted on a lot at least ten (10)
acres in size.
(b) No animal which is dangerous or capable of causing
harm to persons or damage to property shall be permitted to roam
free.
(c) Every barn, animal shelter, stable, cage, feed yard or
manure storage area shall be at least three hundred (300) feet from
all lot lines, residential district boundaries and dwellings except the
dwelling of the owner or lessee.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 321 of Section 2)
XXXII-203
B15488
Section 322. Special Exception Uses.
(A) Purpose. Before a zoning permit is granted for any use listed as a
special exception use in this Chapter, a site plan shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. This
requirement is provided because of the considerable impact that these uses tend
to have on a community. The application and review process shall follow the
procedures included in Part 8 of this Chapter.
(B) Site Plan and Traffic Impact Study Submittals.
(1) All applicants for a special exception use shall submit the
required number of sets of site plans, as specified in Part 8 of this Chapter,
for the proposed use to the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the
application for a zoning permit.
(2) All site plans shall contain the information required in
§409(C) and shall conform to the site design guidelines included in
§409(E).
(3) A special exception application that involves any of the
following uses shall include a complete traffic impact study complying
with the provisions of §409(D):
area.
(a)
(b)
Residential: 60 or more dwelling units.
Commercial: 20,000 square feet or more of total floor
(c) Office: 30,000 square feet or more of total floor area.
(d) Industrial: 60,000 square feet or more of total floor
area or any truck terminal.
(e) Institutional: 30,000 square feet or more of total floor
area.
(f) Any use or combination of uses that would generally
result in greater than 1,500 trips per day.
B15488
(g) Where the Township Engineer certifies that there is a
clear existing severe traffic problem within close proximity to the
proposed project which will likely be significantly worsened by the
proposed project.
(C) Standards. Each special exception use shall comply with general
standards listed in Part 8 and any specific standards listed for the proposed use
in §321.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 322 of Section 2)
Section 323. Conditional Uses.
(A) Purpose. Before a zoning permit is granted for any use listed as a
conditional use in this Chapter, a site plan shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and approved by the Township Supervisors. This requirement is
provided because of the considerable impact that these uses tend to have on a
community. The application and review process shall follow the procedures
included in Part 8 of this Chapter.
(B) Site Plan and Traffic Impact Study Submittals.
(1) All applicants for a conditional use shall submit the required
number of sets of site plans, as specified in Part 8 of this Chapter, for the
proposed use to the Board of Supervisors as part of the application for a
zoning permit.
(2) All site plans shall contain the information required in
§409(C) and shall conform to the guidelines included in §409(E).
(3) A conditional use application that involves any of the uses
listed under §322(B)(3) shall include a complete traffic impact study
complying with the provisions of §409(D).
(C) Standards. Each conditional use shall comply with all general
standards listed in Part 8 and any specific standards for the proposed use listed
in §321.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 323 of Section 2)
Section 324. Accessory Uses.
B15488
(A) In General. An accessory use on the same lot and customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted by right.
(B) Yard Requirements. Every accessory use shall comply with the
yard regulations for the district in which it is located, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this Chapter.
(C) Special Standards. Each accessory use shall comply with all of the
following standards listed for that use:
(1) Accessory Uses, Buildings or Structures.
(a) No detached accessory building or structure shall be
erected in any required front, side or rear yard, except a five (5) foot
setback shall be allowed within side or rear yards that do not
directly abut a public street. No detached accessory building or
structure shall be erected within five (5) feet of any other building
or structure except as noted in subsection (d) below.
(b) No nonresidential activities shall be permitted in any
residential district except those permitted by home occupation
regulations or other provisions of this Chapter.
(c) No agricultural use or individual gardens used for
home consumption shall occupy more than one-half (1/2) of the
minimum side or rear yard required in the applicable zoning
district.
(d) An accessory building used for storage of garden
equipment, bicycles, sleds or other equipment used by the
occupants of a dwelling shall be allowed to be constructed within
two (2) feet of the side and rear property lines. However, it shall be
located to the rear of the building used as a residence. Construction
of such accessory building will comply with the Uniform
Construction Code, maximum height shall be ten (10) feet, and
maximum size shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet with the
following exception: any accessory storage building as described in
this subsection which is over one hundred fifty (150) square feet
shall be located to the rear of the building used as a residence and
shall be located no closer to a lot line than the minimum side yard
requirement for one side yard for the zoning district in which the
accessory building is located.
XXXII-206
B15488
(e) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit
other uses not mentioned so long as they are clearly accessory to
the principal permitted use of the land and do not create a threat to
the public health, safety and/or welfare of the community.
Accessory buildings to residential uses (including
private vehicle garage).
1) No such accessory building shall be located
within a required front or side yard for an accessory use.
However, such accessory building may be located within a
required rear yard in which case the minimum side yard
requirement for one side yard for the zoning district in
which the accessory building is located shall determine the
minimum building setback.
2) The cumulative floor area of accessory
buildings shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the floor
area of the principal building, except where such
computation would result in a permitted floor area of less
than six hundred (600) square feet. In such case, a
cumulative floor area of accessory structures of six hundred
(600) square feet of floor area shall be permitted.
3) Accessory structures may be located as
follows, within the other requirements of this Chapter:
i) No accessory building to the principal
residential use shall have a height greater than fifteen
(15) feet.
ii) No accessory structure to a singlefamily
dwelling unit shall have a total floor are
greater than ten percent (10%) of the total land area of
the lot.
(2) Farm Pond.
(a) The developer of any farm pond shall obtain all
required State and Federal permits.
(b) No farm pond shall be of such a size or character as to
create any dangerous, noxious or objectionable condition.
XXXII-207
B15488
(3) Fences, Walls, Hedges and Gates.
(a) Unless otherwise stated, these uses shall be allowed
in all districts.
(b) Setback from Roads. A fence, structure, wall or
continuous hedge shall be located no closer than three (3) feet of the
existing right-of-way of a public road and shall have a maximum
height of four (4) feet along all public roads. In addition, the sight
distance requirements of §405(H) shall be satisfied.
(c) Fences.
1) Any fence located in the front yard of a use in a
residential district shall have a minimum of 50% of its
surface area as transparent and shall not exceed three (3) feet
in height; except that such a fence may be installed to a
height of four (4) feet when 75% of its surface area is
transparent.
2) Fences shall be located no closer than six (6)
inches to any side or rear lot line, unless otherwise agreed
upon in writing between two (2) adjoining property owners,
in which case the fence may be located closer than six (6)
inches including the location of the fence on the side or rear
lot line.
3) In a residential district, a fence located
anywhere except the front yard of a use may have a height
of up to six (6) feet and may be opaque.
4) In all other districts, fences may have a
maximum height of nine (9) feet.
5) A fence of up to ten (10) feet may be allowed in
a rear yard in any district for the sole purpose of enclosing a
court for tennis or similar sports. Such fence shall be located
no closer than five (5) feet to any property line or street
right-of-way.
XXXII-208
B15488
(d) Walls.
1) Any walls should be architecturally compatible
with the structure and the landscape.
2) Any wall in the front yard of a use in a district
shall be a special exception, permitted only if compatible
with the character of the area.
3) Walls may be one (1) foot in height for every
two (2) feet they are set back from a property line, up to a
maximum height of six (6) feet.
(e) Hedges. Continuous hedges may have a maximum
height of three (3) feet in any front yard.
Gates. All fences, walls or continuous hedges more
than three (3) feet in height shall be equipped with gates or other
suitable passageways at intervals of not more than two hundred
fifty (250) feet.
(4) Heliport.
(a) The Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation within the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall find the landing
area safe and acceptable for licensing a heliport.
(b) The Federal Aviation Administration shall have
granted approval for the use of the air space.
(5) Holiday Tree Sales. When operated as an accessory use to a
principal use on the same lot, holiday tree sales shall comply with all
provisions listed for such use under §321.
(6) Home Occupation.
(a) In any residential district, all dwelling units with
direct access to a public street, except apartment units, may be used
for the practice of a home occupation, provided such occupation is
clearly incidental or secondary to the use of the property as a
residence, and further provided that such use of the dwelling does
not change the character thereof or have any exterior evidence of
B15488
such accessory use other than a small nameplate as provided in this
Chapter.
(b) Standards:
1) Home occupation shall be limited to the
involvement on the premises of not more than two (2)
persons at any one (1) time.
2) The number of off-street parking spaces shall
comply with the requirements for a home occupation listed
in Table 7.1, in addition to those required for the residence
units. All parking spaces shall be located outside of the
street right-of-way.
3) Unless otherwise permitted in this Section,
home occupations shall not occupy more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total floor area of the dwelling unit.
4) Home occupations shall be subject to the
following limitations:
i) No emission of unpleasant gases or
other odorous matter shall be permitted.
ii) No emissions of noxious, toxic or
corrosive gases or fumes injurious to persons,
property or vegetation shall be permitted.
iii) No glare and heat from any home
occupation shall be permitted.
iv) No discharge is permitted into a
reservoir, sewage or storm disposal system, stream,
open body of water or into the ground, of any
materials in such a way or of such nature or
temperature as could contaminate any water supply,
or damage or be detrimental to any sewage system or
any sewage treatment process or otherwise could
cause the emission of dangerous objectionable
elements.
B15488
v) No vibration perceptible beyond the
dwelling unit or building in which the home
occupation is conducted shall be permitted.
vi) No noise shall be audible beyond the
dwelling unit or building in which the home
occupation is conducted whichever shall be the
smaller, which exceeds the average intensity of street
traffic at the front lot line. Objectionable noises due to
intermittence, beat, frequency or shrillness shall be
muffled.
vii) No emission of any smoke shall be
permitted.
viii) Electric or electronic devices shall be
shielded in such a manner as not to interfere with
radio or television reception or transmission of any
kind.
ix) No storage of materials or products in
open areas shall be permitted.
x) No retail sales shall be permitted except
for home produced goods.
xi) No material designed for use as an
explosive shall be reproduced or stored on the
premises.
(c) Additional standards for a day care center as a home
occupation. In addition to the general home occupation standards
listed above, a day care center operating as a home occupation shall
comply with the following specific standards.
1) The use shall comply with all local, State,
Federal and County requirements.
2) The use may occupy more than twenty-five
(25) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit.
XXXII-21 1
B15488
(7)
3) The use shall serve no more than twelve (12)
children, including members of the family residing in the
dwelling.
4) With the exception of the outdoor activity area,
the operation of the day care center shall take place within
the dwelling and shall not be located within any accessory
structure.
5) There shall be a minimum of sixty (60) square
feet of space per child in the outdoor activity area, which
area shall be free of hazards and properly fenced with a
fence having a minimum height of four (4) feet. No outdoor
activity area shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any lot
line.
6) The day care center shall be located and
operated in a manner that reduces or eliminates potential
hazards to the children being cared for at the facility. It shall
be the responsibility of the owner to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Building Code Official, full compliance
with this provision.
7) With the exception of minimum lot size, a day
care center operating as a home occupation that serves more
than five (5) children that are not members of the family
residing hi the dwelling shall comply with all provisions
listed under §321 for a day care center as a principal use.
This shall include provisions relating to outdoor activity
areas, indoor floor space and air space, off-street parking
and any applicable County, State or Federal regulations.
Interior Service and Convenience Uses.
(a) Interior Service and Convenience Uses shall be
permitted as an accessory use, where specified, and only within a
building housing one of the following principal uses: business
office, government office, financial establishment, hospital/medical
center, medical office/medical clinic, professional office, college or
university, other similar commercial uses, and any industrial use.
III -212
B15488
(b) All interior service and convenience uses shall not
occupy more than a total of ten percent (10%) of the total floor area
of the building in which they are located.
(c) Public entrances to interior service and convenience
uses shall be from the interior of the building.
(d) No public entrance to any interior service or
convenience use shall be located less than thirty (30) feet from an
exterior exit to the building that is used by the public for ingress
and egress.
(e) Exterior signage shall not be permitted for any service
and convenience use.
(f) An employee nursery/ day care functioning as an
interior service and convenience use shall comply with. all
provisions specified for a nursery/ day care functioning as a
principal use.
(8) Keeping Animals or Fowl.
(a) See regulations on the following uses that are not
defined as "the Keeping of Animals or Fowl," "Kennels,"
"Agriculture, general," "Animal Husbandry" and "Stables" in §321
and the appropriate definitions in Part 2.
(b) The keeping of animals or fowl shall comply with the
performance standards of Part 5 and shall not result in a threat to
the public health or safety.
(c) A lot involving a single-family dwelling with a lot
size of less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or any
multifamily dwelling unit shall include the keeping of not more
than five (5) cats or dogs of more than six (6) months of age.
(d) The keeping of animals or fowl within the LDS, MDS,
SS, U, NC, and PHC Districts shall not include the keeping of farm
animals.
(9) Noncommercial Swimming Pool. A noncommercial
swimming pool designed to contain a water depth of twenty-four (24)
B15488
inches or more shall not be located, constructed or maintained on any lot
or land area except in conformity with the following requirements:
(a) Permit. A building permit shall be required to locate,
construct or maintain a noncommercial swimming pool.
(b) Location. Such pool shall be located in a rear or side
yard only. No above or inground pool shall be located within
fifteen (15) feet of a side or rear lot line, within ten (10) feet of any
overhead wires, over any onlot sewage disposal field or system or
five (5) feet from any other structure.
(c) Fence. Every inground noncommercial swimming
pool shall be entirely enclosed with a fence complying with all
provisions of the applicable building code. Where required by the
applicable building code, aboveground pools shall also be entirely
enclosed with an appropriate fence. Aboveground pools not
requiring a fence shall require a self-closing and self-latching gate
to any pool access platform.
(d) Water. If the water for such pool is supplied from a
private well, there shall be no cross-connection with the public
water supply system. If the water from such pool is supplied from
the public water supply system, the inlet shall be above the
overflow level of said pool.
(e) Drainage. The draining of all pools shall comply with
all applicable local and state regulations.
(10) No-Impact Home-Based Business. The business or
commercial activity comprising the no-impact home-based business must
satisfy the following requirements:
(a) The business activity shall be compatible with the
residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
(b) The business shall employ no employees other than
family members residing in the dwelling.
(c) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and
no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
XXXII-214
B15488
(d) There shall be no outside appearance of a business
use, including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(e) The business activity may not use any equipment or
process which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or
electrical or electronic interference, including interference with
radio or television reception, which is detectable in the
neighborhood.
(1) The business activity may not generate any solid
waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not
normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
(g) The business activity shall be conducted only within
the dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable
floor area.
(h) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
(i) Approval of such a use shall not supersede any deed
restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the use of land, nor
any master deed, by-law or other document applicable to a
common interest ownership community.
(11) Open Air Retail Sales of Agricultural Products, as an
accessory use.
(a) Shall be permitted solely as an accessory use to a
principal agricultural use.
(b) Any permanent structure shall be subject to all area,
bulk, and setback requirements of the zoning district within which
it is located.
(c) Temporary structures shall be dismantled at the end
of the growing season. Any structure in place for more than six (6)
months, whether consecutively or in aggregate, during any
calendar year shall be deemed a permanent structure and shall be
regulated as such.
(d) Temporary structures must be secure and
structurally sound so as not to create a hazard either to customers
or the general public.
XXXII-2l5
B15488
(e) Temporary structures shall be set back at least twenty
(20) feet from the road right-of-way.
Signs for temporary structures shall be in
conformance with the regulations Part 6 of this Chapter.
(g) Safe off-street parking shall be provided for
customers at temporary structures.
(h) Parking shall be provided in compliance with the
provisions of Part 7.
(12) Recreational Vehicle Storage. See applicable provision of the
Township of Spring Motor Vehicles and Traffic Chapter (Ord. 179,
adopted December 10, 1984, as amended) (Part 3 of Chapter XIX of the
Codification of Ordinances of the Township of Spring).
(13) Seasonal Roadside Produce Market. Roadside produce
markets for the sale of dairy, farm, greenhouse or nursery products are
permitted with the following restrictions:
(a) Size. The area where products are displayed or sold
shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet.
(b) Location. The stand shall be at least fifty (50) feet
from an intersection and shall be at least thirty (30) feet from the
existing right-of-way line.
(c) Removal in Off-Season. The stand shall be portable,
shall be maintained in good condition and shall be removed during
seasons when products are not being offered for sale, except as is
allowed below.
(d) A stand may remain in place through the year
without being removed if it would be located a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet from the existing right-of-way line.
(e) Parking. Parking for vehicles shall be provided
outside of the existing street right-of-way and in compliance with
the provisions of Part 7. Parking shall be provided for a minimum
of four (4) vehicles.
B15488
(f) A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all items offered
for sale shall have been produced on the property on which they
are offered for sale.
(14) Solar Energy System. No solar energy system shall deny
solar access of adjacent lots.
(15) Temporary Retail Sales. When operated as an accessory use
to a principal use on the same lot, temporary retail sales shall comply with
all provisions listed for such use under §321.
(16) Tennis Court.
(a) A tennis court shall not be located in front of the
principal building.
(b) A tennis court shall not be located over a drainage
field of a sewage disposal system.
(c) No tennis court shall be located within fifteen (15) feet
of the lot line of an abutting single-family detached dwelling.
(17) Wind Generated Energy Systems (Including Windmills).
(a) All windmills, except single pole structures, shall be
enclosed by a fence at least four (4) feet in height which is located at least
five (5) feet from the base of such windmill.
(b) No windmill shall be permitted the design of which
permits any vane, sail or rotor blade to pass within ten (10) feet of the
ground.
(c) All electrical wiring leading from a windmill shall be
located underground.
(d) Windmills may be located within the required rear or
side yards.
(e) The vibration control standards of §512 of this
Chapter shall be complied with.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 324 of Section 2)
B15488
Part 4
General Regulations
Section 401. Limit of One Principal Use. No more than one (1) principal use
shall be permitted on a lot, unless the provisions of the relevant zoning district permit a
combination of permitted uses or a multiple use building, or unless it is otherwise
permitted by this Chapter. See §402(B) and (C). (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Section 401 of Section 2)
Section 402. Principal Buildings.
(A) Street Frontage Required. Every principal building shall be built
upon a lot with frontage upon a public or private street improved to meet
Township standards or for which such improvements have been insured by the
posting of a performance guarantee pursuant to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII), excepting however, those principal
buildings specifically approved by the Board of Supervisors.
shall:
(B) Two or More on a Lot. Two (2) or more principal buildings on a lot
(1) Conform to all requirements of this Chapter as if each
building were on a separate lot, including the minimum lot size.
(2) Conform to the standards, improvements and procedures
required for a land development by the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII).
(C) Multiple Occupancy.
(1) Occupancy of a principal commercial or industrial building
by more than one (1) use of similar type is specifically allowed, provided
that all other requirements of this Chapter are satisfied.
(2) Occupancy of a principal building by more than one (1) use
of dissimilar type is only allowed where the provisions of the specific
Zoning District permit a multiple-use building and where all other
requirements of this Chapter are satisfied
XXXII -218
B15488
(3) Each separate use within a principal building shall be
required to apply for separate zoning and occupancy permits, through the
appropriate required processes.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 402 of Section 2)
Section 403. Maximum Height of Buildings. No building shall exceed the
maximum building height standard specified in the relevant district regulations of this
Chapter, except that such standard shall not apply to farm structures, silos, water
towers, communication towers, church spires, belfries, solar energy collectors (and
equipment used for the mounting or operation of such collectors), windmills, chimneys
or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy. Although exempted from structural height limitations,
these structures shall not diminish the solar access of other properties. (Ordinance No.
335, March 26, 2007, Section 403 of Section 2)
Section 404. Buildings to Have Access. Every building hereafter erected or
moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or a private street approved by the
governing body and all buildings shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and
convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 404 of Section 2)
Yards.
Section 405. Special Lot and Yard Requirements/Sight Distances and Buffer
(A) In General. The lot or yard requirements for any new building or
use shall not include any part of a lot that is required by any other building or
use to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
(B) Corner Lots.
(1) Every lot at the corner of two (2) streets shall have, facing
each street, a yard equal to the front yard requirement. This shall not
apply to existing alleys.
(2) Of the remaining yards on a corner lot, the Zoning Officer
shall determine which are rear and side yards. This determination shall
be based upon factors including the location and orientation of the
principal structure, the configuration of the lot and the location of
vehicular access to the lot.
XXXII-219
B15488
(3) The minimum rear yard requirement for a corner lot shall be
five (5) feet less than the minimum rear yard requirement listed for the
district within which the corner lot is located.
(4) Where an existing lot of record is changed into a corner lot
as a the result of the subdivision or land development of an adjacent tract
of land, the front yard requirement shall apply only along the street upon
which the lot originally fronted.
(C) Yard Requirements of Subdivisions Located Within Two (2) or
More Residential Zoning Districts.
(1) When any subdivision of land is located within two (2) or
more residential zoning districts, as established by the official zoning map
of this Chapter, any subdivider thereof shall have the right to request from
the governing body permission to have the said subdivision, in its entirety
regulated as to side, rear and front yard requirements of any one (1) of the
residential zoning districts within which the said subdivision is located.
(2) Any such request shall be submitted to the governing body
in writing. The acceptance or rejection of the said request by the
governing body, after receiving the written comments of the Planning
Commission of the Township concerning the said request, shall be
forwarded, in writing, to the subdivider.
(3) The governing body shall have the right to impose
reasonable conditions and safeguards in granting any such request as
deemed necessary by the governing body to implement this Chapter,
including any amendments thereto.
(D) Lot Area and Lot Width for Lots Not Served With Public Water
and/ or Sanitary Sewers. Where a lot is not served by a public water supply
and/or sanitary sewerage system and the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) or other State or local ordinance in
force required higher standard for lot area or lot width than this Chapter, the
more restricted regulations of such other ordinance or regulation shall apply.
(E) Yard Exceptions.
(1) When an unimproved lot that is not a corner lot is situated
between two improved lots with front yard dimensions less than those
required for the district, the front yard required may be a depth equal to
the average of the two (2) adjoining lots.
MI1-220
B 1 5488
(2) Where a principal structure, which is located on a through
lot abutting an arterial or collector street, fronts on a parallel street that is
not an arterial or collector and gains vehicular access from such street, the
yard abutting the arterial or collector street shall be considered a rear
yard. Such lot shall contain a 20-foot wide buffer yard, including planting
screen, in accordance with the provisions of §405(1). Where a lot exists at
the time of adoption of this Chapter and contains no such buffer yard, a
planting screen shall not be required, but any principal or accessory
structure shall be located as though such buffer yard existed.
(3) Two-family semidetached dwellings and single-family
attached dwellings shall have no side yard requirement along the
common lot lines upon which the vertical walls separating dwelling units
are located. All walls constructed along the common lot line shall be fire
walls unless they are located a minimum of four (4) feet from the common
lot line. All applicable building code provisions pertaining to common lot
lines shall apply.
(F) Projections Into Required Yards.
(1) The following projections shall be permitted into required
yards and shall not be considered in the determination of yard
requirements or building coverage.
(a) Terraces, patios, decks or porches, whether roofed or
not, but not otherwise enclosed by one or more doors, windows,
screens, walls and/or siding of any kind, size or dimension
provided that such terraces, patios, decks or porches shall not
project into the required side yard and/or yards, nor shall the same
project more than five (5) feet into the required front yard and/or
yards, nor shall the same project into the required rear yard more
than one-third (1/3) of the required rear yard. Unless otherwise
permitted under §405(F)(1)(b) below, no such projection shall be
permitted within four (4) feet of any required side lot lines.
(b) In the case of a two-family semidetached dwelling or
a single-family attached dwelling, terraces, patios, decks or porches
may be located closer than four (4) feet to an internal side lot line
when the applicant has demonstrated to the Township's
satisfaction the right to encroach upon the adjoining property in
order to construct and maintain such terraces, patios, decks or
porches. Any agreements, easements or similar documents
III -22l
B15488
granting such rights shall "run with the land" and be recorded in
the office of the Berks County Recorder of Deeds.
(c) Projected Architectural Features. Bay windows,
cornices, eaves, fireplaces, chimneys, windowsills or other
architectural features, provided that any single feature does not
exceed five (5) square feet in external area.
(d) Lampposts, walkways, driveways, retaining walls
and steps shall be permitted within any required yard.
(e) Uncovered stairs, landings, and handicap ramps,
provided such stairs, landings or ramps do not exceed three (3) feet
six (6) inches in height.
(f) Open balconies provided such balconies are not
supported on the ground and do not project more the five (5) feet
into any required yard nor closer than three (3) feet to any adjacent
lot lines.
(G) Exceptions to Minimum Lot Areas and Lot Widths.
(1) Nonconforming Lots. See §408.
(2) Irregularly Shaped Lots. In the case of irregularly shaped
lots, the minimum lot width specified in the district shall be measured at
the minimum required front yard, provided that in no case shall the lot
frontage measure at the street right-of-way line be less than fifty percent
(50%) of the minimum lot width (see Sketch A).
X=AT LEAST
50% OF REQUIRED
LOT WIDTH
B15488
(H) Traffic Visibility Across Corners.
(1) Sight lines at Intersection of Streets.
(a) A triangular area as defined in §405(H)(1)(c) of this
Part shall be graded and shall be free of sight obstructions so that
vision between a height of from two (2) feet to ten (10) feet above
the centerline grades of the intersecting streets is not obscured.
(b) By means of deed restriction, lease restriction or plan
amendment (whichever method is applicable), vegetation shall not
be planted or allowed to grow in such a mariner as to obscure
vision between a height of from two (2) feet to ten (10) feet above
the centerline grades of the intersecting streets within the triangular
area defined in §405(H)(1)(c) of this Part.
(c) Such triangular area shall be bounded by the
intersecting street centerlines and a diagonal connecting two (2)
points, one which is at each end of the centerline of each street:
1) one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
intersection of such street centerlines, if either street is an
arterial street;
2) one hundred (100) feet from the intersection of
such street centerlines if either street is a collector street;
3) seventy-five (75) feet from the intersection of
such street centerlines, if both streets are local streets.
B15488
(2) Sight lines at Intersections of Driveways or Accessways with
Streets.
(a) A triangular area as defined in §405(H)(1)(c) of this
Part shall be graded and shall be free of sight obstructions so that
vision between a height of from two (2) feet to ten (10) feet above
the centerline grades of the intersecting driveway, accessway or
streets is not obscured.
(b) By means of deed restriction, lease restriction or plan
amendment (whichever method is applicable), vegetation shall not
be planted or allowed to grow in such a manner so as to obscure
vision between a height of from two (2) feet to ten (10) feet above
the centerline grades of the intersecting driveway, accessway or
streets within the triangular area defined in §405(H)(2)(c) of this
Part.
(c) Such triangular area shall be bounded by the
intersecting driveway, accessway or street centerlines and a
diagonal connecting two (2) points, one which is at each end of the
centerline of each driveway, accessway or street thirty (30) feet
from the intersection of such centerlines.
3.3*
(I) Buffer Yards. Any nonresidential use which directly abuts any
existing residential use shall provide buffer yards. Where specified elsewhere in
this Chapter, certain nonresidential uses which directly abut a residential district
shall also provide buffer yards. Such buffer yards shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) Size, Location.
(a) A twenty (20) foot buffer yard shall be required,
unless otherwise indicated in this Chapter.
XDOCII-224
B15488
(b) Where a buffer yard is required along a property or
lot line, it shall be measured from said property or lot line. Where a
buffer yard is required along a district boundary line, it shall be
measured from the district boundary line or from the street rightof-
way line (where a street serves as the district boundary line).
Buffer yards shall not be within an existing or future street right-ofway
and shall be in addition to that right-of-way.
(c) The buffer yard may include land within a required
front, side or rear yard, provided the larger yard requirement shall
apply in case of conflict.
(2) Characteristics.
(a) The buffer yard shall be a continuous, pervious,
landscaped area consisting of trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover.
(b) All buffer yards shall be free of structures (other than
fences serving as screens), manufacturing or processing activities,
sewage systems, parking areas or storage of materials.
(c) No driveways or streets shall be permitted in the
buffer yards except at points of ingress or egress.
(d) Maintenance. In all buffer yards, all areas not covered
by trees or bushes shall be maintained with an all-season
groundcover, such as grass. All grass shall be regularly mowed,
with a height not to exceed ten (10) inches. The buffer yard shall be
kept free of debris or rubbish.
(3) Planting Screen or Fence.
(a) Each buffer yard shall include a planting screen or a
fence extending the full length of the buffer yard to serve as a
barrier to visibility, airborne particles, glare and noise. Such
planting screen shall consist of trees, shrubs and/ or other plant
materials.
(b) Each planting screen shall be in accordance with the
following requirements:
B15488
1) The amount and type of plant material
required shall be determined by the intensity of the
proposed land use.
2) Plant materials used in the planting screen
shall be of such species and size as will produce, with three
(3) years, a year-round visual screen of at least eight (8) feet
in height.
3) The planting screen shall be permanently
maintained by the landowner and any plant material which
does not live shall be replaced within one (1) year.
4) The planting screen shall be so placed that at
maturity it will be at least three (3) feet from any street or
property line.
5) The planting screen shall be broken only at
points of vehicular or pedestrian access and shall comply
with §405(C).
(c) In circumstances where it is impractical for a planting
screen to meet all the requirements of this Section or would create
an undue hardship, the Zoning Hearing Board may modify the
requirements or approve acceptable alternatives which shall satisfy
the spirit, objectives and intent of the screen requirements.
(d) A fence, when erected as a screen, shall be not less
than eight (8) feet in height and shall be placed no closer than three
(3) feet from any street or property line. In all other respects such
fence shall comply with the provisions of §324.
(e) A planting screen or fence shall have openings or
breaks only at points of vehicular or pedestrian access.
(1) Planting Screens shall be of the following intensities
based upon the proposed land use:
B15488
Proposed Land Use Intensity of Planting
Screen Required*
Recreational Low
Office/ Institutional Medium
Multifamily Residential Medium
Commercial/Industrial High
Mobile Home Parks High
*Where it is determined by the Township that certain aspects of a
proposed use should be provided with a planting screen of greater
intensity than herein specified, such a screen shall be provided to
the extent necessary to screen the particular aspect from the
adjoining property.
(g) For every fifty (50) linear feet of buffer yard, the
following minimum quantities and types of plant materials shall be
required within the planting screen:
1) Low Intensity: one (1) canopy tree and two
ornamental trees. One (1) evergreen may be substituted for
one of the required ornamental trees.
2) Medium Intensity: one (1) canopy tree, two (2)
evergreen trees, and five (5) shrubs.
3) High Intensity: an average of one (1)
evergreen tree placed for each eight linear feet of buffer
yard, with the trees staggered so that the trunk of each tree is
at least twelve (12) feet diagonally away from each other tree
trunk. In addition, an average of two (2) ornamental trees
and one (1) canopy tree shall be provided. Alternative
plantings that would create a complete, year round visual
screen may be permitted.
4) Planting screens may be combined with an
earthen berm. The majority of the plantings shall be placed
on the outside slope of the berm. Any planting placed at the
top of the berm must be demonstrated to receive adequate
moisture.
B15488
(h) The required plant materials shall be distributed over
the length and width of the buffer yard. Plantings may be arranged
symmetrically (formal) or asymmetrically (informal) and may be
grouped to form plant clusters. Informal groupings that reflect the
natural character of the area are encouraged.
(i) Where an applicant proposes that existing vegetation
serve as the required planting screen, the buffer yard shall be a
minimum of fifty (50) in width and, if high intensity planting
screens are required, the applicant must demonstrate that the
existing vegetation would create, and would be maintained as, a
complete, year-round visual screen.
(j) A variety of plant species is required as follows:
Number of Trees
Min. Number
of Tree Max. Percentage of Any
Species One Species
0 to 5 1 100
6 to 15 2 60
16 to 30 3 40
31 to 50 4 30
51 and over 6 20
(k) Existing topographic conditions such as
embankments and berms may be incorporated into the required
buffer yards.
(4) Plans.
(a) Prior to the issuance of any zoning permit, the
applicant shall submit plans showing:
1) The location and arrangement of each buffer
yard.
2) The placement, species and size of all plant
materials.
3) The placement, size, materials and type of all
fences to be placed in such buffer yard.
B15488
4) The location and size of any proposed or
existing earthen berms to be utilized.
(b) Such plans shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer to
ascertain that the plans are in conformance with the terms of this
Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 405 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 354, March 10, 2008, Section 3)
Section 406. Establishment of Ultimate Right-of-Way Widths for Streets.
(A) Purpose. Minimum ultimate right-of-way widths are established
for streets where the existing right-of-way is less than that indicated in §406(C)
for the particular class of street.
(B) Measurement.
(1) The ultimate right-of-way shall be measured from the center
line of the existing streets, with one-half (1/2) of the total width provided
on each side of the center line.
(2) All front yards and other appropriate yards shall be
measured from the ultimate right-of-way line, unless otherwise
specifically stated.
(3) The specific classification of each road is shown on the
official street classification map which is hereby incorporated into and
made a part of this Chapter.
B15488
(C) Minimum Widths. Minimum ultimate rights-of-way are as follows:
Street Classification Minimum Future Right-of-Way
Expressway 120'
Arterial Street 80'
Collector Street 60'
Local Street 53'*
(Greater width may be required in
accordance with use intended)
*unless otherwise specified on the street classification map.
(D) Newly Created Streets. For any newly built street, the Township
Engineer shall designate the functional classification of the street. These
functions should then periodically be added to the official street classification
map. The Township Engineer shall base such classification on the function the
street is expected to serve in the long-term development of the Township.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 406 of Section 2)
Section 407. Frontage Development Along Arterial and Collector Streets. In
order to encourage the sound development of frontage along arterial and collector
streets (as defined on the official street classification map) and to minimize traffic
congestion and hazard, the following special provisions shall apply:
(A) Off-Street Parking and Loading. All area for off-street parking, offstreet
loading and unloading and the storage or movement of motor vehicles
shall comply with all requirements of Part 7.
(B) Access. Access drives, driveways and accessways shall be in
accordance with the provisions of §704.
(C) Large Developments. In the case of any development intended to
involve more than five (5) commercial or industrial buildings or lots, or more
than ten (10) acres of commercial, industrial, garden apartment or townhouse
uses, each principal building shall front upon a marginal access street, service
road, common parking lot or similar area and not directly upon a public street,
unless the Board of Supervisors determines that strict compliance would not be
possible because of the peculiar characteristics of the site and the uses.
)ODCII-230
B15488
(D) Vehicular Access onto Arterial or Collector Streets. Direct
vehicular access from individual lots abutting arterial or collector streets shall be
strongly discouraged. Where possible, lots that abut arterial or collector streets
shall be configured as through lots, where vehicular access is obtained from a
parallel street that is not an arterial or collector. See the section of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter )0(VII) on "Restriction
of Access."
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 407 of Section 2)
Section 408. Nonconformities.
(A) Statement of Intent.
(1) Within the zoning districts established by this Chapter or
subsequent amendments thereto, there exists or will exist certain
nonconformities which, if lawful before this Chapter was passed or
amended, may be continued, subject to certain limitations, although such
nonconformities would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this Chapter or subsequent amendments thereto.
(2) To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Chapter shall be
deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of
any building or structure on which actual construction was lawfully
begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Chapter and on which actual building construction has been diligently
carried on.
(B) Nonconforming Lots of Record.
(1) Structures and customary accessory buildings may be
erected in any district on any lot of record at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this Chapter, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this Chapter. This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and
requirements, other than those applying to area or width, or both, shall
conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of
the Zoning Hearing Board.
B15488
(2) If two (2) or more lots, combination of lots and portion of
lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time
of passage or amendment of this Chapter, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements established for lot width and/or area, the land
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of
this Chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a
manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and/or area
requirements established by this Chapter, nor shall any division of any
parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the
requirements stated in this Chapter. This Section shall not apply for a
period of five (5) years to an approved subdivision or development plan,
whether preliminary or final.
(C) Nonconforming Uses of Land. Lawful uses of land, which at the
effective date of this Chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto
become nonconforming and where such use involves no individual structure or
building with a replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may
be continued by the present or any subsequent owner so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Extension. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was owned
or leased by the user at the effective date of adoption of such amendment
of this Chapter.
(2) Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been
discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, such use
shall not thereafter be reestablished unless a Certificate of Intention as per
§609 of State Act 247 of 1968 has been filed. Any future use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
(3) Changes or Moving of Use. A nonconforming use, if
changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed back to any
nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may, by special exception, be
changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Zoning Hearing
Board shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more
appropriate in the zoning district than the existing nonconforming use.
(4) Additional Structures or Buildings. No additional structures
or buildings not conforming to the requirements of this Chapter shall be
erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
B15488
(D) Nonconforming Structures or Buildings. Structures or buildings
which at the effective date of this Chapter or subsequent amendments thereto
become nonconforming by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height,
yards, location on the lot or other requirements concerning the building or
structure, may be continued to be used so long as such structure or building
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Enlargement. No such nonconforming structure or building
may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity,
but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease it
nonconformity.
(2) Damage or Destruction. A nonconforming structure which
is destroyed or partially destroyed by fire, explosion or by any means to
an extent of seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the market value
thereof immediately prior to such damage or destruction shall not be
repaired or restored to a nonconforming status, but shall be reconstructed
and used only in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
(3) Moving of Structure or Building. No nonconforming
structure or building shall be, for any reason, moved for any distance
unless it shall thereafter conform to the zoning regulations for the district
in which it is located after it is moved.
(E) Nonconforming Uses of Structures or Buildings. Lawful uses of
structures or buildings which at the effective date of this Chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments thereto become nonconforming, may be continued by
the present or any subsequent owner so long as such use remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Extension. A nonconforming use may be extended
throughout any part of an existing structure or building or a new
extension may be constructed, provided that any structural alterations,
extensions or additions shall comply with all provisions of this Chapter
with respect to height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements for
the Zoning District in which the structure or building is located.
However, such extension of a nonconforming use shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the gross floor area occupied by said nonconforming use
at the time such nonconforming use became nonconforming.
(2) Change of Use. A nonconforming use of a structure or
building, if changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed
back to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use of a structure or
B15488
building may, by special exception, be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the Zoning Hearing Board shall find that the proposed
use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in the zoning district than
the existing nonconforming use.
(3) Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use of a
structure or building or portion thereof has been discontinued or
abandoned for eighteen (18) consecutive months, such structure or
building or portion thereof shall not thereafter be reestablished unless a
Certificate of Intention as per §609 of State Act 247 of 1968 has been filed.
Any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
(4) Destruction. Removal or destruction of the structure or
building in which a nonconforming use is located shall eliminate the use
of the land upon which the structure or building was erected for a
nonconforming use. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is
defined as damage to an extent of seventy-five percent (75%) or more of
the market value of the structure or building immediately prior to such
damage or destruction. However, if construction begins within twelve
(12) months after destruction or partial destruction is begun, the same
nonconforming use may be reestablished. The Zoning Hearing Board
may, by special exception, authorize another equally appropriate or more
appropriate use to be reestablished.
(F) Unsafe or Unlawful Structures or Buildings. If a nonconforming
structure or building or portions thereof containing a nonconforming use
becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs or maintenance,
and is declared by the Board of Supervisors, upon the advice of the Township
codes enforcement staff or the Township Engineer, to be unsafe or unlawful by
reason of physical condition, such structure or building shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
(G) Permitted Special Exception Uses Not Nonconforming Uses. Any
use which is permitted as a special exception in a zoning district under the terms
of this Chapter (other than a change through Zoning Hearing Board action from
one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use) shall not be deemed a
nonconforming use in such Zoning District, but shall without further action be
considered a conforming use.
(H) Registration of Nonconforming Uses and Structures or Buildings.
To facilitate the administration of this Chapter, it shall be the duty of the Zoning
Officer to prepare and maintain an accurate listing of all nonconforming uses,
XXXII -234
B15488
structures and buildings. Such a listing shall be a matter of public record and
shall constitute sufficient notice of the nonconforming status of said property and
the limitations therein expressed and implied to any transferee acquiring any
right to use or own such property.
(I) Certificate of Intention.
(1) A Certificate of Intention shall be required in all instances
where a nonconforming use of land or nonconforming use of a structure
or building, is discontinued if the owner or operator of such uses desires
to maintain such a nonconforming use
(2) The Zoning Officer shall maintain proper forms for the
registration of any Certificate of Intention. It shall be incumbent upon the
owner or applicant to file such a form with the Zoning Officer. The filing
of such form shall be considered a ministerial duty of the Zoning Officer,
who shall not refuse to accept the completed form.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall maintain a separate file for all
Certificates of Intention.
(4) Each Certificate of Intention shall be valid for three (3) years.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 408 of Section 2)
Section 409. Site Plan Review.
(A) Scope.
(1) Before a zoning permit is issued for any use designated in
the regulations of a district in Part 3 as requiring site plan review, the
procedures of this Section shall be followed in order to more effectively
administer, enforce and implement the purposes, intent and requirements
of this Chapter.
(2) Any proposed development which constitutes a "land
development" (as defined in the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter )(VII)) shall not be required to
separately follow the procedures of this Section. The sketch or
preliminary plan shall, however, be submitted to the Zoning Officer to
determine compliance with this Chapter.
B15488
(B) Procedure.
(1) When the applicant applies to the Zoning Officer for a
zoning permit, the applicant shall submit the required number of sets of
site plans (contact the Township Zoning Officer for the required number).
(a) No zoning permit shall be granted until after the
Planning Commission submits its recommendation to the Zoning
Officer or after forty-five (45) days of the date the site plans were
submitted.
(b) Site plan approval shall not relieve the applicant from
any other provisions of this Chapter nor constitute a
recommendation for a variance or other relief that the applicant
may seek from the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall forward two (2) copies of the site
plan to the Planning Commission within seven (7) days of the date of
official plan submission. The Zoning Officer shall retain one (1) copy of
the site plan for review.
(3) The Planning Commission shall make a written
recommendation to the Zoning Officer within forty-five (45) days of the
date the plan was submitted on whether the site plan indicates that a
zoning permit should be granted or denied. The written recommendation
shall include the underlying findings and reasons affecting the
recommendation. Failure to make a written recommendation within such
forty-five (45) days shall be considered a recommendation to issue such
zoning permit.
(4) The Zoning Officer shall review the site plan and the
Planning Commission's recommendations and issue or deny the zoning
permit within sixty (60) days after the site plan was officially submitted.
(a) The decision of the Zoning Officer shall be in writing
and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to
him at his last known address not later than the day following the
decision.
XXXII-236
B15488
(b) The decision shall indicate the specific provisions of
this Chapter and other laws which have not been met and the
specific reasons therefore.
(C) Site Plan Requirements. The following information may be
required by the Zoning Officer or Planning Commission and shall be included on
the site plan:
(1) A statement describing the proposed use.
(2) Site Layout.
(a) A site layout showing the location, dimensions and
area of each lot, the location, dimensions and height of proposed
buildings, structures, streets and any existing buildings in relation
to property and street lines. If the application relates to property
which is scheduled to be developed in successive stages, such plans
shall show the relationship of the portion scheduled for initial
development to the proposed layout of the entire property.
(b) Scale of Plan. The site layout shall be drawn to a scale
of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet for sites less than fifty (50) acres,
one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet for sites of between fifty
(50) and ninety-nine (99) acres and one (1) inch equals two hundred
(200) feet for sites of one hundred (100) acres or greater.
(3) The location, dimensions (numbers shown) and
arrangements of all open spaces and yards, landscaping, fences and buffer
yards including methods and materials to be employed for screening.
(4) The location, size (numbers shown), arrangements and
capacity of all areas to be used for motor vehicle access, off-street parking,
off-street loading and unloading and provisions to be made for lighting
such areas.
(5) The dimensions (numbers shown), location and methods of
illumination for signs and exterior lighting.
(6) The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas
to be devoted to pedestrian use.
(7) Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of sewage
and industrial wastes and water supply.
)0(XII-237
B15488
(8) The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the proposed
density in terms of number of dwelling units per acre of land.
(9) A description of any proposed industrial or commercial
operations in sufficient detail to indicate effects of those operations in
producing noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards, traffic
congestion or other safety hazards.
(10) Description of methods to be employed in controlling any
excess noise, air pollution, smoke, fumes, water pollution, fire hazards or
other safety hazards.
(11) Site contours at:
(a) Two (2) foot intervals where slopes are five percent
(5%) or less.
(b) Five (5) foot intervals where slopes are six percent
(6%) to fifteen percent (15%).
(c) Ten (10) foot intervals where slopes are over fifteen
percent (15%).
(Note: the Planning Commission may require a smaller contour
interval to assure proper design or slope delineation.)
(12) All proposed site grading and drainage provisions and
proposals.
(13) A key map showing the entire project and its relation to
surrounding properties and existing building thereon.
(14) Zoning districts and requirements.
(15) Soil and slope delineations and Identified Floodplain Areas.
(16) Name of the person who prepared the site plan. (The
Zoning Officer or Planning Commission may require the site plant be
prepared by Pennsylvania State registered engineer or land surveyor.)
B15488
(17) Certification of ownership and acknowledgement of plan
signed by owner or developer.
(D) Traffic Impact Study. When a traffic impact study is required
under §322 or §323 as part of a special exception use or conditional use
application, it shall be submitted with the required site plan and shall comply
with the following requirements.
(1) The Traffic Impact Study shall be prepared by a qualified
professional traffic engineer with verified experience in preparing such
studies.
(2) The area for the traffic study shall be based on sound
engineering judgment and an understanding of existing traffic conditions
at the site as well as the area which is likely to be affected by the
development. The study limits shall be determined by the Township.
(3) The Traffic Impact Study shall contain the following:
(a) The study area boundary and identification of the
roadways included within the study area.
(b) A general site description, including:
i) Size and location of existing and proposed land
uses and dwelling types.
ii) Construction staging, and completion date of
the proposed development.
iii) Existing land uses, approved and recorded
subdivision and land developments and subdivisions and land
developments proposed but not yet approved and recorded in the
study area that are determined by the Township as having bearing
on the development's likely impact.
iv) Within the study area, the applicant must
describe existing roadways and intersections (geometries and
traffic signal control) as well as improvements contemplated by
government agencies or private parties.
B15488
(c) Analysis of existing conditions, including:
i) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes.
Schematic diagrams depicting daily and peak hour(s) traffic
volumes shall be presented for roadways within the study area.
Turning movement and mainline volumes shall be presented for
the three peak hour conditions (a.m., p.m. and site generated) while
only mainline volumes are required to reflect daily traffic volumes.
The source and /or method of computation for all traffic volumes
shall be included.
ii) Volume/Capacity Analyses at Critical Points
Utilizing techniques described in derivative Highway Capacity
Manual, latest edition or derivative nomographs, an assessment of
the relative balance between roadway volumes and capacity are to
be described. The analysis shall be performed for existing
conditions (roadway geometry and traffic signal control) for the
appropriate peak hours.
iii) Level of Service at Critical points. Based on the
results obtained in the previous section, levels of service (A
through F) shall be computed and presented for all movements.
Included in this section shall also be a description of typical
operating conditions at each level of service.
iv) A tabulation of accident locations during the
most recent three-year period shall be provided.
(d) Analysis of future conditions without the proposed
development. The future year(s) for which projections are made
will be specified by the Township and will be dependent on the
timing of the proposed development. The following information
shall be included:
i) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes. This
section shall clearly indicate the method and assumptions used to
forecast future traffic volumes. The schematic diagrams depicting
future traffic volumes shall be similar to those described in
Section 409(D)(3)(c)(i) in terms of location and times (daily and
peak hours).
ii) Volume/Capacity Analyses at Critical
Locations. The ability of the existing roadway system to
)00CII-240
B15488
accommodate future traffic (without site development) shall be
described in this section. If roadway improvements or
modifications are committed for implementation, the
volume/capacity analysis shall be presented for these conditions.
In the case of existing signalized intersections, Traffic signal
timing shall be optimized to determine the best possible
levels of service that can be obtained utilizing existing
roadway geometry and traffic signal equipment.
iii) Levels of Service at Critical Points. Based on
the results obtained in the previous section, Levels of Service (A
through F) shall be determined.
(e) Trip Generation. The amount of traffic generated by
the development shall be presented in this section for daily and the
three peak hour conditions. The trip generation rates used in this
phase of the analysis shall be justified and documented to the
satisfaction of the Township. Trip Generation (latest edition)
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers shall be
used unless the Township approves other studies.
(f) Trip Distribution. The direction of approach for site
generated traffic shall be presented in this section for the
appropriate time periods. As with all technical analysis steps, the
basic method and assumptions used in this work shall be clearly
stated in order that the Township can replicate these results.
(g) Traffic Assignment. This section shall describe the
utilization of study area roadways by site generated traffic. The
proposed traffic volumes shall then be combined with anticipated
traffic volumes from Section 409(D)(3)(d) to describe mainline and
turning movement volumes for future conditions with the site
developed as the applicant proposes.
(h) Analysis of Future Conditions with Development.
This section shall describe the adequacy of the roadway system to
accommodate future traffic with development of the site.
Any unique characteristics of the site or within the study area
(e.g. weekend tourists, antique sales, or holiday shopping) affecting
traffic shall be considered. If staging of the proposed development
is anticipated, analysis for each stage of completion shall be made.
XXXII -24l
B15488
The following information shall be included:
i) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes,
Mainline and turning movement volumes shall be presented for the
highway network in the study area as well as driveways and
internal circulation roadways for the appropriate time periods.
ii) Volume/Capacity Analysis at Critical Points.
Similar to Sections 409(D)(3)(c)(ii) and 409(D)(3)(d)(ii), a
volume/capacity analysis shall be performed for the appropriate
peak hours for future conditions with the site developed as
proposed.
iii) Levels of Service at Critical Points. As a result
of the volume/capacity analysis, the level of service on the study
area roadway system shall be computed and described in this
section for all movements.
(i) Recommended Improvements. In the event that the
analysis indicates a decrease in the level of service for all
movements will occur on study area roadways, a description of
proposed improvements to remedy deficiencies shall be included in
this section. These proposals would not include committed projects
by the Township and State which were described in
Section 409(D)(3)(b)(iii) and reflected in the analysis contained in
Sections 409(D)(3)(c) and 409(D)(3)(d).
i) Proposed Recommended Improvements. This
section shall describe the location, nature and extent of proposed
improvements to assure sufficient roadway capacity.
Accompanying this list of improvements shall be preliminary cost
estimates.
ii) Volume/Capacity/ Analysis at Critical Points.
An iteration of the volume/capacity analysis shall be described
which demonstrates the anticipated results of making these
improvements.
iii) Levels of Service at Critical Points. As a result
of the revised volume/capacity analysis presented in the previous
Sub-Section, levels of service for the highway system with
improvements shall be presented.
XXXII-242
B15488
(j) Conclusion. The last section of the report shall be a
clear, concise description of the study findings.
(E) Site Design Guidelines. The following guidelines are divided into
eight (8) categories to assist the applicant in the preparation of site and building
plans and to assist the Planning Commission and the Zoning Officer in their
reviews of all site plans. These guidelines are meant to encourage creativity,
innovation and well-designed developments. They apply to principal buildings
and structures and to all accessory buildings, structures, signs and other site
features.
(1) Relation of Proposed Building to the Surrounding
Environment. Relate proposed structure(s) harmoniously to the terrain
and to existing buildings that have a visual relationship to the proposed
structure(s). To achieve this favorable relationship between existing and
proposed uses, create focal points with respect to avenues of approach,
terrain features or other buildings and relate open space between all
existing and proposed buildings.
(2) Drive, Parking and Circulation. For vehicular and
pedestrian circulation (including walkways, interior drives and parking)
give special attention to the location and number of access points to public
streets, width of interior drives and access points, general interior
circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, arrangement of
safe and convenient parking areas. Design these vehicular and pedestrian
areas to enhance the appearance of and access to the proposed buildings
and structures and to the neighboring properties.
(3) Surface Water Drainage. Give special attention to proper
site surface drainage to ensure that removal of surface waters will not
adversely affect either neighboring properties or the public storm
drainage system. Remove and efficiently carry away all stormwater from
all roofs, canopies and paved areas. Collect surface water from all paved
areas to permit vehicular and pedestrian movement.
(4) Utility Service. Place electric and telephone lines
underground, where possible. Locate, paint and undertake any other
treatment to ensure that any utilities which remain aboveground will have
a minimal adverse impact on neighboring properties.
(5) Advertising Features. Ensure that the size, location, lighting
and materials of all permanent signs and outdoor advertising structures or
XXX1I-243
B15488
features will enhance rather than detract from the design of proposed
buildings and structures and the neighboring properties.
(6) Special Features. Provide needed setbacks, screen plantings
and other screening methods for exposed storage areas, exposed
machinery installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility
buildings and structures and similar accessory areas and structures to
help make them compatible with the existing or contemplated site design
and with neighboring properties.
(7) Preservation of Landscape. Preserve the landscape in its
natural state by minimizing tree and soil removal. Ensure that grade
changes are compatible with the general appearance of neighboring
developed areas.
(8) Solar Energy Use. Consider the desirability and feasibility of
active and passive solar energy use. Orient proposed buildings and
provide structures to provide for solar energy use and to prepare solar
access of adjoining properties.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 409 of Section 2)
Section 410. Easements. No structure shall be constructed, erected, relocated to
or placed within an existing easement or right-of-way without the written permission of
the person, party or entity to which the easement or right-of-way benefits. (Ordinance
No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 410 of Section 2)
Section 411. Historic Buildings.
(A) Purpose. This Section regulating the demolition and use of historic
buildings is intended to:
(1) Promote the retention of community character through
preservation of the local heritage by recognition and protection of
historical and architectural resources;
(2) Establish a clear process to review and approve demolition
of designated historical buildings;
(3) Encourage continued use, appropriate rehabilitation and
adaptive reuse of historic buildings; and
B15488
(4) Regulate uses and structures at or near places having unique
historic, architectural or patriotic interest or value.
(B) Applicability. This Section shall apply to any building eligible for
the National Register of Historic Places, identified by the Berks County
Conservancy or identified by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission.
(C) Delay of Demolition of Historic Buildings. A principal building
regulated by this Section shall not be partially or entirely demolished unless a
minimum of sixty (60) days has passed from the date that a valid permit
application has been duly submitted to the Zoning Officer for the demolition.
After such time period, the permit may be issued by the Zoning Officer for the
demolition if all requirements of Township Ordinances have been met. The
intent of this delay is to provide:
(1) A mechanism to discourage thoughtless and unnecessary
destruction of valuable historic resources;
(2) A mechanism that allows interested parties an opportunity
to encourage a property owner to consider alternatives to demolition; and
(3) Opportunities for historic resources to be documented
before they may be demolished, and to permit the salvage of historic
features before demolition.
(D) Partial Demolition. For purposes of this Section, partial demolition
shall include, but not be limited to, removal of a porch or a wing of a building.
(E) Municipal Review. The Township Planning Commission and
Board of Supervisors shall receive a copy of application for demolition of a
building regulated by this Section and shall have thirty (30) days to review and
make comments.
(F) Emergency. The Zoning Officer may issue a permit for the
demolition without compliance with the sixty (60) day delay if the Township
Building Inspector certifies in writing that the building represents a clear and
immediate hazard to public safety, and that no other reasonable alternatives exist
to demolition.
(G) Exceptions. The delay of demolition required by this Section shall
not be applicable to the following:
B15488
(1) Demolition of accessory structures that are not attached to
the principal building.
(2) Interior renovations or removal of features that do not harm
the structurally stability of the building and that are not visible from a
public street.
(3) Removal of features that were added within the last
80 years.
(4) Relocation of a building, provided that it does not result in a
partial or complete demolition as regulated in this Section.
(H) Modification to Lot Area and Yard Regulations. As a special
exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may modify a specific yard, lot coverage or
lot area requirement if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board that
such Modification is necessary to allow a reasonable use of a building regulated
by this Section.
(I) Demolition by Neglect.
(1) Every owner of a building regulated by this Section shall
repair and maintain the building to avoid demolition by neglect. This
shall include maintaining the structural integrity of the building and
protecting the building and attached features from damage from the
elements. These attached features include the roof, chimney, cornice,
soffit, fascia, spouting, columns, beams, posts, window sills, door sills and
lintels.
(2) If a property owner fails to comply with an order from the
Building Inspector to repair a building regulated by this Section to correct
a code violation that threatens the structural integrity of a building, such
matter shall be considered a violation of this Section and the property
owner may also be cited for a violation of this Chapter.
(J) Additional Uses within Rehabilitated Historic Buildings
(1) A rehabilitated building regulated under this Section may be
used for any principal use and its accessory uses as permitted in the
zoning district within which it is located, and in accordance with all
relevant provisions of this Chapter.
B15488
(2) Each of the following additional principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted within a rehabilitated building regulated
under this Section as a special exception use by the Zoning Hearing Board
in accordance with the standards contained in §322 of this Chapter.
(a) Art, photography or dance studio*.
(b) Bed and breakfast*.
(c) Business office.
(d) Community center.
(e) Day care, nursery school*.
(f) Financial establishment*.
(g) Government office.
(h) Medical clinic/medical office*.
(i) Personal service establishment.
(j) Professional office.
*See §321 for additional requirements.
(3) To be eligible for the above uses, the applicant shall prove to
the Zoning Hearing Board's satisfaction that the exterior of the building as
visible from public streets shall be historically rehabilitated in accordance
with accepted standards and practices.
(4) The building shall not be expanded by more than twenty
(20%) percent of its floor area for a use permitted under this Section. This
limitation on building expansion shall not apply if the proposed use is
allowed in the zoning district without applying the provisions of this
Section.
(5) All above uses shall be in accordance with the relevant
provision listed in this Chapter for that use, including the off-street
parking provisions.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 411 of Section 2)
Section 412. Airport Zoning.
(A) The Township Reading Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter )00(11I), including the Airport Zoning Map, shall be considered in
addition to this Chapter.
(B) No building, structure or land shall be used, occupied, erected,
moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless it is in conformity with the
B 15488
applicable provisions of the Township Reading Municipal Airport Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter )00(III).
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 412 of Section 2)
B15488
Part 5
Environmental Protection
Section 501. Environmental Preservation Required.
(A) All uses shall be developed in a manner consistent with the
preservation of the quality of the existing environment and of any natural
amenities present on the site.
(B) All uses shall provide for the preservation and the minimum
destruction of natural drainage areas, minimum grading and destruction of the
ground surface, the preservation of substantial stands of trees and forested areas
and the preservation of attractive views and any other natural features existing
on the site.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 501 of Section 2)
Section 502. Prohibited Nuisances. No land or structure in any zoning district
shall be used or occupied in any manner that creates any nuisance in such manner or in
such amount as to adversely affect the reasonable use or value of the surrounding area
or adjoining premises or be dangerous to public health or safety. (Ordinance No. 335,
March 26, 2007, Section 502 of Section 2)
Section 503. Slope Controls.
(A) Intent. Areas exist within each zoning district that would have
special constraints on development because of the topography. These concerns
include soil erosion, stream siltation, unsatisfactory onlot sewage disposal,
excessive cut and fill requirements, loss of vegetation and increase runoff and
flooding. The intent of this Section is to establish certain restrictions relating to
permitted uses, bulk, area and coverage requirements for property located on
slopes of fifteen percent (15%) or more. It is not the intent, however, to prohibit
development, but merely to insure that adequate consideration has been given to
these unique problems and that adequate safeguards will be taken.
(B) Exceptions. The following existing features are excluded from the
definition of steep slope areas;
(1) Man-made embankments within street rights-of-way which
are a result of cut and fill operations and are not the natural condition of
the land.
XXVII -249
B15488
(2) Stormwater detention and retention basins.
(3) Man-made landscape berms.
(C) Lots Containing Slopes of Fifteen Percent (15%) or Greater.
(1) The minimum lot area for a lot containing slopes of fifteen
percent (15%) or greater shall be the summation of the following:
(a) The percentage of the lot area having slopes less than
fifteen percent (15%) multiplied times the minimum lot area
required for the district within which it is located; plus
(b) The percentage of the lot area having slopes between
fifteen percent (15%) and twenty-five (25%) multiplied times three
(3) acres; plus
(c) The percentage of the lot area having slopes greater
than twenty-five percent (25%) multiplied times five (5) acres.
(2) The minimum lot width for a lot containing slopes of fifteen
percent (15%) or greater shall be the summation of the following:
(a) The percentage of the lot area having slopes less than
fifteen percent (15%) multiplied times the minimum lot width
required for the district within which it is located; plus
(b) The percentage of the lot area having slopes between
fifteen percent (15%) and twenty-five (25%) multiplied times two
hundred (200') feet; plus
(c) The percentage of the lot area having slopes greater
than twenty-five percent (25%) multiplied times three hundred
(300') feet.
(3) Slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater shall not be
altered, regraded, cleared, built upon or otherwise disturbed unless such
disturbance is necessary:
XXVII-250
B15488
(a) To accommodate an access drive or driveway when
no other feasible route for such an access drive or driveway exists
and if the slope is disturbed to the minimum extent necessary to
accommodate such access drive or driveway; or
(b) To accommodate a trail or trails that are part of an
existing or planned trail network and are located and constructed
based upon accepted best management practices for minimizing
erosion.
(c) Installation of underground utilities, where the
applicant has demonstrated to the Township's satisfaction that no
alternative location is feasible and that the proposal consists of the
minimum disturbance necessary to provide utility service.
(4) In no case shall more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
area containing slopes between fifteen percent (15%) and twenty-five
percent (25%) be disturbed.
(5) In no case shall more than fifteen percent (15%) of the area
containing slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater be disturbed.
(D) Procedures.
(1) The Zoning Officer will advise the applicant when his
property or parcel lies within such a slope designation. The Zoning
Officer will not issue a zoning permit until a plan is submitted indicating,
to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, that all potential problems of
steep slopes have been resolved.
(2) Plans shall show existing topography, proposed structure
and building locations, streets and driveways location and grade, site
drainage, sanitary facilities, grading plan, revegetation or planting plan
prepared by a registered architect, engineer or landscape architect. Plans
shall be accompanied by drawings or a statement of how problems of
surface water runoff, erosion, soil stabilization, onlot sewage disposal,
revegetation, sediment control and all other associated problems are
proposed to be overcome.
B15488
(3) Should the area designated as steep slopes be found to be
inaccurate, based on a topographical survey prepared by a licensed
surveyor or engineer, showing two (2) foot contour intervals, then the
zoning requirements for such property shall be deemed to be the
regulations of the district in which the property is located.
(4) The Zoning Officer should maintain a map or overlay
including areas of steep slopes.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 503 of Section 2)
Section 504. Areas With High Water Table.
(A) Any proposed land use which may directly (by means of effluent
discharge into the ground) or indirectly (though the leaching of stored materials)
result in the pollution of the groundwater shall be prohibited from developing in
any area which has a year-round or seasonal high water table which comes to
within any distance of the ground surface which violates PADEP regulations.
(B) The determination of such hazards shall be made by the
appropriate State agency and/or by a qualified sanitary engineer, geologist or
soil scientist approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(C) The County Soil Survey developed by the United States Soil
Conservation Service shall be used to establish high water table soils, unless
more accurate information is available.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 504 of Section 2)
Section 505. Development Along Water Bodies. No structure nor off street
parking area shall be within fifty (50) feet of the banks of any stream, lake or pond,
except for public recreation uses. (See also §517 Wetland Buffers and §518 Riparian
Buffers) (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 505 of Section 2)
Section 506. Floodplain Regulations. Any proposed land use or activity, or any
proposed site or building alteration, shall comply with the provisions of the Township
of Spring Floodplain Ordinance (Chapter X). (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Section 507 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance 392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
XXVII-252
B15488
Section 507. Filling, Excavation and Grading.
(A) All activities which require the moving of earth or the filling or
excavating of an area shall submit a plan to the Township showing site grading
and erosion control measures.
(B) Grading Regulations.
(1) The existing grade shall not be increased so that unstable
slopes are created.
(2) The surface area of any yard adjacent to a building or
structure shall be graded so that surface water will be drained away from
such structure.
(3) The deposit of soils, detritus or other debris (as a result of
site preparation, grading or excavating) shall not be unsightly or
detrimental to any property, street, sewer or natural Watercourses.
apply.
(4) All County Soil Conservation Service regulations shall
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 508 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 9, June 11, 2012)
Section 508. Tree Preservation.
(A) Intent. The purpose of this Section is to conserve forested areas in
order to preserve wildlife and bird habitats, encourage groundwater recharge,
avoid pollution of creeks by high temperature runoff, maintain the attractive
character of areas, conserve energy, protect and enhance property values and
avoid other negative environmental impacts.
(B) Applicability. Forestry, including timber harvesting, shall be a use
permitted by right within all zoning districts. The provisions of this section shall
apply to all timber harvesting operations where lumber will leave the site and
where the affected area will exceed one-half (1/2) acre for clear cutting
operations or one (1) acre for all selective cutting operations.
(C) All forestry or timber harvesting operations, having affected areas
which exceed the sizes listed above, shall comply with the regulations for
forestry and timber harvesting under §321 of this Chapter. All forestry or timber
harvesting operations, regardless of the size of the affected area, shall comply
)0(V11-253
B15488
with the applicable provisions of Part 5, including, but not limited to, the
provisions of §503 Slope Controls, §517 Wetland Buffers and §518 Riparian
Buffers.
(D) Exceptions. These provisions shall not apply to the following:
(1) The cutting of trees for the personal use of the landowner;
(2) A bonafide plant nursery or Christmas tree farm;
(3) The routine "thinning" of a wooded area, involving the
cutting down on one (1) or more abutting lots, within a single calendar
year, up to 20% of the trees having a diameter at breast height (DBH,
typically 4.5 feet from the ground) greater than 6 inches, with such cutting
being well-distributed throughout the wooded area;
(4) The cutting of trees that create a hazard to vehicular sight
distance.
(5) The removal of defective, decayed, diseased or dying trees.
(E) Compliance Responsibility. The landowner and the operator
performing the timber harvesting operations shall be jointly and individually
responsible for complying with the provisions of this Section.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 509 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 509. Outdoor Storage Control.
(A) No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above the ground, except for tanks or drums of less than six hundred (600)
gallons of fuel which is directly connected with engines, heating devices or
appliances located and operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel
and which have been approved by the Township.
(B) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products
stored outdoors (including those permitted in §509(A) shall be enclosed by a
fence of a type, construction and size as shall be adequate to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
(C) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such a form
or manner that they may be transported off by natural causes or forces.
XXVII-254
B15488
(D) No substance which can (i) contaminate groundwater or surface
water, (ii) render groundwater or surface water undesirable as a source of water
supply or recreation or (iii) destroy aquatic life shall be allowed to enter any
groundwater or surface water.
(E) Applicable PADEP regulations shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 510 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 510. Sewage Waste Treatment and Disposal Control.
(A) All methods of sewage and waste treatment and disposal shall be
approved by the PADEP and in accordance with the sewage plan for the
Township.
(B) The standards of the regulations specified in §509(A) or the
following standards (whichever is more restrictive) shall apply:
(1) Discharged wastes shall not contain any:
(a) Toxic substance.
(b) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel, oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(c) Cyanides or halogens.
(d) More than ten (10) ppm of the following gases:
hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrogen dioxide.
(e) A chlorine demand in excess of fifteen (15) ppm.
(f) Phenol in excess of 0.0005 ppm.
(g) Grease fats or oils, or any oily substance in excess of
one hundred (100) ppm or exceeding a daily average of twenty-five
(25) ppm.
(h) Liquid having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty (150) degrees F.
)0CVII-25 5
B15488
(i) Matter containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
paunch manure or any solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstructions or other interference with the proper
operation of a sewage treatment plant.
(j) Any insoluble substances which:
1) Are in excess of ten thousand (10,000) ppm.
2) Exceed a daily average of five hundred (500)
ppm.
3) Fail to pass a No. 8 sieve.
4) Have a dimension greater than one-quarter
(0.25) inch.
(k) Liquid having a pH lower than five (5.0) or higher
than nine (9.0) or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel.
(1) Material which would be harmful to the treatment of
sewage.
(2) Acidity and alkalinity of wastes shall be neutralized with a
pH seven (7.0) as a daily average on a volumetric basis, with a temporary
variation of pH five (5.0) to nine (9.0).
(C) Recertification of the adequacy of sewage disposal systems shall be
required, prior to the expansion or conversion of an existing use.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 511 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 511. Noise Control.
(A) No person shall operate or cause to be operated on private or
public property any source of continuous sound (any sound which is static,
fluctuating or intermittent with a recurrence greater than one (1) time in any
fifteen (15) second interval) in such a manner as to create a sound level which
exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use category in the following
XXVII-256
B15488
table when measured at or within the property boundary of the land use
generating such sound:
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use and Time
Receiving Land Use
Category
Time Sound Level Limit
Residential, Public Space,
Open Space, Agricultural
or Institutional
Commercial or Business
Industrial
1) 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
2) 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. plus
Sundays and legal
holidays
1) 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
2) 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. plus
Sundays and legal
holidays
60 dBA
50 dBA
65 dBA
50 dBA
At all times 70 dBA
(B) For any source of sound which emits a pure tone, the maximum
sound level limits set forth in §511(A) shall be reduced by five (5) dBA.
(C) The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in §511(A)
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency.
(2) Emergency work to provide electricity, water or other public
utilities when public health or safety are involved.
(3) Domestic power tools, between the hours of 8 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. on Mondays through Fridays and between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
Saturdays or Sundays.
(4) Explosives and construction operations.
(5) Agriculture.
B15488
(6) Motor vehicle operations, other than parked trucks and
other parked vehicles that run continuously for more than fifteen (15)
minutes.
(7)
(8)
(9)
Public celebrations, specifically authorized by the Township.
Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad.
The unamplified human voice.
(D) For any source of sound which emits an impulsive sound (a sound
of short duration, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay and an occurrence of not
more than one (1) time in any fifteen (15) second interval) the excursions of
sound pressure level shall not exceed twenty (20) dBA over the ambient sound
pressure level, regardless of time of day or night or receiving land use, using the
"fast" meter characteristic of a Type II meter, meeting the ANSI specifications
S1.4-1971.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 512 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 512. Dust, Dirt, Smoke, Vapors, Gases and Odors Control.
(A) No person shall operate or permit the operation of any device, or
conduct or permit any use to be conducted which does not conform with the
standards established under the State Air Pollution Control Act of January 9,
1960, Public Law 2119, as amended, and Title 25, Rules and Regulations, PADEP,
Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources, Article III Air Resources.
(B) No one shall generate odors that would be seriously offensive to
persons of average sensibilities.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 513 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 513. Light, Glare and Heat Control. All uses shall minimize the
production of light, heat or glare that is perceptible beyond any property line of the lot
on which the light, heat or glare is produced. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Section 514 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance 392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 514. Electric, Diesel, Gas or Other Power. Every use requiring power
shall be so operated that any service lines, substation or other facility shall:
)0(VII-258
B15488
(A) Conform to the highest applicable safety requirements.
(B) Be constructed and installed as an integral part of the architectural
features of the plant.
(C) Be concealed by evergreen planting from residential properties.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 515 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 515. Control of Radioactivity, Electrical Emissions and Electrical
Disturbances.
(A) No person shall operate or permit the operation of any device, or
conduct or permit any use to be conducted which does not comply with the
regulations of the PADEP's Division of Radiology, the Federal Nuclear
Regulatory Commission, and the Federal Interstate Commerce Commission.
(B) No person shall conduct or permit any use to be conducted which
causes electrical disturbances (except from domestic household appliances) to
adversely affect any equipment at any time other than the equipment creating
the disturbance.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 516 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 516. Manufacturing and Storing of Dangerous Material Prohibited.
(A) No person shall use any land or erect any building or structure for
the commercial or industrial manufacture or storage of coal, oil, coal oil, chlorine,
fuel oil, burning fluid, naphtha, benzol, benzene, gasoline, dynamite, nitro
glycerin, gunpowder, petroleum, or other combustible, inflammable, or
dangerous liquid or material, unless otherwise permitted in this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 517 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
XXVII-259
B15488
Section 517. Wetland Buffers.
(A) Wetland buffers, having a minimum width of thirty-five (35) feet,
shall be required adjacent to all jurisdictional wetlands identified pursuant to
this section. Buffers shall serve as an ecological transition zone from nonwetlands
to wetlands, which is an integral portion of the wetlands ecosystem,
providing temporary refuge for wetland fauna during high water episodes,
critical habitat for animals dependent upon but not resident in wetlands, and
slight variations of wetland boundaries over time due to hydrologic or
climatologic effects. Buffers also serve as a sediment and stormwater control
zone to reduce the impacts of development upon wetlands and wetland species.
(B) Within the required wetland buffer no removal of existing natural
vegetation, earth moving activities or impervious surfaces shall be permitted.
(C) Exceptions. Notwithstanding the above, the following
encroachments shall be permitted within a wetland buffer in cases where a
permit has been obtained from the appropriate State or Federal agency for such
encroachment within the adjacent wetland area. In such cases the Township
must be provided with a copy of the permit or a notice from these agencies
stating the proposed encroachment is exempt from their permit requirements.
Where such encroachments are permitted, the wetland and buffer areas shall be
restored to their natural condition and grade, to the maximum extent possible.
(1) Underground utilities.
(2) Access roads or drives, where the applicant has
demonstrated to the Township's satisfaction that no alternative location is
feasible and that the proposal consists of the minimum disturbance
necessary to provide adequate access.
(D) All lands designated as wetlands within the Township are subject
to the restrictions and /or permits of the PADEP and the United States Army
Corps of Engineers.
(E) For any proposed improvements or earth disturbance, the
Township shall determine whether a wetland delineation will be required by a
qualified professional. Wetland delineations shall be accompanied by a technical
report and appropriate data forms describing the results of the evaluation.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 518 of Section 2) ; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
XXVII-260
B15488
Section 518. Riparian Buffers.
(A) Riparian buffers are required along all streams or watercourses in
order to provide water resource protection, including the following:
(1) Reduction of the amount of nutrients, sediment, organic
matter, pesticides, and other harmful substances that reach watercourses.
(2) Provision of shade which moderates stream temperature
and protects fish habitat.
(3) Provision of stream bank stability which protects fish habitat
and controls sediment and erosion.
(4) Provision of organic matter through leaves which fall in the
stream and provide food and habitat.
(5) Conservation of the natural features important to land and
water resources.
(B) Riparian buffers shall be consist of any area within thirty-five (35)
feet of any stream bank.
(C) No woodland or land disturbance shall be permitted within any
riparian buffer, except for the following:
(1) Timber harvesting in accordance with a woodland
management plan submitted to the Township and prepared by a
professional consulting forester;
(2) Vegetation management in accordance with an approved
landscape plan or open space management plan;
(3) Customary agricultural practices in accordance with a. soil
conservation plan approved by the Berks County Conservation District;
(4) Regulated activities permitted by the Commonwealth.
XXVII-261
B15488
(5) Installation of underground utilities and access roads or
drives, where the applicant has demonstrated to the Township's
satisfaction that no alternative location is feasible and that the proposal
consists of the minimum disturbance necessary to provide utility service
or adequate access.
(6) Provision of unpaved trail access;
(7)
species.
Selective removal of hazardous or invasive alien vegetative
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 519 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
XXV II-262
B15488
Part 6
Signs
Section 601. Scope and Applicability.
(A) Signs perform an important function by identifying a broad range
of land uses.
(B) Control of the construction, location, size, conspicuity, brightness,
legibility, operational characteristics and maintenance of signs is necessary to
promote the health, safety, general welfare and aesthetics of the Township. Signs
have a direct and substantial impact on traffic safety, pedestrian safety,
community aesthetics and property values. Signs also provide a guide to the
physical environment and, as such, serve an important function to the
community and economy. Electronic signs, including video display signs, are
highly visible from long distances and at very wide viewing angles both day and
night and are designed to draw the attention of persons in their vicinity and hold
it for extended periods of time. If left uncontrolled, electronic signs, including
video display signs, can constitute a serious traffic safety threat.
(C) The term "sign" shall mean any object, device, display or structure
that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, inform or attract attention.
(D) Those elements which may be excluded from sign controls include
(1) flags of any governmental unit or branch or of any charitable or religious
organization, (2) flags or signs posted by any religious organization to provide
directions to a place of worship, (3) interior signs not visible from a public right
of way or adjoining property, (4) cornerstones built into or attached to a wall of a
building commemorating a person or event, (5) official notices of any court or
public office, (6) legal notices posted pursuant to law, and (7) public service signs
as aids to safety or service.
(E) In all permitted districts signs may be erected, altered, maintained,
used, removed or moved only if they comply with the provisions of this Chapter
and other regulations of the Township relating to such activities.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 601 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
)0CVII-263
B15488
Section 602. General Sign Regulations.
(A) No sign shall be erected containing information which states or
implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the
provisions of this Chapter in the zoning district within which the property to
which the sign relates is located.
(B) On-site signs advertising a use no longer in existence or a product
no longer available shall be removed or changed to advertise the new use or
product within thirty (30) days of the cessation of the original use or product
availability. Only signs in conformance with this Chapter shall replace signs
once removed.
(C) No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic
because of glare; blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks, or
driveways; confusion with a traffic control device (by reason of color, location,
shape, or other characteristic); or any other reason.
(D) In no case shall any sign, other than an official sign, be erected
within the official right-of-way of any street, unless specifically authorized by
ordinance or regulation of the Township and in conformance with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulations, where appropriate.
(E) In no case shall any sign, other than an official sign, be erected
within the boundaries of a designated clear sight triangle at an intersection of
streets or access drives, unless it complies with the provisions of Section 405(H)
of this Chapter.
(F) Signs may be illuminated by direct lighting but shall have such
lighting shielded so no glare or direct light will shine on abutting properties or in
the normal line of vision of the public using the streets or sidewalks. No red,
amber, or green lights shall be permitted, and no flood or spotlights shall be
mounted higher than fifteen (15) feet above ground level.
(G) No sign, except such directional devices as may be required by the
Federal and State Aviation Authorities, that is a part of or is supported by a
building, shall be placed, inscribed, or supported upon the roof or upon any
structure which extends above the roof of any building.
(H) All sign provisions of this Chapter shall apply to signs on
smokestacks, water towers, and other similar structures.
XXVII-264
B15488
(I) Non-illuminated temporary signs may be permitted on new
construction sites, if such signs do not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in total
area and if they are removed within seven (7) days after completion of the
construction work. Not more than one (1) sign shall be placed on each street
frontage of the construction site.
(J) Temporary signs announcing or advertising any political,
educational, charitable, civic, professional, religious, philanthropic or similar
campaign, drive or event may be permitted on non-residential properties only
for a total period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any calendar year, providing
such signs do not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and are removed
promptly after the completion of the campaign, drive or event.
(K) If an establishment has walls fronting on two (2) or more streets,
the sign area for each street may be computed separately.
(L) No sign in other than a residential district shall be located so as to
face any residential district on the same side of the street on which the property
bearing the sign fronts.
(M) Free-standing signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the
street right of way line. No free-standing sign shall project beyond a street rightof-
way line. No free-standing sign in other than a residential district shall be
within thirty-five (35) feet of any residential district boundary line.
(N) Wall signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any facade or other
surface to which they are mounted and shall not project more than twelve (12)
inches from its surface.
(0) Projecting signs shall not extend more than four (4) feet from the
wall or surface to which they are mounted. Projecting signs shall not interfere
with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic, shall not be less than ten (10) feet
above the pavement of ground, and shall not be closer than six (6) feet to the
property line.
(P) No signs shall be posted, stapled, or otherwise permanently
attached to public utility poles or trees within a street right-of-way. No
temporary signs shall be placed on any Township-owned property or on any
other edifice owned or controlled by any governmental entity or any public
utility except signs specifically authorized by such government or public utility.
(Q) All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of durable
material and kept in good condition and repair. Any sign which is allowed to
XXVH-265
B15488
become dilapidated or a hazard shall be repaired or removed by the property
owner or lessee of the property or may, after 30 days notification, be removed by
the Township at the expense of the owner or lessee of the property on which it is
located.
(R) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any
premises that they own or control a sign which has been abandoned. Any such
abandoned sign shall be repaired or removed by the property owner or lessee of
the property or may, after 30 days notification, be removed by the Township at
the expense of the owner or lessee of the property on which it is located. An
"abandoned sign", for the purpose of this Section is a sign that:
(1) Is located on and /or related to the use of a property which
becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of nine months of more,
(2) Was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the
present occupant in business and is not being lawfully used for the new
occupant; or
(3) Which relates to a time, event or purpose which is past.
(S) Signs existing at the time of passage of this Chapter and which do
not conform to the requirements of this Chapter shall be considered nonconforming
signs and once removed shall be replaced only with conforming
signs. Nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired (including lighting),
provided that a repainted or repaired sign does not exceed the dimensions of the
existing sign. Copy may also be changed, but a new permit must be obtained
before such copy change takes place. Any nonconforming sign which is
damaged in excess of 25% of its cost of replacement or is removed shall be
replaced only with a conforming sign.
(T) In addition to other applicable regulations of the Township and
state laws, the following shall apply to all adult business use signs and other
visible messages:
(1) Sign messages shall be limited to written descriptions of
material or services available on the premises.
(2) Sign messages shall not include any graphic or pictorial
depiction of material related to specific sexual activities or anatomical
areas.
XXVII-266
B15488
(3) Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials
related to specific sexual activities or anatomical areas shall not be shown
or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the
building.
(4) The entrance of the adult business should include a sign
warning all individuals that the premises is classified as an adult business.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 602 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 603. Permitted Signs. The types, numbers and sizes of signs shall be in
accordance with the following regulations.
(A) All Zoning Districts.
(1) Official traffic or directional signs and other official Federal,
State, County or local government signs.
(2) Temporary signs announcing any political, educational,
charitable, civic, religious, philanthropic, or similar campaign, drive or
event only for a total period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any calendar
year, provided such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
area and shall be removed promptly upon the completion of the
campaign, drive or event.
(3) Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon
which the sign is located. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
area and shall be removed within seven (7) days after settlement or a lease
has been entered into. No more than one (1) such sign shall be placed on
the property unless said property fronts on more than one (1) street, in
which case one (1) sign may be located on each street frontage.
(4) Temporary signs of architects, builders, contractors,
developers, engineers and similar artisans, which are erected and
maintained on the premises where the work is being performed. Such
signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and shall be removed
promptly upon completion of the work.
XXVII-267
B15488
(5) Trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a
road, driveway or premises, signs controlling fishing or hunting on the
premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed four (4)
square feet.
(6) Nameplate signs displaying the name and address of the
occupant of a dwelling, or dwelling unit, provided that the area of each
such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet and provided that such a
sign shall not be internally illuminated or illuminated by any lighting
having a total wattage of more than one hundred (100) watts.
(7) Temporary signs erected in connection with the
development or proposed development on the premises by a builder,
contractor, developer, or other persons with an interest in such
development. The aggregate area of such signs shall not exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area and shall be removed within seven (7) days
after the last structure has been initially occupied. When a developer is
engaged in selling lots only, the temporary signs advertising the sale of
lots in the development shall be permitted during the initial period of the
development project, which period shall commence with the recording
date of the development plan and shall end twelve (12) months thereafter.
The permit for such signs may be renewed at the end of each twelve (12)
month period. The text of he sign shall clearly indicate that a
development is "proposed" unless all necessary municipal approvals have
been obtained.
(8) Signs identifying a permitted home occupation displaying
the name, profession or activity, and address of the occupant, provided
that not more than one (1) such sign shall be erected for each permitted
use, and provided that the area of each such sign shall not exceed two (2)
square feet. Each such sign shall not be internally illuminated or
illuminated by any lighting having a total wattage of more than one
hundred (100) watts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no signs shall be
permitted which advertise a no-impact home-based business.
(9) Signs identifying residential subdivisions or land
developments comprising ten (10) or more dwelling units. Such signs
shall have a maximum area of thirty (30) square feet and a maximum
height of eight (8) feet. These signs may be located at up to three of the
major entrances from exterior streets and may include the overall name of
the development and any logo. Such signs shall not include advertising.
XXVII-268
B15488
(10) Temporary signs identifying a yard or garage sale, provided
(1) no more than two signs per event, (2) each sign shall not exceed four
square feet in area, and (3) all signs shall be placed a maximum of twentyfour
(24) hours prior to a sale and removed within twenty-four (24) hours
after the sale.
(11) Temporary signs advertising the temporary sale of products
or goods such as Christmas trees, Easter flowers, fireworks, etc., provided
such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and shall not be posted
earlier than thirty (30) days before the date of the event to which they
pertain and shall be removed within seven (7) days of said event.
(B) Residential Districts.
(1) Sign, bulletin, announcement board or identification sign for
schools, churches, hospitals, sanitariums, clubs, multi-family dwellings or
other principal uses and buildings for the purpose of displaying the name
of the institution and its activities or services, provided that the area of
any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet and not more than
one (1) such sign shall be erected on any one street frontage.
(2) Sign offering the sale of farm products, nursery products or
livestock produced or raised on the premises, provided that the area of
any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet and not more than
one (1) such sign shall be erected on any one street frontage.
(3) Sign denoting membership in agricultural associations,
cooperatives or indicating specialization in a particular breed of cattle,
hogs, etc., or in a particular hybrid or strain of plant, provided that such
sign is limited to six (6) square feet and not more than one (1) sign on any
one street frontage.
(C) Signs for Multi-Family Dwellings (Garden Apartments or
Townhouses). The following signs shall be permitted:
(1) Freestanding signs advertising the sale or rental of the
premises upon which the sign is erected, provided that (a) the total area of
the sign does not exceed forty (40) square feet, (b) there shall be no more
than one (1) such sign on any one lot on the same street frontage, and (c)
no sign shall be erected so as to stand higher than any of the buildings it
advertises. For the purpose of this Chapter, multi-family dwelling units
shall not be advertised by such real estate signs for more than twelve (12)
months after building construction is completed.
XXVII-269
B15488
(2) Directional signs, not to exceed two (2) square feet each,
erected within the multi-family complex itself to direct persons to a rental
office or sample apartment.
(3) Permanent identifying signs for the purpose of indicating
the name of the multi-family complex and for the purpose of identifying
the individual buildings within the complex. Not more than one (1) sign
for each entrance to the complex shall be permitted and no such sign shall
exceed ten (10) square feet in size. Signs to identify the individual
buildings within the complex shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size.
(D) Commercial and Industrial Districts.
(1) Signs directing patrons, members or audience to temporary
exhibits, shows or events and signs erected in conjunction with a political
election, provided that such sign (a) shall not exceed six (6) square feet, (b)
shall be removed within two (2) weeks after the date of the exhibit, show,
event or election, and (c) shall not be posted earlier than two (2) weeks
before the date of the exhibit, show or event, except that political signs
shall not be posted earlier than one (1) month prior to an election.
(2) Wall or free-standing signs on the same lot as the use to
which they relate, provided that the total area of such signs shall be
limited to two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of horizontal building
façade length, but not to exceed an aggregate area of one hundred
sixty (160) square feet. No more than one (1) freestanding sign structure
shall be permitted on a lot having less than five hundred (500) feet of
street frontage. No more than two (2) freestanding sign structures shall be
permitted per lot.
(3) Special temporary promotional devices, signs or displays,
such as banners or pennants. Where such signs are outside of a building,
they shall remain on display for a period not to exceed sixty (60)
consecutive days. Banners shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign
area.
(4) "A" type, sandwich type, sidewalk, or curb signs and
balloons or devices shall be permitted only in commercial, business, and
industrial districts for special occasions not more than four (4) times a year
for a period totaling not more than fifteen (15) days within a calendar
year, as long as they do not obstruct any public right-of-way. At no other
time shall such devices be permitted. Such "A" type, sandwich type,
XXVII-270
B15488
sidewalk, or curb signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area
per side.
(5)
window.
Window signs shall not exceed 20% of the total area of the
(6) Signs identifying office, commercial or industrial
subdivisions or land developments comprising three (3) or more principal
uses. Such signs shall have a maximum area of thirty (30) square feet and
a maximum height of eight (8) feet. These signs may be located at up to
three of the major entrances from exterior streets and may include the
overall name of the development and any logo. Such signs shall not
include advertising.
(7) Signs indicating the existence of, and direction to tourist
attractions of a natural, scenic and/or outdoor recreational nature,
provided that no such sign shall exceed twenty (20) square feet.
(8) Electronic Changeable Copy Signs, in accordance with the
provisions under Section 606.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 603 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 604. Signs Prohibited in all Districts
(A) Signs which in any way simulate official, functional, directional, or
warning signs erected or maintained by the Federal, State, County, or any
municipal government, or by any railroad, public utility, or similar agency
concerned with the protection of public health or safety.
(B) Banners, spinners, flags, pennants, or any moving objects used for
commercial advertising purposes, whether containing a message or not, except
as otherwise permitted within this Chapter.
(C) Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated, or moving signs of any
type, except those portions of signs which indicate time and temperature.
(D) Video display signs.
(E) Electronic changeble copy signs, except as otherwise permitted
within this Chapter.
XXVII-271
B15488
(F) Off-Premises Signs, except as otherwise permitted within this
Chapter.
(G) Multi-Vision Signs.
(H) Portable changeable copy signs.
(I) Any type of sign that fluctuates in light intensity or uses
intermittent, strobe or moving lights that does not fall under the definition of a
video display sign, an electronic changeable copy sign, or an electronic graphic
display sign.
(J) Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon the roof or upon any
structure which extends above the eaves of the roof of any building.
(K) Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or color.
(L) Signs or displays that include words or images that are obscene,
pornographic or highly offensive to public decency.
(M) Signs that are not in good repair or do not meet construction
standards.
(N) Signs erected without a building permit.
(0) Signs that contain out-of-date political messages.
(P) Signs that are illegal under State law or regulations.
(Q) Signs that attempt or appear to attempt to regulate, warn, or direct
the movement of traffic or that interfere with, imitate, or resemble any official
traffic sign, signal, or device.
(R) Signs that are erected or maintained on trees or painted or drawn
on rocks or other natural features.
(S) Signs that prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or
fire escape or that are attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(T) Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the
carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle's primary
purpose, but becomes a primary purpose in itself.
XXVII-272
B15488
(U) Temporary signs, when located on the same property as an
electronic changeable copy sign.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 604 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 605. Off-Premises Signs (Billboards).
(A) Location of Off-Premises Signs.
(1) Off-premises signs shall be permitted only within the
Planned Highway Commercial (PHC) District along U S 27? and the
Planned Industry/ Business (PIB) District along the corridor of U.S. 222.
(2) No off-premises sign shall be erected less than ten (10) feet
nor more than fifty (50) feet from any street right-of-way line.
(3) No off-premises sign shall be located closer than 300 feet
from any existing dwelling on an adjoining residential lot.
(4) V-type or back-to-back off-premises sign shall be considered
one sign.
(5) No two (2) off-premises signs shall be spaced less than 1,500
feet apart along any street.
(6) No off-premises sign shall be located in such a manner as to
obscure or otherwise physically interfere with the effectiveness of an
official traffic sign, signal, or device or obstruct or physically interfere
with a driver's view of approaching or intersecting traffic.
(B) Size of Off-Premises Signs.
(1) The maximum gross surface area of an off-premises sign
shall be six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet, with a maximum
length of forty-eight (48) feet, plus temporary embellishments not
exceeding twenty (20) percent of the sign's gross surface area.
(C) Height of Off -Premises Signs.
(1) There shall be a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet to the
top of an off-premises sign face, measured from the ground level at the
base of the sign.
)0CVII-273
B15488
(D) Lighting of Off-Premises Signs.
(1) No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light that
simulates any emergency light device shall be permitted as part of any offpremises
sign.
(2) Flashing devices shall not be permitted on an off-premises
sign. However, illuminated signs that indicate customary public
information, such as time, date, temperature, or other similar information,
shall be permitted.
(3) External lighting, such as floodlights, thin line, and
gooseneck reflectors, are permitted, provided that the light source is
directed on the sign face and is effectively shielded so as to prevent beams
of light from being directed onto any portion of a street.
(4) The illumination of any sign shall be diffused or indirect in
design to prevent direct rays of light from shining onto residential
districts.
(E) Off-Premises Signs with an Electronic Process or Remote Control.
(1) All messages/displays shall remain unchanged for a
minimum of five (5) seconds.
(2) The time interval used to change from one complete
message/display to the next complete message/display shall be a
maximum of one (1) second.
(3) There shall be no appearance of a visual dissolve or fading,
in which any part of one message/display appears simultaneously with
any part of a second message/display.
(4) There shall be no appearance of flashing or sudden bursts of
light, animation, movement, or flow of the message/ display.
(5) Any illumination intensity or contrast of light level shall
remain constant.
(F) Prohibited Off-Premises Signs.
XXVII-274
B15488
(1) Signs that have multiple sign faces oriented in the same
direction and aligned in a side-by-side or high/low fashion.
(2) Signs that advertise defunct businesses.
(3) Signs that are not securely fixed on a substantial structure.
(4) Signs that meet the definitions of video display signs or
multi-vision signs, or contain portions that meet such definitions.
(G) Construction Standards.
(1) All off-premises signs shall be constructed in accordance
with the current Building Code of the Township of Spring.
(2) The structural elements of all off-premises signs shall be of
metal construction.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 605 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 606. Electronic Changeable Copy Signs. In addition to complying with
all other requirements of this Chapter, electronic changeable copy signs shall comply
with the following provisions.
(A) Location of Electronic Changeable Copy Signs
(1) Electronic changeable copy signs shall be permitted only
within the following Districts:
(a) Neighborhood Convenience (NC) District.
(b) Planned Highway Commerce (PHC) District.
(c) Planned Highway Interchange (PHI) District.
(d) Planned Office / Business District (POB) District.
(e) Planned Business and Residential (PBR) District.
(f) Planned Industry/ Business (PIB) District.
(g) Extractive Industry (El) District.
(h) Fuel Storage (FS) District.
(2) In Zoning Districts other than those listed in Section
606(A)(1), electronic changeable copy signs may be permitted by the
Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception use in accordance with the
XXVII-275
B15488
standards contained in Section 322 of this Part for any lot containing one
of the following principal uses :
(a) College or university.
(b) Community center.
(c) Fire station
(d) Nursery school/day care center.
(e) Place of worship.
Public recreation.
(g) School, public/private.
(h) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(3) Such sign must be located on the lot containing the use
identified or advertised on the sign. No electronic changeable copy sign
shall advertise for businesses, goods or products not located on the
premises on which the sign is located. This shall not prohibit general
messages to the public such as community events, birthdays, etc.
(B) Setbacks of Electronic Changeable Copy Signs.
(1) Any electronic changeable copy sign shall be set back a
minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the property boundary line of any
existing principally residential use and from the boundary of any
residential district.
(C) Size of Sign. An electronic changeable copy sign may be used only
in conjunction with an immediately adjacent wall sign or as part of a free
standing sign and shall not be displayed on its own. The electronic changeable
copy portion of the sign shall not be larger than (40%) of the total area of the
permanent graphic portion of the sign when compared as graphic components.
For purposes of determining the allowable total sign area, the permanent graphic
portion of the sign and the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign shall be
included in the same perimeter inclusive of any physical separation between the
two components.
(D) Operational Limitations. Electronic changeable copy signs shall
contain static messages only, changed only through dissolve or fade transitions
which may otherwise not have movement, or the appearance or optical illusion
of movement, of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the
sign, including the movement of any illumination or flashing, scintillating or
varying of light intensity.
XXVII-276
B15488
(E) Limit on Number of Signs. Only one (1) electronic changeable copy
sign, or sign containing a portion thereof, shall be permitted per lot. Such signs
must be included in the total number of signs permitted, and shall not be in
addition to that permitted total.
(F) Duration of Message. Any message, or portion thereof, displayed
on such sign shall have a minimum duration of one (1) minute and must be a
static display. The time of transition from one message or image to the next shall
be no longer than one (1) second. No portion of the message may flash, scroll,
twirl, change color, fade in or out, or in any manner imitate movement.
(G) Text of Message. The text of the sign must be limited to ten words
to allow passing motorists to read the entire copy with minimal distraction.
(H) Illumination of Electronic Changeable Copy Signs.
(1) The brightness of an electronic changeable copy sign shall
not exceed an illumination of 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter)
during daylight hours, and 500 nits between dusk and dawn, as measured
from the sign's face at maximum brightness. The sign shall have an
automatic dimmer switch control to produce a distinct illumination
change from a higher illumination level to a lower illumination level for
the period of time between one half hour before sunset and one half hour
after sunrise. Electronic changeable copy signs shall also be equipped
with automatic monitors and dimmer features to adjust brightness levels
based upon ambient light. At no time shall the sign be operated at a
brightness level greater than the manufacturer's recommended levels.
(2) The lamp wattage and luminance level in nits (candelas per
square meter) shall be provided at the time of permit application. Permit
applications for electronic changeable copy signs shall also include a copy
of the manufacturer's operating manual, which includes the
manufacturer's recommended standards for brightness, and a certification
from the owner or operator of the sign stating that the sign shall at all
times be operated in accordance with all applicable Township regulations
and that the owner or operator shall provide proof of such conformance
upon request of the Township.
(Ordinance No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
XXVII-277
B15488
Section 607. Area of Sign.
(A) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any
supporting framework and bracing which is incidental to the display itself.
(B) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted on a surface, the area shall be considered to be the smallest rectangle
which can be drawn to encompass all of the letters and symbols.
(C) The size of any sign shall be computed by multiplying its greatest
height by its greatest length, exclusive of supporting structures, unless such
supporting structure is illuminated or is in the form of a symbol or contains
advertising copy.
(D) In the case of signs that have no definable edges, such as raised
letters attached to a building facade, the sign size shall be that area within a
single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual message or
copy area.
(E) In computing square foot area of a double-face sign, only one (1)
side shall be considered, provided both sign faces are identical. If the interior
angle formed by the two (2) faces of a double-faced sign is greater than forty-five
(45) degrees, then both sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the
sign area.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 606 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 608. Supplemental Sign Regulations.
(A) Projection. No sign shall project more than twelve (12") inches
from the building façade to which it is attached. No freestanding sign may
project beyond the lot line or beyond a street right-of-way.
(B) Height. No sign that is a part of or is supported by a building shall
be erected upon the roof of such building, nor shall such sign extend above the
height of the building. Freestanding signs shall meet the height requirements of
the particular zoning district in which they are located.
XXVII-278
B15488
(C) Illumination. Signs may be lighted with nonglaring lights or may
be illuminated by shielded floodlights, provided, however, that no red, green or
amber lights shall be permitted and provided that lighting is screened from
adjacent properties. No lights of intermittent, flashing or animated types shall be
permitted.
(D) Placement. No signs shall be permitted which are posted, stapled
or otherwise permanently attached to public utility poles or trees within a street
right-of-way. No portion of any freestanding sign shall be located within
five (5') feet of any side lot line.
(E) Construction. All signs, except temporary signs, shall be
constructed of durable material and kept in good condition and repair. Any sign
which is allowed to become dilapidated may, after thirty (30) days notification,
be removed by the Township at the expense of the owner or lessee of the
property on which it is located.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 607 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 609. Sign Permits.
(A) General
(1) All signs, with the exception of those specifically excluded
under Section 608(B), shall require the issuance of a sign permit prior to
erection or replacement.
(2) No permit will be required for each time the copy changes
on a sign which involves frequent or periodic changes of copy.
(3) All signs must comply with all of the regulations contained
herein, regardless of whether or not a permit is required.
(B) Signs Not Requiring Permits
(1) Official signs of any governmental unit and legal notices
posted pursuant to law.
(2) Nameplate signs.
(3) Memorial or historic markers when approved by the Board
of Supervisors or the Pennsylvania Museum and Historical Commission.
XXVII-279
B15488
(4) Public services signs such as those advertising availability of
restrooms, telephone, meeting times of service organizations or other
similar public conveniences.
(5) No-trespassing signs or signs indicating the private nature of
a road, driveway or premises and signs prohibiting or controlling hunting
and fishing upon the premises.
(C) Freestanding Signs.
(1) If the sign is to be supported by a separate structure to be
erected for that purpose, then the applicant shall supply a map of the lot
indicating the location of the proposed sign and the relative distances to a
point perpendicular to the lot lines. A scaled diagram or photograph of a
similar sign shall also be attached.
(2) A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for freestanding
signs only.
(D) Hazardous Signs.
(1) When in the discretion of the Zoning Officer the type of sign
in question constitutes a potential danger to the community, a certificate
of insurance shall be required. Such policy shall provide $20,000
minimum benefits.
(2) No Sign Permit shall be granted unless the application
conforms to the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 608 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
XXVII-280
B15488
Part 7
Off-Street Parking and Loading
Section 701. Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces.
(A) Requirement.
(1) Each use established, enlarged or altered in any district shall
provide and satisfactorily maintain off-street parking spaces in accordance
with Table 7.1 and the regulations of this Part.
(2) Uses not specifically listed in Table 7.1 shall comply with the
requirements for the most similar use listed in Table 7.1.
(3) Where a proposed use contains or includes more than one
(1) type of use (regardless of whether each use is listed in Table 7.1 or is an
unlisted use), or where a single use involves two or more activities that
have separate and distinct parking demands, the number of parking
spaces required shall be the sum of the parking requirements for each
separate use or activity, except in such cases in which compelling evidence
is provided to demonstrate the extent to which such parking demands
will not be concurrent.
(4) Where the computation of required parking spaces results in
a fractional number, the fraction of one-quarter (1/4, 0.25) or more shall be
counted as one (1).
Table 7.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
CATEGORY PARKING SPACES***
AGRICULTURAL USES
Agriculture 1 per employee
Animal Hospital/ Veterinarian 1 per employee + 4 per doctor
Animal Husbandry 1 per employee
XXVII-281
B15488
CATEGORY
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES***
Greenhouse/ Nursery
Kennel
Riding Stable
Seasonal Roadside Produce Stand
RESIDENTIAL USES
Dwelling, 3 bedrooms or less
Dwelling, 4 bedrooms or more
Group Home
Home Occupation
Housing for the Elderly
Rooming/ Boarding House,
Fraternity and Other Similar Places
RECREATIONAL USES
Bowling Alley
Community Center
Health Club
Library
1 per employee + 1 per 120 SF**
1 per employee + 1 per 4 animals of capacity
1 per employee + 1 per 4 animals of capacity
1 per employee + 1 per 120 SF**
2 per dwelling unit
3 per dwelling unit
1 per each employee on largest shift +
1 space per bedroom
1 per 200 SF of floor area accessible to customers* + 1
per each nonresident employee, to a maximum of
3 spaces in addition to those required for the
dwelling unit
1 per 2 dwelling units + 1 per each employee on
largest shift
1 per roomer/boarder + 1 per each rental unit + 1 for
each employee
5 per lane
12 spaces per 1,000 SF + 1 per employee
1 per 60 SF** + 1 per employee on largest shift
5 per 1,000 SF + 1 per employee
XXVII-282
B15488
CATEGORY
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES***
Indoor Recreation, including
Membership Club
Outdoor Recreation
(Ballfields, Golf Course)
Swimming or Tennis Club
Stadium
Theater or Auditorium
1 per 45 SF of floor area accessible to customers*
+1 per each employee on largest shift
1 per 3 persons of design capacity + 1 per each
Employee on largest shift
1 per 3 persons of maximum occupancy + 1 per each
employee on largest shift
1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee on largest shift
INSTITUTIONAL AND EDUCATIONAL USES
Ambulatory Surgical Center
College or University
Conference/ Training Center
Cultural Center
Hospital/Medical Center or
Nursing Home
Hospital Staff Dormitory
Medical or Dental Office/Clinic
Medical Laboratory
Nursery/ Day Care Center
Patient Hostel
Places of Worship
1 per 600 SF**
1 per 2 students + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per 2 seats + 1 per employee
1 per 500 SF** + 1 per employee (indoor facility) or 1
per 4,000 SF of lot area dedicated to use + 1 per
employee (outdoor facility)
1 per bed + 1 per employee
1 per resident + 1 per employee on largest shift
4 per doctor + 1 per employee
1 per 250 SF**
1 per employee + 1 per 12 children
1 per guest room + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee
XXVII-283
B15488
CATEGORY
School, Elementary/Jr. High
School, High
Utility Substation
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES***
2 per admin. Employee + 1.2 per additional employee
+ 0.25 per gymnasium seat
1 per employee + 1 per every 3 students
accommodated at one time
1 per vehicle required to service such facility
RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES USES
Adult Bookstore
Auto, Gas/Service/Repair
Auto, Recreational or Boat Sales
Fast Food Restaurant, Fast Food
Restaurant with Drive
Through, Food Stand
Financial Institution
Food Stand
Funeral Home
Hotel/ Motel
Laundromat
Nightclub
Office, less than 400 SF
1 per 100 SF** + 1 per employee
2 per service bay + 1 per employee
1 per 10 vehicles/RVs/boats on display + 1 per each
employee
1 per 30 SF** + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per 250 SF** + 1 per employee
1 per 20 SF** + 1 per employee
1 per 50 SF*" + 1 per employee
1 per guest unit + 1 per employee on largest shift.
Parking for any associated restaurant, nightclub,
conference/training, recreation or other use shall be
calculated separately.
1 per 3 machines + 1 per each employee
1 per 30 SF** + 1 per employee on largest shift or 1
per 2 persons of maximum occupancy + 1 per
employee on largest shift, whichever shall require
more spaces
1 per 150 SF**
XXVII-284
B15488
CATEGORY
Office, more than 400 SF
Off-Track Betting Parlor
Open Air Retail
Personal Service Business
Restaurant/Tavern
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES"
1 per 250 SF'
1 per 40 SF** + 1 per employee on largest shift or 1
per 2 persons of maximum occupancy + 1 per
employee on largest shift, whichever shall require
more spaces
1 per 1,500 SF of lot area dedicated to use
1 per 150 SF* + 1 per employee
1 per 40 SF' + 1 per employee on largest shift or 1
per 3 persons of maximum occupancy + 1 per
employee on largest shift, whichever shall require
more spaces
Retail/General Merchandise Store 1 per 200 SF** + 1 per employee
Shopping Center 5 per 1,000 SF** (See additional parking requirements
under §321
INDUSTRIAL, WHOLESALE AND WAREHOUSING USES
Industrial, Manufacturing or 1 per each employee on two largest successive shifts
Warehousing Uses
* Of all floor area occupied by equipment, furnishings or inventory
accessible to customers or patrons, but not including corridors, toilet rooms
and other such accessory rooms as may be provided.
** Gross floor area.
In addition to the required off-street parking spaces, a day care or any interior service
and convenience uses that involve a day-care shall have one (1) off-street stacking space
for every ten (10) participants in the day-care, which shall be in accordance with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of §707.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 701 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 354, March 10, 2008, Section 4)
XXVII -285
B15488
Section 702. General Regulations Applying to Required Off-Street Parking
Facilities.
(A) General. Parking space layout and requirements shall be adequate
for the intended use.
(B) Existing Parking. Structures and uses in existence at the effective
date of this Part shall not be subject to the requirements of this Part provided that
the kind of use is not changed and that any parking facility now serving such
structures or uses shall not in the future be reduced to an amount less than that
required by this Chapter.
(C) Changes in Use.
(1) The required number of parking spaces may be affected by
changes or enlargements in floor area, number of dwellings, type of use,
number of employees, seating capacity or other applicable criteria.
(2) The parking requirements for §701 shall be used to
determine if additional parking is needed. If the requirement after the
change would be greater than one hundred and ten percent (110%) of
what is currently provided, then the use shall provide the additional
parking prior to receiving an occupancy permit.
(D) Continuing Character of Obligation.
(1) All required parking facilities shall be provided and
maintained so long as the use which the facilities were designed to serve
still exists.
(2) Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced in total
extent except when such reduction is in conformity with the requirements
of this Part in conjunction with a change in the nature of the use.
(E) Conflict With Other Uses. No parking area shall be used for any
other use that interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
(F) Location of Parking Spaces. Required off-street parking spaces
shall be on the same lot or premises with the principal use served, except where
off-site parking is permitted as a conditional use.
XXVII-286
B15488
(G) Joint Use. In the commercial areas, two (2) or more uses may
provide for required parking in a common parking lot, provided that the total
number of spaces in such lot shall not be less than the sum of spaces required for
each use individually and provided such parking lot is within three hundred
(300) feet walking distance of all of the principal uses served by such lot.
(H) Parking of Commercial Vehicles. No more than one (1) commercial
motor vehicle with more than six (6) wheels may park on a residential lot within
the RS, MDS, LDS, SS and U Districts.
(I) Recreational Vehicles. Overnight parking of recreational vehicle,
motor homes or campers shall be permitted on non-residential parking lots only
within a campground or a recreational vehicle sales area.
Unlicensed Vehicles. Vehicles without current license plates or
valid inspections, including boats and trailers, shall not be parked or stored
along any public or private street or alley, or upon any residentially zoned
property outside the rear yard area or garage. The number of such vehicles
parked within the rear yard area shall be as provided for in the provisions of the
Township's Property Maintenance Code. The duration for which such vehicles
shall be permitted within the rear yard shall not exceed ninety (90) days.
(K) Vehicle Repair. Except for emergency repairs, no repair to or
maintenance of vehicles shall be permitted in any parking lot or street.
(L) Temporary Seating. Where parking requirements are determined
by the number of seats and temporary seats are provided, the number of parking
spaces to be provided shall be based upon the capacity for temporary seats in
normal usage.
(M) Off-Site Parking. Where off-street parking is permitted by
conditional use approval to be located on a separate lot from the permitted
principal use, the number of required off-street parking spaces may be met by
off-site or remote parking spaces. Off-site parking facilities shall comply with
the following provisions.
(1) Off-site or remote parking facilities shall be located within
two hundred (200) feet of the parcel containing the principal use.
(2) Walking paths between the off -site or remote parking
facilities and the principal use shall not cross streets.
XXVII-287
B15488
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate a copy of a written contract
or agreement with the owner of the property upon which the off-site
parking facility is located, granting the applicant use of said property.
Conditional use approval of off-site or remote parking shall expire upon
the expiration of such contract or agreement.
(4) Such off-site parking facilities shall comply with all other
applicable provisions of this Section.
(N) All off-street parking facilities shall comply with the applicable
ADA standards.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section; 702 of Section 2)
Section 703. Design Standards for Off-Street Parking Facilities.
(A) General Requirements.
(1) Every parking facility shall be designed so that its use does
not constitute a nuisance, hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
(2) Every parking area shall be arranged for orderly, safe
movement.
(3) No parking area shall be designed to require or encourage
parked vehicles to back into a public street in order to leave a parking
space, except those of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
(4) Every parking area shall be designed so that each motor
vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle, except those of s
single-family or two-family dwelling.
(5) No parking area shall be located in a required buffer yard.
(6) No parking area shall be located within ten (10) feet of a
septic system absorption area.
(7) All common parking areas and access drives shall be
surfaced with asphalt or other appropriate material approved by the
Township, shall be graded to provide convenient vehicular access and
proper drainage and shall be maintained in usable condition. The
maximum grade of areas for parking shall not exceed six percent (6%).
XXVII-288
B15488
Surface water shall not be concentrated onto streets, sidewalks or other
lots.
(8) All dead-end parking areas shall be designed to provide
sufficient backup area for the end stalls of the parking area.
(9) Parking areas and interior accessways shall be designed so
as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site.
(B) Parking Spaces.
(1) Each parking space shall have a stall width of at least ten
(10) feet.
(2) Each parking space shall have a stall depth of:
(a) At least twenty (20) feet for all angle parking.
(b) At least twenty-two (22) feet for parallel parking.
(3) All spaces shall be marked in parking areas so as to indicate
their location, except those of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
(C) Aisles.
(1) Each aisle providing access to stalls for one-way traffic only
shall be at least the minimum aisle width specified as follows:
Angle of Parking Minimum Aisle Width
Parallel 12 feet
30 degrees 12 feet
45 degrees 14 feet
60 degrees 18 feet
90 degrees 20 feet
(2) Each aisle providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall
be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width.
XXVII-289
B15488
(3) No aisle shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in length.
(D) Grading, Surface Drainage. Except for areas that are landscaped
and so maintained, all portions of required parking facilities, including
driveways and access drives, shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt or other
appropriate material approved by the Township, and drained to the extent
necessary to prevent dust, erosion or excessive water flow across streets or
adjoining properties.
(E) Nighttime Illumination.
(1) Any parking area designed for use by six (6) or more cars
after dusk shall be adequately illuminated.
(2) All lighting fixtures used to illuminate parking areas shall be
arranged to prevent glare into public streets and adjoining properties.
(3) Parking lots serving residential uses shall, as a minimum, be
illuminated over their entire surface to one-half (0.5) average maintained
footcandles (5.4 avg. maintained lux).
(4) Parking lots serving commercial and industrial uses shall, as
a minimum, be illuminated over their entire surface to one (1.0) average
maintained footcandles (10.8 avg. maintained lux).
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 703 of Section 2)
Section 704. Access Drives and Driveways.
(A) General Requirements.
(1) Adequate provisions shall be made to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street at the point of
driveway or access drive entry. No driveway or access drive shall be
constructed in such a way as to create a drainage problem to an adjacent
property or public street.
(2) Where access is to a State road, a State Highway Occupancy
Permit shall be obtained.
(3) Where access drives and driveways are proposed as part of
subdivision or land development, the provisions of the Township's
XXVII-290
B15488
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) shall also
be met.
(4) Access drives and driveways shall be designed so as to
prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site.
(5) Provisions shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways, without undue
congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow within the
Township.
(6) All streets and accessways shall conform to the specifications
determined by the Township Engineer and the requirements of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter
XXVII). Provision shall be made for adequate signalization, turn, standby
and deceleration lanes and similar facilities where deemed necessary by
the Township Engineer, after receiving any input or requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(B) Design Standards.
(1) Each access drive shall have a minimum width of twelve (12)
feet and maximum width of fifteen (15) feet at the street line for one- way
use only and a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and maximum
width of thirty-five (35) feet at the street line for two-way use.
(2) Grades of access drives shall not exceed ten percent (10%)
and grades of driveways shall not exceed twelve percent (12%); however,
in both cases the initial twenty (20) feet from the edge of the cartway shall
not exceed five percent (5%).
(3) Uses Fronting on an Arterial or Collector Street. The
following requirements apply to any use fronting on an arterial or
collector street:
(a) Each use that has one hundred (100) feet of frontage
shall have a maximum of one (1) access drive or driveway onto
each such street. Each use that has one hundred (100) feet or more
of frontage shall be permitted to have a second access drive or
driveway onto each such street, provided that all appropriate
separation distances and sightlines otherwise required in this
Chapter are met. In addition to the above, one additional access
drive or driveway unto each such street is permitted for each one
XXVII-291
B15488
hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage beyond the original one
hundred (100) feet. Where practicable, access to parking areas shall
be provided by a common service drive in order to avoid direct
access to an arterial or collector street.
(b) A minimum separation distance of one hundred fifty
(150) feet along street frontage is required between any newly
created private entrance or exit driveway or access drive serving a
commercial or industrial use and any existing public street that
intersects the fronting street. The separation distance shall be
measured from the centerline of the driveway or access drive and
closest right-of-way line of the street.
(c) Large Developments. In the case of any development
intended to involve more than five (5) commercial or industrial
buildings or lots, or more than ten (10) acres of commercial,
industrial, garden apartment or townhouse uses, each point of
vehicular access to and from a public street shall be located at least
two hundred (200) feet from the intersection of any public street
right-of-way lines, provided that such point of vehicular access
which converts a "T" intersection into an intersection of two (2)
streets which cross one another shall be permitted. The separation
distance shall be measured from the centerline of the vehicular
access and the closest right-of-way line of the street.
(4) At least fifty (50) feet shall be provided between any two (2)
access drives along one (1) street for one (1) lot.
(5) No access drive or driveway shall be less than thirty (30) feet
from any street intersection. The separation distance shall be measured
from the centerline of the driveway or access drive and closest right of
way line of the street
(6) No driveways or access drives shall be within two (2) feet of
any property line unless such driveway or access drive is shared by an
adjacent house.
(7) Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, no driveway
shall be constructed so that there is more than one (1) entrance to a street
unless entrances are separated by a distance of two hundred (200) feet.
(8) No driveway or access drive shall be constructed or
maintained which does not meet the following regulations:
XXVII-292
B15488
(a) Entrance to the street shall be at an angle of seventyfive
(75) degrees to one hundred and five (105) degrees with the
intersecting street.
(b) The driveway or access drive between the right-ofway
of the street and the cartway shall be paved.
(c) All curb cuts shall be properly constructed to
Township standards when curbing is provided; if curbing is not
provided, then adequate drainage provisions shall be provided as
determined by the Township Engineer.
(9) All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service
areas or spaces between or about buildings, other than those related to a
dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated during night hours of use at no
cost to the Township, in accordance with the provisions of Section 703(E).
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 704 of Section 2)
Section 705. Off-Street Loading.
(A) General Requirements. Each use shall provide paved off-street
loading facilities sufficient to accommodate the maximum demand generated by
the use, which comply with the regulations contained in §705.
(B) The number and size of off-street loading spaces shall be
appropriate for the use to be conducted on the premises and sufficient to
accommodate all vehicles serving the use. Off-street loading spaces shall comply
with the following provisions:
(1) Loading docks shall be provided for all uses that require the
loading of any truck requiring a CDL or that contain in excess of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area in an area under single
lease or ownership.
(2) No repair work or servicing of vehicles, except for
emergency repairs, shall be conducted in a loading area.
XXVII-293
B15488
(3) The number of required off-street loading spaces shall be
determined as follows:
CATEGORY
Commercial
Industrial
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
LOADING SPACES
1 per 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
1 per 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(4) Deviations from the above-required number of off-street
loading spaces may be permitted by the Zoning Officer if, when a zoning
approval or building permit is applied for, the application shall show all
provisions for off-street loading and include supporting data (number,
frequency and size of vehicles which will use the loading facilities), which
justify the number and size of the spaces provided. Number and size of
spaces provided shall be approved by the Zoning Officer unless otherwise
indicated in this Section.
(C) Design and Layout of Off-Street Loading Facilities. Off-street
loading facilities shall be designed to conform to the following specifications:
(1) The requirements of this Section shall apply to all new
industrial, commercial, office and mixed-use developments and to all
expansions of such existing uses resulting in an increase in gross floor area
of twenty percent (20%) or more from the effective date of this Part.
(2) Each off-street loading and unloading space shall be at least
fourteen (14) feet in width by seventy-five (75) feet in depth and shall have
a clear height of no less than fourteen (14) feet.
(3) Off-street loading areas shall be completely contained upon
the site of the building served and shall neither occupy nor infringe upon
any parking spaces, traffic lanes within a parking area, driveways, access
drives or street rights-of-way.
(4) A planting screen in accordance with the requirements of
§405(I) shall be provided between loading areas and any existing
residential use.
(5) Each space shall have sufficient maneuvering room separate
from other parking to eliminate traffic conflicts within off-street loading
and parking areas.
XXVII -294
B15488
(6) Each space shall be located entirely on the lot being served
and be so located that each space and all maneuvering room is outside of
required buffer areas, yard areas and right-of-ways.
(7) An appropriate means of access to a street or alley shall be
provided that the maximum width of driveways (measured at the street
lot line) shall be thirty-five (35) feet and that the minimum width shall be
twenty-four (24) feet.
(8) All off-street loading and unloading spaces, maneuvering
areas, driveways and entranceways shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt
or other suitable material and drained to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances of dust, erosion or
excessive water flow across public ways and to protect adjoining property.
(9) No such facilities shall be designed or used in any manner so
as to constitute a nuisance, a hazard or an unreasonable impediment to
traffic.
(10) Any loading docks or truck maneuvering areas shall be
placed in such locations that are the maximum distance possible from any
adjacent residential district and from existing residences. Buildings and
loading docks shall be located and oriented, to the greatest extent
practicable, so that the loading docks shall be located along walls that do
not face adjoining residences or residential districts. It shall be the
applicant's responsibility to demonstrate compliance with these
requirements.
(11) All such facilities shall comply with the lighting
requirements of §703(E) and the landscaping requirements of §706.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 705 of Section 2)
Section 706. Parking Lot Landscaping.
(A) All areas not serving as parking spaces, aisles, access drives or
pedestrian walkways shall be covered with an all-season groundcover and be
well maintained.
(B) Except where entrance and exit drives cross street lines, all parking
areas for any purpose other than single-family residences and two- family
residences shall be physically separated from any public street by a raised curb
XXVII-295
B15488
or landscaped berm and an area not less than ten (10) feet in depth (measured
from the right-of-way line) which shall be covered with an all-season
groundcover and maintained.
(C) Any lot that would include more than thirty (30) parking spaces
shall be required to provide landscaped areas within the paved area. This
required landscaped area shall be equal to a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
total paved area. Such landscaped areas shall be configured to promote
pedestrian safety by defining walkways, to enhance motorist safety by defining
traffic lanes and discouraging cross-lot taxiing, to act as a barrier against windborne
debris and dust, to provide shade moderating microclimatic conditions, to
reduce the volume and velocity of stormwater runoff and to enhance the
appearance of the parking areas.
(D) One (1) deciduous tree of a minimum caliper of one and one-half (1
1/2) inches shall be required for every eighteen (18) required off-street parking
spaces. The trees shall be of species acceptable to the Planning Commission.
(E) A substantial proportion of the trees required by this Section
should be planted within the parking lot within protected islands. Required
trees are also encouraged to be planted in highly visible locations, especially
between parking areas and major streets.
(F) The landscaped areas shall not obstruct sight distances for
motorists or pedestrians, nor shall such landscaping create any potential hazard
to public safety.
(G) Each individual plot of landscaping within a parking lot shall
occupy an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet and shall
have no side dimension of less than five (5) feet.
(H) Landscaped areas shall be protected from the encroachment of
vehicles by use of curbing, wheel stops, bollards, fencing or other approved
barriers.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 706 of Section 2)
XXVII-296
B15488
Section 707. Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations.
(A) General Provisions. The purpose of off-street stacking space
regulations is to promote public safety by alleviating on-site and off-site traffic
congestion from the operation of a facility which utilizes a drive-through service
unit. Any use having a drive-through service unit shall provide the required offstreet
stacking area on-site and shall locate the drive-through facilities in such a
way as to ensure that on-site and off-site traffic conflicts, hazards and congestion
are avoided. Each drive-through service unit shall provide the stacking spaces as
follows:
(1) Each stacking space shall be not less than eight and one-half
(8-1/2) feet in width and seventeen and one-half (17-1/2) feet in length,
with additional spaces for necessary turning and maneuvering.
(2) The area required for stacking spaces shall be exclusive of
and in addition to any required parking space, loading space, driveway,
access drive or aisle, unless otherwise permitted.
(3) A parking space at any component of a drive-through
service unit (window, menu board, order station, or service bay) shall be
considered to be a stacking space.
(4) Any area reserved for stacking spaces shall not double as a
circulation drive or maneuvering area.
(5) Sites with stacking spaces shall include an exclusive bypass
aisle, drive or other circulation area in the parking lot design to allow
vehicles to bypass the stacking area.
(6) Any component of a drive-through service unit may project
up to one (1) foot into the stacking area.
(7) Drive-through service units may contain more than one (1)
component part. Service units may contain such components as menu
board(s), pay windows, and food-service pickup windows. To determine
the number of off-street stacking spaces located before a service unit, the
final component of the service unit shall be used in determining the
location of the off-street stacking spaces. In the case of car washes, the
final component of a service unit is the entrance to the car wash building
itself.
XXVII-297
B15488
(8) Where a single drive-through lane serves more than one (1)
drive-through service unit, the minimum number of stacking spaces
provided shall equal the combined total required for each service unit.
(B) Required stacking spaces.
(1) Car wash:
(a) Self-service or hand wash: Three (3) spaces before the
final component of each service unit; two (2) spaces at the exit of
each unit.
(b) Semi- or fully automatic: Ten (10) spaces before the
final component of each service unit; two (2) spaces at the exit of
each unit.
(2) Drive-In (Outdoor) Theater. Before the ticket service
window or area, stacking space shall be equal to twenty (20) percent of the
total off-street parking capacity of the theater. The in-bound reservoir
area shall not connect or conflict in any way with the exit drives.
(3) Restaurants or Financial Institutions (including ATMs),
(a) One (1) drive-through service unit. Six (6) spaces
before the final component of the service unit; two (2) spaces at the
exit of the unit.
(b) For each additional drive-through service unit. Four
(4) spaces before the final component of each additional service
unit; one (1) space at the exit of each unit.
(c) The number of stacking spaces required above shall
be considered minimums. The Township may require additional
stacking spaces when they are deemed necessary to comply with
the general provisions of this section.
(d) Where an applicant can provide compelling evidence
that fewer than the required number of stacking spaces would
adequately serve a drive-through establishment, the number of
required stacking spaces may by Special Exception be reduced by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
XXVII-298
B15488
(4) All other facilities utilizing a drive-through service unit,
including, but not limited to, laundry and dry cleaning stations, photo
drop-off/pick-up stations, automobile oil change or lubrication facilities:
Three (3) spaces before the final component of the service unit; one (1)
space at the exit of each service unit.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 707 of Section 2)
XXVII -299
B15488
Part 8
Administration
Section 801. General Procedure.
(A) Persons desiring to undertake any new construction, structural or
site alteration, or changes in the use of a building or lot shall apply to the
Township Zoning Officer for a zoning permit by filling out the appropriate
application form and by submitting the required fee.
(B) The Zoning Officer shall either issue the zoning permit or shall
deny the permit, indicating in writing the reason for refusal. Certain
construction, alterations or uses require approval of the Zoning Hearing Board
and/or of the Board of Supervisors, and/or the recommendations of the
Planning Commission.
(C) If denied a permit by the Zoning Officer, the applicant may appeal
to the Zoning Hearing Board for further consideration.
(D) After the zoning permit has been received by the applicant, he may
undertake the action permitted by the zoning permit, so long as no other permits
are required, including, but not limited to, state and local building permits and
approvals.
(E) Upon completion of such action, the applicant may apply to the
Township Zoning Officer for an occupancy permit (where such a permit is
required).
(F) If the Zoning Officer finds that the action of the applicant is in
accordance with the zoning permit and any other required permits, he shall issue
an occupancy permit allowing the premises to be occupied.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 801 of Section 2)
Section 802. Permits and Certificates.
(A) Zoning Permit.
(1) Scope.
(a) No person shall erect, alter, convert, move or add to
any building, structure or sign, nor alter the use of any land or
XXVII-3 00
B15488
structure, until the Zoning Officer issues a zoning permit to the
person for said change or construction.
(b)
and repairs.
No zoning permit is required for normal maintenance
(2) Types of Uses.
(a) Permitted Uses. A zoning permit for a permitted use
may be issued by the Zoning Officer.
(b) Special Exception, Variance. A zoning permit for a
use requiring a special exception or variance shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer only upon the written order of the Zoning Hearing
Board after a hearing. An application for a special exception,
variance or for interpretation of any part or provision of this
Chapter shall be made to the Zoning Hearing Board on forms
which may be obtained from the Township Secretary.
(c) Conditional Use. A zoning permit for a conditional
use shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only upon the written
order of the Board of Supervisors. An application for a conditional
use shall be made to the Board of Supervisors on forms which may
be obtained from the Township Secretary.
(3) Application.
(a) All applications shall be made in writing and shall be
accompanied by two (2) sets of plans. Such plans shall be prepared
by a licensed surveyor or engineer at the discretion of the Zoning
Officer. The plan shall depict at least the following information if
applicable:
1) Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be
built upon prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer.
2) The exact size and location on the lot of
buildings, structures, all rights-of-way and easements,
public or private, signs and existing and/or proposed
extensions thereto prepared by a licensed surveyor or
engineer.
3) The number of dwelling units if applicable.
)0(VII-3 01
B15488
4) Vehicular access, parking spaces and loading
facilities.
5) Statement indicating the existing or proposed
use.
6) Height of structure, building or sign.
7) All other information necessary for such
Zoning Officer to determine conformance with and provide
for enforcement of this Chapter.
8) A detailed scaled drawing of the signs showing
intended location and stating how it shall be affixed.
9) A statement indicating the type of construction
and the manner of installation for signs, together with the
materials to be used.
(b) One (1) copy of the plans shall be returned to the
applicant by the Zoning Officer after he shall have marked such
copies either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by
his signature on such copy.
(c) One (1) copy of all such plans shall be retained by the
Zoning Officer for his permanent records.
(4) Issuance.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall issue or refuse an application
for a zoning permit within thirty (30) days after the date such
application was made, except as specifically provided for in this
Chapter.
(b) A zoning permit shall be issued in at least triplicate.
(c) One (1) copy shall be kept conspicuously on the
premises. No person shall perform building operations of any kind
unless a zoning permit is being displayed as required by this
Chapter.
)0(VII-302
B15488
(d) In case of denial, the applicant shall be informed of
his rights of appeal. Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning
Hearing Board within thirty (30) days of the date of denial of the
permit.
(5) Expiration of Zoning Permit. Zoning permit shall expire
within six (6) months from date of issuance, if work described in any
permit has not begun. If work described in any zoning permit has begun
within the six (6) month period, said permit shall expire after one (1) year
from date of issuance thereof.
(B) Occupancy Permit.
(1) Scope. Prior to the use, occupancy of any land or building or
for any change of use of any existing building or for any change of use of
land, an occupancy permit shall be secured from the Zoning Officer.
(2) Application. The application for certificate of use and
occupancy shall be submitted in such form as the Zoning Officer may
prescribe accompanied by an "as built survey" prepared by a licensed
surveyor or engineer.
(3) Issuance.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall inspect any structure,
building, sign and /or land or portions thereof and shall determine
the conformity therewith. If he is satisfied that the completed work
is in conformity with this Chapter and with the work listed in the
zoning permit, he shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy.
(b) Certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted or
refused in writing within ten (10) days from the date of application.
(c) In zones in which performance standards are
imposed, no certificate of occupancy shall become permanent until
thirty (30) days after the facility is fully operating and only after,
upon reinspection by the Zoning Officer, it is determined that the
facility is in compliance with all performance standards. After said
reinspection the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant that the
facility is in full compliance with all performance standards and
that the certificate of use and occupancy is permanent or that the
facility does not comply and that the certificate of use and
occupancy is still temporary.
XXVII-303
B15488
(C) Other Permits. The Township may require additional permits
specified in other related ordinances and laws.
(D) Certificate of Nonconforming Use or Structure.
(1) The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful
nonconforming use or structure may secure a certificate of nonconforming
use or structure from the Zoning Officer.
(2) Such certificate shall be authorized by the Zoning Officer
and shall certify to the owner his right to continue such nonconforming
use or structure.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 802 of Section 2)
Section 803. Zoning Officer.
(A) Appointment.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors and shall not hold any elective office.
(2) The Zoning Officer or staff shall continue to serve the
Township until such time as the Board of Supervisors declares otherwise.
(B) Duties and Powers
(1) The Zoning Officer shall:
(a) Administer this Chapter in accordance with its literal
terms.
(b) Identify and register nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures.
(c) Receive and examine all applications required under
the terms of this Chapter.
(d) Issue or refuse permits within sixty (60) days of the
receipt of the application, except as specifically provided for in this
Chapter.
XXVII-304
B15488
(e) Receive complaints of violation of this Chapter.
(f) Issue a written notice of violation to any person
violating any provision of this Chapter.
(g) Keep records of applications, permits and certificates
issued, of variances and special exceptions granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board, of conditional uses granted by the Board of
Supervisors, of complaints received, of inspections made, of reports
rendered and of notice or orders issued.
(h) Make all required inspections and perform all other
duties as called for in this Chapter.
(i) Be responsible for keeping this Chapter and the
Zoning Map up to date so as to include all amendments thereto.
Issue certificates of use and occupancy in accordance
with the terms of this Chapter.
(k) Perform such other duties and functions as
authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. Section 10101, et seq., as amended, and/or by the Board of
Supervisors.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall not have the power to permit any
construction, use or change of use which does not conform to this
Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 803 of Section 2)
Section 804. Zoning Hearing Board.
(A) Appointment.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three (3) residents
of the Township appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Board members shall serve terms of three (3) years, so fixed
that the term of office of one (1) member shall expire each year.
(3) Members of the Board shall hold no other elective or
appointed office in the Township.
XXVII-305
B15488
(4) The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least
one but no more than three residents of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Zoning Hearing Board. The term of office of an alternate
member shall be three (3) years. When seated pursuant to the provisions
of this Section, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Zoning Hearing Board to the same and
full extent as provided by law for the Zoning Hearing Board members,
including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting Zoning Hearing
Board member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and
duties set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code and as otherwise
provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other elected or appointed
office in the Township, including service as a member of the Planning
Commission or as a zoning officer, nor shall any alternate be an employee
of the Township. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or
discussion of the Zoning Hearing Board but shall not be entitled to vote as
a member of the Zoning Hearing Board nor be compensated pursuant to
this Part unless designated as a voting alternate Zoning Hearing Board
member pursuant to this Section.
(B) Vacancies.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board
of Supervisors of any vacancies which occur.
(2) Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of a term.
(C) Removal. Any Zoning Hearing Board member may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a
majority vote of the Board of Supervisors which appointed the Zoning Hearing
Board member, taken after the Zoning Hearing Board member has received
fifteen (15) days advance notice of the intent to take such vote. A hearing shall
be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
XXVII-306
B15488
(D) Organization.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own
membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may
succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any
action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the Zoning
Hearing Board members, but the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a
hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on it
behalf and the parties may waive further action by the Zoning Hearing
Board as provided in this Section.
(2) The chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board may designate
alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board to replace any absent or
disqualified member, and if, by reason of absence or disqualification of a
member, a quorum is not reached, the chairman of the Zoning Hearing
Board shall designate as may alternate members of the Zoning Hearing
Board to sit on the Zoning Hearing Board as may be needed to reach a
quorum. Any alternate member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
continue to serve on the Zoning Hearing Board in all proceedings
involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially
appointed until the Zoning Hearing Board has made a final decision on
the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this Section
shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining
seniority among the alternates.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind
rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with this Chapter, and all
applicable Township ordinances and laws of the Commonwealth. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall keep full public records of its business, which
records shall be the property of the Township, and shall submit a report of
its activities to the Board of Supervisors as requested by the Board of
Supervisors.
(E) Expenditures for Services. Within the limits of funds appropriated
by the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract
for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical
services. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation for
the performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, but
in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the
Board of Supervisors. Alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board may
receive compensation, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, for the
performance of their duties when designated as alternate members pursuant to
XXVII-307
B15488
this Section, but in no case shall such compensation exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the Board of Supervisors.
(F) Hearings and Meetings. Hearings and meetings of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as
the Zoning Hearing Board, by majority vote, may determine. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
this Part.
(G) Jurisdiction.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction
to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
(a) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use
ordinance, except those brought before the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance
raising procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by appeal
taken within thirty (30) days after the effective date of said
ordinance.
(c) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning
Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any
permit, or failure to act on the application therefore, the issuance of
any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register
any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
(d) Appeals from a determination by the Township
Engineer or the Zoning Officer which reference to the
administration of the floodplain ordinance or such provisions
within a land use ordinance.
(e) Applications for variances from the terms of this
Chapter and the floodplain ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
(f) Applications for special exceptions under this
Chapter or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
(g) Appeals from the determination of any officer or
agency charged with the administration of any transfers or
XXVII-308
B15488
development rights or performance density provisions of this
Chapter.
(h) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination.
(i) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer
or municipal engineer in the administration of any land use
ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and
erosion control and storm water management.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
(a) All applications for approvals of planned residential
developments.
(b) All applications for approval of subdivisions or land
developments.
(c) Applications for conditional use under the express
provisions of this Chapter.
(d) Applications for curative amendment to this Chapter.
(e) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances.
Any action on such petitions shall be deemed legislative acts,
provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to
enlarge or diminish existing law with reference to appeals to court.
(H) Applications to the Board.
(1) All appeals from a decision of the Zoning Officer and
applications to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be submitted in writing on
forms prescribed by the Zoning Hearing Board. Four copies shall be
required.
(2) Every appeal or application shall include the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, or appellant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the property to
be affected by such proposed change or appeal. A copy of the Deed
XXVII-309
B15488
of Record or other instrument under which applicant claims
standing shall be attached to the application.
(c) A brief description and location of the property to be
affected by such proposed change or appeal.
(d) A statement of the present zoning classification of the
property in question, the improvements thereon and the present
use thereof.
(e) A statement of the Section of this Chapter under
which the appeal is made and reasons why it should be granted, or
a statement of the Section of this Chapter governing the situation in
which the alleged erroneous ruling is being appealed and the
reasons for this appeal.
(f) A reasonably accurate description of the additions or
changes intended to be made under this application, indicating the
size, material and general construction of such proposed
improvements. A plot plan of the property to be affected,
indicating the location and size of the lot and the size of existing
and intended improvements, shall be attached to the description.
(I) Time Limitations.
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the
Zoning Hearing Board later than thirty (30) days after an application for
development, preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate
municipal officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure
reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges
and proves that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that
such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his
interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to
appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan pursuant to this
Chapter or from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge
to the validity of this Chapter or map shall preclude an appeal from a final
approval except in the case where the final submission substantially
deviates from the approved tentative approval.
(2) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners
shall be filed by the landowner within thirty (30) days after notice of the
determination is issued.
)0CVII-310
B15488
(J) Stay of Proceedings. Upon filing of any proceeding before the
Zoning Hearing Board and during its pendency before the Zoning Hearing
Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or
approval of the Zoning Officer or of the Zoning Hearing Board or Board of
Supervisors, and all official action thereunder, shall be stayed unless the Zoning
Officer or Board of Supervisors certifies to the Zoning Hearing Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which
case the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the
court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the
Zoning Officer or Board of Supervisors. When an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been duly ,approved and proceedings designed to
reserve or limit the approval are filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction
of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to
continuing the proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 804 of Section 2; As amended by Ordinance
No. 392, Section 10, June 11, 2012)
Section 805. Zoning Hearing Board Functions.
(A) Variances.
(1) Four (4) copies of an application for a variance shall be
submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such application shall include all
information specified for a zoning permit application and any other
information the Zoning Hearing Board deems necessary to make
determination. The applicant shall be responsible for all pertinent costs
incurred for the review of the application.
(2) The administrative procedures for a variance hearing shall
be consistent with the requirements specified by Section 807 of this Part.
(3) The Township Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors shall receive a copy of the application and shall have thirty
(30) days to review and make comments and a recommendation at their
discretion.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances
where it is alleged that the provisions of this Chapter inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The Zoning Hearing Board may by rule
XXVII-31
B15488
prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary application
to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance,
provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant in a
given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot
size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of
this Chapter in the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Chapter
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created
by the appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the
minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the
least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(5) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code
and this Chapter.
(B) Special Exceptions.
(1) Four (4) copies of an application for a special exception shall
be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such application shall include
all information specified for a zoning permit application and any other
XXVII-3 l 2
B15488
information the Zoning Hearing Board deems necessary to make
determination. The applicant shall be responsible for all pertinent costs
incurred for the review of the application.
(2) The administrative procedures for a special exception
hearing shall be consistent with the requirements specified by Section 807
of this Part.
(3) The Township Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors shall receive a copy of the application and shall have thirty
(30) days to review and make comments and a recommendation at their
discretion.
(4) Where the Board of Supervisors, in this Chapter, has stated
special exceptions to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board
pursuant to express standards and criteria, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance
with such standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the
Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code
and this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 805 of Section 2)
Section 806. Conditional Uses.
(A) Four (4) copies of an application for permission to conduct a use
permitted by condition shall be submitted to the Township Board of Supervisors.
Such application shall include all information specified for a zoning permit
application and any other information necessary to allow the Township Board of
Supervisors to determine that all requirements of this Chapter have been met.
The applicant shall be responsible for all pertinent costs incurred for the review
of the application.
(B) The administration procedures for a conditional use hearing shall
be consistent with the requirements specified by Section 807 of this Part.
(C) The Township Planning Commission shall receive a copy of the
application and shall have thirty (30) days to review and make comments and a
recommendation at their discretion.
XXVII-3 13
B15488
(D) Conditional uses shall meet the specific standard established for
each use by this Chapter and all other applicable Zoning District requirements
and general regulations established by this Chapter. In addition, the following
standards shall be met:
(1) The use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a
conditional use in the Zoning District wherein the applicant is seeking a
conditional use.
(2) The use conforms with the goals, objectives and policies of
the Township Comprehensive Plan.
(3) The use conforms with the spirit, purposes and intent of all
other applicable provisions of all other Township ordinances.
(4) The use conforms with all pertinent State and Federal laws,
regulations and requirements.
(5) Services and utilities shall be made available to adequately
service the proposed use.
(6) The use will not generate traffic such that hazardous or
unduly congested conditions will result.
(7) The use is appropriate to the site in question.
(8) The use shall not adversely affect the character of the general
neighborhood, nor the health and safety of residents or workers on
adjacent properties and in the general neighborhood.
(E) The granting of permission to conduct a use permitted by condition
does not exempt an applicant from acquiring all approvals required by the
Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (see Chapter XXVII
of the Township Code of Ordinances).
(F) The approval of a conditional use, if authorized by the Board of
Supervisors, which anticipates construction or modification of a structure,
creation of new or revised lot lines or dimensional standards for a property or
structure situated thereon, shall be valid and remain in effect for a term of one (1)
year from the date of said approval and shall thereafter expire and be void,
unless said construction, modification, new or revised lot lines or dimensional
standards or change of use or occupancy be initiated within said one (1) year
term or said term is expressly extended as part of the initial approval. In the
XXVII-3 14
B15488
event that the activity anticipated by the conditional use should not be initiated
within one (1) year of the approval or such additional term as may be expressed
in the approval or should the activity which is the subject of the conditional use
be discontinued, the premises or structure or structure situated thereon shall not
thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
(G) The Board of Supervisors shall hold hearings on and decide
requests for conditional uses in accordance with the standards and criteria set
forth in this Chapter. The hearing shall be conducted by the Board of
Supervisors or the Board of Supervisors may appoint any member or an
independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is
called for, the findings shall be made by the Board of Supervisors. However, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Township may,
prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Board of
Supervisors and accept the decision or finding of the hearing officer as final. In
granting a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Chapter, as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this act in this Chapter.
(H) The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision or, when
no decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use application
within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board of Supervisors. Where the
application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact or conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions to this Chapter or of any ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons
why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
(I) Where the Board of Supervisors fails to render the decision within
the period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete
the required hearing as provided in this Part, the decision shall be deemed to
have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in
writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been
rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board of
Supervisors to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board of
Supervisors shall give public notice of the decision within ten days from the last
day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by the
public notice requirements of this Chapter. If the Board of Supervisors shall fail
to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
(J) Nothing in this Section shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
XXVII-315
B15488
jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of
the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no
later than the day following its date.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 806 of Section 2)
Section 807. Hearings. The boards shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following:
(A) Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the zoning officer, adjacent property owners, the Township Planning
Commission and to any person who has made timely request for the same.
Written notices shall be given by regular mail at least one week prior to the
hearing. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said
hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one
week prior to the hearing.
(B) The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearings before the boards, by Resolution, from time-to-time. Fees for
said hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of the
zoning hearing board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative
overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal
expenses of the zoning hearing board, expenses for engineering, architectural or
other technical consultants or expert witness costs.
(C) The first hearing before the board or hearing officer shall be
commenced within sixty (60) days from 'the date of receipt of applicant's
application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
Each subsequent hearing before the board or hearing officer shall be held within
forty-five (45) days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall complete the
presentation of his case-in-chief within one hundred (100) days of the first
hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the board or hearing officer shall
assure that the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the one
hundred (100) days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the
application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application
within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing held after the completion of
the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted
additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the persons opposed
to the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings. Persons
opposed to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the
record by the applicant and Township, be granted additional hearings to
XXVII-316
B15488
complete their opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
(D) The hearings shall be conducted by the board or the board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The
decision, or, where not decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the
board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to
the Township, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as
final.
(E) The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any persons
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
board, and any other person including civic or community organizations
permitted to appear by the board. The board shall have power to require that all
persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms
provided by the board for that purpose.
(F) The chairman or acting chairman of the board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
(G) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence an argument
and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
(H) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(I) The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for the stenographer
shall be shared equally by the applicant and the board. The cost of the original
transcript shall be paid by the board if the transcript is ordered by the board or
hearing officer or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the
board if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the
party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
(D The board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall
not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other
)0CVII-3 17
B15488
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an
opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his
representatives unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
(K) The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called or, make written findings on the
application within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the board or
hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall
be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with
the reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provision of this act or of any
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on
and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the
facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been
no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the board shall make his
report and recommendations available to the parties within forty-five (45) days
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the
board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the board's decision shall
be entered no later than thirty (30) days after the report of the hearing officer.
Except for challenges filed where the board fails to render the decision within the
period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the
required hearing as provided in this Section, the decision shall be deemed to
have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in
writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been
rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the board to meet or
render a decision as hereinabove provided, the board shall give public notice of
said decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a
decision in the same manner as provided in this Section. If the board shall fail to
provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision
to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(L) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of
the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not
later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their
name and address with the board not later than the last day of the hearing, the
board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings
and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be
examined.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 807 of Section 2)
Section 808. Challenge to the Validity of Ordinance or Map.
XXVII -318
B15488
(A) A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the
validity of this Chapter or map or any provisions thereof which prohibits or
restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest shall submit
the challenge either:
(1) to the Zoning Hearing Board; or
(2) to the Board of Supervisors, together with a request for a
curative amendment.
(B) Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land
of another by this Chapter or map, or any provision thereof, who desires to
challenge its validity on substantive grounds shall first submit their challenge to
the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision thereon.
(C) The submissions referred to above shall be governed by the
following:
(1) In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the
challenging part shall make a written request to the Zoning Hearing
Board that it hold a hearing on its challenge. The request shall contain the
reasons for the challenge. Where the landowner desires to challenge the
validity of this Chapter, or map, or provisions thereof, and elects to
proceed by curative amendment, his application to the Board of
Supervisors shall contain, in addition to the requirement of the written
request hereof, the plans and explanatory materials describing the use or
development proposed by the landowner in lieu of the use or
development permitted by this Chapter or map, or provisions thereof.
Such plans or other materials shall not be required to meet the standards
prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the issuance
of a permit, so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use
or development and a sufficient basis for evaluating this Chapter or map,
or provisions thereof, in light thereof. Nothing herein contained shall
preclude the landowner from first seeking a final approval before
submitting his challenge.
(2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the Board of
Supervisors as stated above, the request also shall be accompanied by an
amendment or amendment to the Chapter, map, or provision thereof,
proposed by the landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
XXVII-3 1 9
B15488
(3) If the submission is made to the Board of Supervisors, the
Township Solicitor shall represent and advise it at the hearing or hearings.
(4) The Board of Supervisors may retain an independent
attorney to present the defense of the challenged Chapter, map, or
provisions thereof, on its behalf and to present their witnesses on its
behalf.
(5) Based upon the testimony presents at the hearing or
hearings, the Board of Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the
case may be, shall determine whether the challenged Chapter, map, or
provisions thereof, are defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a
challenge heard by the Board of Supervisors is found to have merit, the
Board of Supervisors shall proceed with a Landowner Curative
Amendment. If a challenge heard by a Zoning Hearing Board is found to
have merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall include
recommended amendments to the challenged Chapter, map, or provisions
thereof, which will cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the amendments, plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(a) the impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer
facilities, water supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(b) if the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of
the proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available
to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of this Chapter, map or
provisions thereof;
(c) the suitability of the site for the intensity of use
proposed by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood
plains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(d) the impact of the proposed use on the site's soils,
slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood plains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any
adverse environmental impacts; and
VCVII-320
B15488
(e) the impact of the proposal on the preservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential to public health
and welfare.
(6) the Board of Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board, as
the case may be, shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after
the conclusion of the last hearing.
(7) If the Board of Supervisors or Zoning Hearing Board, as the
case may be, fails to act of the landowner's request within the time limits
referred to above, a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on
the forty-sixth (46th) day after the close of the last hearing.
(D) The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of supervisors, as the case may
be, shall commence its hearings within sixty (60) days after the request is filed
unless the landowner requests or consents to an extension of time.
(E) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of
this Chapter, map or provisions thereof, is in question and shall give the place
where and the times when a copy of the request, including any plans,
explanatory material or proposed amendments may be examined by the public.
(F) The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(1) the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of Supervisors, as
the case may be, fails to commence the hearing within the time limits set
forth herein;
(2) the Board of Supervisors notifies the landowner that it will
not adopt the curative amendment;
(3) the Board of Supervisors adopts another curative
amendment which is unacceptable to the landowner; or
(4) the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of Supervisors, as
the case may be, fails to act of the request forty-five (45) days after the
close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is extended by
mutual consent by the landowner and Township.
(G) Where, upon enactment of this Chapter, a curative amendment
proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment application by the
Board of Supervisors or a validity challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing
Board or the court acts finally on an appeal from denial of a curative amendment
)0CVII-321
B15488
proposal or a validity challenge, and the proposal or challenge so approved
requires a further application for subdivision or land development, the
developer shall have two (2) years from the date of such approval to file an
application for preliminary or tentative approval. Within the two (2) year
period, no subsequent change or amendment in this Chapter, map, Chapter
XXVII of the Code of Ordinances (Subdivision and Land Development) or other
ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the
rights of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the sustained
validity challenge. Upon the filing of the preliminary or tentative plan, the
provisions of Section 508 of the Municipalities Planning Code shall apply. When
the proposal appended to the curative amendment application or the validity
challenge is approved but does not require further application under Chapter
XXVII of the Code of Ordinances (Subdivision and Land Development), the
developer shall have one year within which to file for a building permit. Within
the one (1) year period, no subsequent change or amendment in this Chapter,
map or Chapter XXVII of the Code of Ordinances (Subdivision and Land
Development), or any other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any
manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the
curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During these protected
periods, the court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding
such supplemental relief as may be necessary.
(H) If the Township has adopted a multimunicipal comprehensive plan
but not a joint municipal zoning ordinance and all the municipalities in the
multimunicipal comprehensive plan have adopted and are administering zoning
ordinances generally consistent with the provisions of the multimunicipal
comprehensive plan, and a challenge is brought to the validity of this Chapter
involving a proposed use, then the Zoning Hearing Board or Board of
Supervisors, as the case may be, shall consider the availability of uses under
zoning ordinances within the municipalities participating in the multimunicipal
comprehensive plan within a reasonable geographic area and shall not limit its
consideration to the application of this Chapter.
(I) A landowner who has challenged on substantive grounds the
validity of this Chapter or map, wither by submission of a curative amendment
to the Board of Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board, shall not submit any
additional substantive challenges involving the same parcel, group of parcels or
part thereof until such time as the status of the landowner's original challenge
has been finally determined or withdrawn. Provided, however, that if after the
date of the landowner's original challenge the Township adopts a substantially
new or different Chapter, or portion thereof, or map, the landowner may file a
second substantive challenge to the new or different Chapter, or portion thereof,
or map, under this Section.
XXVII-322
B15488
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 808 of Section 2)
Section 809. Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinions. In order not to
unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure assurance that this Chapter,
or portion thereof, or map under which he proposed to build is free from challenge, and
recognizing that the procedure for preliminary approval of his development may be too
cumbersome or may be unavailable, the landowner may advance the date from which
time for any challenge to this Chapter, or portion thereof, or map will run by the
following procedure:
(A) The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing
his proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary opinion
as to their compliance with this Chapter, or portion thereof, and map. Such
plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed
for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a building
permit so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or
development and a sufficient basis for a preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
(B) If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with this Chapter, or portion thereof, or map, notice
thereof shall be published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall include a
general description of the proposed use or development and its location, by some
readily identifiable directive, and the place and times where the plans and other
materials may be examined by the public. The favorable preliminary approval
and the time specified for commencing a proceeding with the board shall run
from the time when the second notice thereof has been published.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 809 of Section 2)
Section 810. Amendments.
(A) The Township may, on its own motion or by petition, amend,
supplement, change, modify or repeal this Chapter.
(B) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In
addition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of
said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the municipality at points
deemed sufficient by the municipality along the tract to notify potentially
interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week
prior to the date of the hearing.
3C<VII-323
B15488
(C) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted under this
Section, where the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice
of the public hearing shall be mailed by the municipality at least thirty (30) days
prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the addressees to which real
estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within the area being rezoned,
as evidenced by tax records within the possession of the Township. The notice
shall include the location, date and time of the public hearing. A good faith
effort and substantial compliance shall satisfy the requirements of this
Subsection. This Subsection shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a
comprehensive rezoning.
(D) In the case of an amendment other that that prepared by the
Township Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit each
such amendment to the Township Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days
prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Township
Planning Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
(E) The Township shall submit each amendment to the County
Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing on the
amendment by the Township.
(F) Within thirty (30) days after enactment, a copy of the amendment
to this Chapter shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 810 of Section 2)
Section 811. Curative Amendments.
(A) Landowner Curative Amendment.
(1) A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of any provision of this Chapter, which prohibits or
restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest, may
submit a curative amendment to the Board of Supervisors with a written
request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and
decided as provided in Section 804 of this Part. The Board of Supervisors
shall commence a hearing thereon within sixty (60) days of the request.
The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the Township
Planning Commission and County Planning Commission and public
notice shall be given.
XXVII-324
B15488
(2) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section
807 of this Part. If the Township does not accept the landowner's curative
amendment brought in accordance with this Section and a court
subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision shall
not result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire Chapter and map, but
only for those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's
curative amendment and challenge.
(3) The Board of Supervisors, when it has determined that a
validity challenge has merit, may accept a landowner's curative
amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative
amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The Board of
Supervisors shall consider the curative amendments, plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer
facilities, water supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of
the proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available
to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of this Chapter or map;
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use
proposed by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood
plains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(d) The impact of the proposed use of the site's soils,
slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood plains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any
adverse environmental impacts; and
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential to public health
and welfare.
(B) Municipal Curative Amendments. If the Township determines that
this Chapter or any portion thereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the
following actions:
XXVII-325
B15488
(1) That Township shall declare by formal action, this Chapter
or portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within thirty (30) days
following such declaration and proposal, the Board of Supervisors shall:
(a) By resolution make specific findings setting for the
declared invalidity which may include:
1) references to specific uses which are either not
permitted or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
2) reference to a class of use or uses which require
revision; or
3) reference to the entire Chapter which requires
revisions.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment
to the Chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
(2) Within one hundred eight (180) days from the date of the
declaration and proposal, the Township shall enact a curative amendment
to validate, or reaffirm the validity of this Chapter in order to cure the
declared invalidity of the Chapter.
(3) Upon the initiation of these procedures, the Board of
Supervisors shall not be required to entertain or consider any landowner's
curative amendment filed nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required
to give a report requested subsequent to the declaration and proposal
based upon the grounds identical to or substantially similar to those
specified in the resolution. Upon completion of these procedures, no
rights to a cure pursuant to the landowner curative amendments shall,
from the date of the declaration and proposal, accrue to any landowner on
the basis of the substantive invalidity of the unamended Chapter for
which there has been a curative amendment pursuant to this Subsection.
(4) Once the Township has utilized the procedures set forth in
this Subsection, the Township may not again utilize this procedure for a
thirty-six (36) month period following the date of the enactment of the
curative amendment or reaffirmation of the validity of this Chapter,
provided, however, if after the date of the declaration and proposal there
is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the Township by
virtue of a change in a statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate
XXVII-326
B15488
Court decision, the Township may utilize the provisions of this Subsection
to prepare a curative amendment to this Chapter to fulfill the said duty or
obligation.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 811 of Section 2)
Section 812. Filing Fees and Costs.
(A) The Board of Supervisors shall establish schedule of fees, charges
and expenses and collection procedures for zoning permits, certificates of
occupancy, special exceptions, variances, conditional uses and appeals and other
matters pertaining to this Chapter.
(B) The schedule of fees shall be available for inspection in the office of
the Zoning Officer and may be altered or amended by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors from time-to-time.
(C) Until all application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in
full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 812 of Section 2)
Section 813. Remedies and Penalties.
(A) Enforcement Remedies. In case any buildings or structures are
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained
or any building, structure or land is used, in violation of this Chapter, the Board
of Supervisors, or, with its approval the Zoning Officer, in addition to other
remedies, may institute in the name of the Township any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use to restrain, correct, or abate
such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct business or use in or about such premises. The
rights and remedies provided in this Chapter are cumulative and are in addition
to all other remedies provided by law.
(B) Enforcement Penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who
or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Chapter
shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus
all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the
XXVII-327
B15488
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership, or corporation violating
this Chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of
this Chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 813 of Section 2)
Section 814. Savings Clause. The provisions of this Chapter shall be severable,
and if any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this Chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this Chapter would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid provision not been
included herein. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 814 of Section 2)
XXVII-328
B15488
Part 9
Appendices
Section 901. Open Space Developments (Appendix A). (Ordinance No. 335,
March 26, 2007, Appendix A of Section 2)
Section A.101. Purpose. The intent of this section is to encourage a residential
development type that will:
(A) Preserve open space and agricultural land by locating new residential
units in close proximity to one another on a smaller portion of a parcel than would be
the case with conventional development;
(B) Preserve scenic vistas from public roads by concentrating development on
the least visually prominent portions of the parcels;
(C) Reduce disturbance of environmentally constrained areas, such as steep
slopes, floodplains, and wetlands;
(D) Require less impervious surface than necessary with conventional
development by concentrating development in smaller areas, thus necessitating smaller
road areas;
(E) Reduce environmental impacts associated with disturbance of constrained
areas and impervious coverage, such as erosion and sedimentation, pollutants in
surface water, and decreased ground water recharge.
Section A.102. Qualifying Conditions.
(A) To be eligible for development under the open space development
regulations, a site must, at a minimum:
(1) Be located within the RHA, RC, RS or PHT District.
(2) Be at least 10 acres in area within the RC, RS or PHT District, or at
least 20 acres in area within the RHA District.
(3) Consist of either:
(a) A single parcel of land, or
XXVII-329
B15488
(b) Multiple contiguous, undivided parcels. In the case of
multiple contiguous, undivided parcels, all applicable parcels shall be
developed according to a single plan and with common authority and
common responsibility. The Township may require evidence of an
agreement between all owners of included parcels demonstrating binding
commitment to common development of the parcels.
(4) Be served by a centralized sewage disposal system and a
centralized water supply system.
(B) It shall be the complete responsibility of the applicant to prove to the
satisfaction of the Township that a proposed development would meet the
requirements and purposes of this Section (Appendix).
Section A.103. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within an open space
development:
(A) Single-Family Detached Dwellings
(B) Accessory uses as would be permitted within the LDS or MDS Districts.
Section A.104. Lot Size Requirements.
(A) Lots for Single-family detached dwelling within an Open Space
Development must comply with the following minimum lot areas:
District Lot Area
RHA 20,000 sq. ft.
RC 10,000 sq. ft.
RS 7,500 sq. ft.
PHT 10,000 sq. ft.
(B) Within any open space development that is developed as condominium
units, the total number of units permitted shall not exceed the amount that would be
permitted if individual lots were proposed.
Section A.105. Slope Controls.
(A) In addition to the minimum lot areas specified above, residential lots
within the Development Area of an Open Space Development shall also comply with
the provisions of Section 503 Slope Controls, with the following exceptions:
XXVII -330
B15488
(1) The factor utilized in the calculation required under §503(C)(1)(a)
shall be the minimum lot area required in §A.104(A).
(2) The factor utilized in the calculation required under §503(C)(1)(b)
shall be 1.5 acres.
(3) The factor utilized in the calculation required under §503(C)(1)(c)
shall be 2.5 acres.
Section A.106. Net Density and Area Regulations.
(A) Common Open Space. The amount of common open space provided in an
Open Space Development shall be not less than 50% of the total tract area within the
RC, RS or PHT District, or not less than 75% of the total tract area within the RHA
District.
(B) Development Area
(1) The area(s) of the tract not designated as part of the Common Open
Space area shall be designated on the plan as Development Area(s).
Development Areas are all areas not designated as common open space and
include (but are not limited to) building areas, yards, driveways, and roads.
(2) Within a Development Area, single-family detached dwellings may
be arranged so as to provide for individual lots for each unit, or may be arranged
as condominiums. In either case, sufficient yard areas shall be set aside and
designated on the plan, so that throughout the development the maximum net
residential density shall not exceed four (4) units per acre in any development
area.
(3) Within any development area that is developed as condominium
units, rather than individual lots, the remaining area within development area
(that area not containing structures, roads, driveways, etc.) shall be designated
Local Open Space. Local Open Space shall remain separate from Common Open
Space and its use shall be primarily for the residents of the development area in
which it is located. Uses within Local Open Space areas shall be limited to yard
area, landscape areas, walkways, and accessory structures allowed within that
zoning district.
Section A.107. Design Standards. The following design standards shall apply to all
Open Space Developments:
XXVII-331
B15488
(A) Site Design Principles. The location of common open space, dwellings,
and site improvements shall be in accordance with all requirements of the Township of
Spring Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) that are not
specifically waived by this Section (Appendix). The following standards shall apply
during the siting process:
to:
(1) Areas designated as common open space shall be configured so as
(a) Minimize negative impacts of development upon the tract;
(b) Maximize conservation of the site features identified as
having particular conservation value, historical significance, or
recreational value, including: mature trees, woodlands, hedgerows, fence
lines, historic sites of structures, historic road or other transport traces,
paths, trails, and other noted landscape features; and
(c) Serve as buffer areas between grouped dwellings and
adjacent tracts.
(2) Dwellings and accessory buildings shall be configured so as to:
(a) Be situated below ridgeline elevations to preserve existing
vistas. To achieve this objective, dwellings and accessory structures
should be sited entirely below the elevation of the nearest ridge line
whenever possible. Where the applicant claims that dwellings and
accessory structures cannot be situated below the ridgeline, it shall be the
burden of the applicant to demonstrate why this cannot be achieved and
how the proposed design creates the minimum possible disturbance of
views of the ridgeline per the requirements of Section A.108(B)(2) below;
(b) Be located outside of environmentally constrained areas,
including steep slopes in excess of 25% floodplains, wetlands and natural
drainage swales;
(c) Be located outside of broad, open vistas visible from roads
or other public vantage points; and
(d) Provide maximum views of and access to open space by
residents of proposed dwellings.
(e) Minimize the impact upon existing wooded areas.
XXVII-332
B15488
(B) Dimensional Standards. The following dimensional standards shall apply
to all Open Space Developments:
(1) All dwelling units within a tract must be set back a minimum of
one hundred (100') feet from the nearest tract boundary line except where
existing natural features of the site, including but not limited to woodland areas,
changes in topography, hedgerows, or other site characteristics result in the
dwelling unit being completely visually screened from the adjacent property and
guarantees are provided through the planning process that such features will
remain undisturbed, this setback may be reduced to seventy-five (75') feet.
(2) Building height shall be limited to 2-1/2 stories, and 30 feet. To the
extent that any portion of a structure must be located above a ridgeline elevation,
such siting shall be contingent upon the submission and approval by the Board
of Supervisors of a plan for the mitigation of such ridgeline impacts. Such plans
shall identify the locations and dimensions of the proposed structure(s), the
architectural style proposed, and shall demonstrate how the structure(s) shall be
effectively screened from the adjacent tracts through screening and/or designed
to minimize disruption of views of the ridgeline.
(3) The minimum distance between single-family detached dwellings
shall be twenty (20') feet.
(4) All structures shall be set back at least twenty-five (25') feet from
the curbline or edge of cartway of any internal access road.
(5) All structures shall be set back at least ten (10') feet from the edge
of any shared parking area except in the case of contiguous, adjacent driveways
that lead to a garage or carport, for which no setback shall be required.
(6) Where Common Open Space is designated as separate,
noncontiguous parcels, no single parcel shall consist of less than one (1) acre in
area. No single area or portion of an area designated as Common Open Space
shall be counted toward the minimum required open space wherever such area
or portion of area is less than one hundred fifty (150') feet in width, except in the
case of a trail corridor or other linkage between two larger, noncontiguous, open
space areas.
Section A.108. Uses Allowed Within Common Open Space Areas. The following uses
shall be permitted within all common open space areas:
(A) Natural Area, including but not limited to, steep slopes, woodland areas,
meadows, wetlands, streams, game preserves, etc.;
XXVII-333
B15488
(B) Lawn, a grass area with or without trees which may be used by the
residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be mowed regularly to insure a neat
and tidy appearance. Lawn shall only be allowed in those portions of the Common
Open Space that do not contain any Environmentally Sensitive Areas;
(C) Outdoor Recreation Area, either active or passive;
(D) Sewage Treatment Facility involving land disposal and groundwater
recharge facilities but excluding buildings and other aboveground structures associated
with such facilities;
(E) Stormwater management facilities or portions thereof that can be
integrated into the natural environment, such as swales, retention ponds, etc.;
(F) Agriculture, subject to the ownership mechanism, procedures and
limitations under Section A.108(B)(6), below.
Section A.109. Common Open Space Ownership and Maintenance Standards.
(A) Development Plan. The development plan submission shall include
documents creating and governing a property owner's organization and containing the
declaration of covenants, restrictions, easements, charges and liens deemed necessary to
own and maintain the common open space area(s), local open space area(s), and any
recreation areas within the open space development.
(B) Ownership Options. Common open space shall be held under any one of
the following forms upon receiving approval from the Board of Supervisors:
(1) Homeowners Association. The applicant may provide for the
establishment of an organization for the ownership and maintenance of the
common property and improvements. The organization shall consist of the
property owners within the open space development, each receiving an equal
vote and responsibility. Such an organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of the common property and improvements unless transferred to
another type of ownership permitted hereunder.
(2) Condominium. The open space as authorized herein may be
controlled through the use of a condominium agreement. Such agreement shall
conform to the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act. In such instance, all
open space and improvements shall be held as a "Common Element".
XXVII-334
B15488
(3) Dedication of Easements. The Township may at any time accept
easements for the public use of any portion or portions of the common open
space. Such land shall be thereby accessible to the residents of the Township. In
the event of a dedication of an easement, the Township shall enter into a
maintenance agreement with the owners of the open space.
(4) Transfer of Easements to Private Conservation Organization.
Easements on common open space may be transferred to a private, nonprofit
organization involved in the conservation of natural resources upon approval of
the Board of Supervisors. The conveyance of an easement shall contain
appropriate provisions for the reversion to the Township at any time the
property is not used pursuant to the intentions of this Chapter. Prior to the
transfer of an easement a maintenance agreement shall be entered into between
the Township, the organization holding ownership and the proposed
conservation organization.
(5) Fee Simple Dedication. The Township may at any time accept
dedication of all or part of the common open space for the use and maintenance
by the Township as common open space.
(6) Agricultural Lease Option. To encourage the retention of
agricultural lands, the Township, Homeowners Association or the Condominium
Agreement may permit all or portions of the open space lands to be leased to a
fanner. Approval of the lease option shall be conditioned on appropriate
agreements between the titleholder and the farmer concerning permitted farming
practices and use of the land in the event farming practices cease.
(C) Homeowners Association Regulations. The formation of a Homeowners
Association shall be governed according to the following regulations:
(1) The applicant shall provide a description of the organization
including its by-laws and methods for maintaining open space and
improvements.
(2) The organization is established by the applicant and operated with
financial subsidization by the applicant prior to the sale of a percentage of the
lots within the development, per Section A.108(C)(4) below.
(3) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
homes and their successors.
XXVII-33 5
B15488
(4) Controlling interest shall not be conveyed from the applicant to the
Homeowners Association prior to completion and sale of at least sixty (60)
percent of the total number of units.
(5) The organization shall be responsible for meeting insurance and tax
obligations on the common open space and improvements.
(6) Rights and duties of the members of the organization in the event
of a breach of the covenants and restrictions shall be defined.
(7) The by-laws shall include a statement, which grants to the
Township such power, but not the duty, to maintain the common open space and
common facilities, and to assess the cost of the same as provided within the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code.
(D) Delinquency of Maintenance.
(1) In the event an organization or a condominium organization
undertakes the responsibility of maintaining the common open space and
improvements and fails to maintain the same in reasonable order and conditions
in accordance with the development plan, the Township may serve written
notice upon the organization or residents in the development setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to properly maintain the common
areas.
(2) Notices shall demand that the deficiencies of maintenance be
corrected within thirty (30) days and shall establish the date and place of a
hearing to be held on the delinquency. Such a hearing shall take place within
fourteen (14) days of the notice. Should the deficiencies set forth in the original
notice or in the subsequent modifications fail to be corrected within the
established thirty (30) days, the Township, in order to preserve the taxable values
of the affected properties, may enter the common open space and improvements
and maintain them for a period of one (1) year. Such efforts shall not constitute a
taking of the property nor vest in the public any right to use the same. The cost
of maintenance by the Township shall be assessed ratably against the properties
within the development that have a right of enjoyment. Such assessments shall
become a lien on the said properties and shall be perfected by filing in the office
of the Prothonotary of Berks County.
XXVII-336
B15488
Section A.110. Additional Requirements.
(A) The proposed plan for an open space development shall comply with the
applicable provisions of the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(Chapter )0(V11).
(B) No individual residential driveways shall directly enter onto an arterial or
collector street.
(C) The Site Design Guidelines of §409(D) shall be used as criteria to evaluate
whether a proposal meets the intent of this section.
(D) It is an intention of this Section (Appendix) to encourage a well-designed
and complementary variety of architectural styles. As an additional submission criteria,
the applicant shall submit preliminary general architectural sketches. These sketches
are for informational purposes only.
XXVII-337
B15488
Section 902. Street Classification Map. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Appendix of Section 2)
XXVII-338
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS MAP
EXPRESSWAY
ARTERIAL
COLLECTOR.
LOCAL
EXISTING PROPOSED
=III MIN
MEP WIMP MGM
==== =====
PROPOSED INTERCHANGE
46,
A le
4r..0 :**-7,?
00"
1 , ,,,, NIV ie ff ...1
:illi..:r!.11111iri.111:..:17-4, 7....:1,,,.,
ma
%..,;,--:,/..:
--- WYOMISSING NIO-5 f kt
TC:t,
(4, /.......
.,
\
-- ;p..1-,- I. -_,-- 4' 1 ,4
..Y:fA:.)'..*: 1Yitril
71M"
,.,/,' ". Ts 44.4'... ...,04%40.
sc-e--;-'...a.,:::'-c-',-'
,,, ) SINKING STEING,f4er,
1,1
1
e'`
,
s' 11 r
%.
;7.4, ),
5 - ...er
..,, \,4 ' ,
TOWNSHIP:
0F SPRING
LBEMS COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA
901.1.1.10L 3200
SCALE IN FEST
KAW1040C011.0.1
unNAN RUAR0j4 NNs sEVE.W.Mily C011.01,71014
II Whaomi NAG .MGLEWGIWNIIYINGm 11010
B15488
Section 903. Zoning Map. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Appendix of
Section 2; as amended by Ordinance No. 357, April 28, 2008, Section 1)
)0(VII-339
RHA
RC
RS
LDS
MDS
SS
U
ZONING MAP
LEGEND
ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE
RESIDENTIAL
RURAL HOLDING AREA
RURAL CONSERVATION
RURAL/SUBURBAN
LOW DENSITY SUBURBAN
MODERATE DENSITY SUBURBAN
SUBURBAN /SEMI -URBAN
URBAN
COMMERCE, BUSINESS & INDUSTRY
NC NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL
PHC PLANNED HIGHWAY COMMERCE
PHI PLANNED HIGHWAY INTERCHANGE
PHT PLANNED HIGHWAY TRANSITIONAL
PO/B PLANNED OFFICE/BUSINESS
PBR PLANNED BUSINESS AND RESIDENTIAL
PI/B PLANNED INDUSTRY/BUSINESS
El EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY
FS FUEL STORAGE
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
STEEP SLOPES 15% - 25%
'y° SLOPES 25% +
NOTE:
STATE GAME LANDS
Am, 00.0 nad Down Sloan rho lactation 00010.0. an Do Contaot Ia.
extLathy motto 0,01 whICn had ret tOrea Caen olvn plan apptayal
onc 01.10 Inorelty are out leo. to :Ahoy,. a/availing tannic 0140001 to
nnontaiocnIn Ltorlelonallon PlonninnCnna Soleil... '110(0) ICS PS FotIlro
10710I0 to oenotlsell.
10Calti010 ul toronuttohIcl laoictUton Ardou
(Went lied fl0000loin Ara Steep SPepto) Lae
otaproxanale and c. chow, lot lolanactionol
owns., Cold .ccollo, ore to to cotomanes
Ion Ina 0.10, c%),,tv Sorway. flood In rend
Poto Ca, or by orocochoos oullhad ot the
000raealol ataan co too Zooleg Orairtmo.
ltI °MOM. ZONLIOC WV 1, 0..1,ottle tor lovas* CI Cla
501.19 Toonanl, /.1unlical Uulldlno
To, It.ovang rcpt.:at:a all ornanantatto to 1-to
tov.scao of Serino ZoMntno Nap lltro.aol,
. -
RS
If
PI/B
PO/B
RS
"kr:, ---..-
' ..'. , PO/B.,,,_ ,.e.,
.- N.' '''''`Id.,,, l''' ''' cc a.
KC. ono
-'- ' -,... , . r ,,,,..,., ,,,,....)
' ,I* A?-... - .k. '4::$.,...", ./
r' * ' '4.1,:.--..., ,...-r... , /
?.. 0'. ''' ),.. ,,,,...._ (4---7A)..,
Corti
. I.
SPRING
RIDdE PO/B
PRO pl
."-SEE NOTE)
."' 0"
PO/B
RS-- 41-1
LDS
PI /B
PHC
PO/B ), opSSING
0'
,s: ....1...i i'k _.,1 , .' '' ^`
RHA.
\
3.-.
r - ,,f C 1
1
-. r4 ',
C
J./. ::,.... "N."' . "..,..1.-.. p
Fir...g_. ... ...,......_______...14.., ,. - .....
. .....,..61 "6r .... ''.' t .
.., ... fo ._>1 , s.
,.....
cy. -'',,-. pri-r-t., ' --.-
...,' -,,..;,....7......-1,.;..;`,.."-,..,,,,,-, :;.,.,-.0-... `.
4--.?- - -II - .2 - - 4.6....r ---, !------`- - . -, 44-'1' :'''''1/4,,,. '''',, t .-'11...-..1.s .
C. ..g . le. :'.. ', :"* P.?! .i: 41 ,? i .
. -1" .bt ,%., ,,. 0. :
' RS -
1. -o-
. -
RHA.
.11
.-..
44. 4.
'
udu la IC Cul Ill, Cull tills la I he 1.11110101 Loa c van. meow*
00 cart ul h o, Acct., Twttoll. AM, tYdliiknot.C.
Wu! UltiunUed uy Ch J
Cnultclott. Strad CI SUDO avatau
AIo^I
47nsh:p
"rnyi CAI
1
RHA
N\
, :,_,
kNo,"
LDS
NC
MDS
PI /B
PO/B
NC
9.
TOWNSHIP
OF SPRING
BERKS COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA
GRAPHIC SCALE
{41;ithoom...
car
tegOr Ir di, CCOMFICC,
volaalliSINIA CA Ne1c.-12.).
2C12 4.1. RIGHTS REEEP1.40
GREAT VALLEY CONSULTANTS
ENCIHall; LANNERS WIIVEYCAS I COMCI.TV.N15












































































..
TOWNSHIP OF SPRING,
BERKS COUNTY, PENNSYL VANIA
ORDINANCE NO. 115
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING, BERKS COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE AND
ZONING MAP (CHAPTER XXXII, ENTITLED "ZONING" OF THE
CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING) TO:
(1) ADD THE FOLLOWING DEFINITIONS: ADULT DAY CARE, BAR,
BEVERAGE DISTRIBUTOR, BODY ART, BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT,
BUS TERMINAL, CASINO OR GAMING ESTABLISHMENT, CIVIC OR
SOCIAL ORGANIZATION, COMMERCIAL STABLE OR RIDING
ACADEMY, COMMUNITY CENTER, COPY CENTER, APARTMENTS
ON UPPER LEVELS, ELECTRONIC NOTICE, GAMING, OUTDOOR
TARGET RANGE, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL USE, INDOOR SPORTS
FACILITY, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE, MAILED NOTICE, MINIATURE
GOLF COURSE, NON-MUNICIPAL INDOOR RECREATION, NONMUNICIPAL
OUTDOOR RECREATION, MUNICIPAL RECREATION,
RETAINING WALL, SEMI-DETACHED COMMERCIAL BUILDING,
OFFICIAL SIGN, AND TATTOO PARLOR; (2) AMEND THE
FOLLOWING DEFINITIONS: AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES,
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (NON-ELECTRONIC), CONVALESCENT
HOME, FLASHING SIGN, GUN CLUB, KENNEL, MEDICAL OFFICE,
MEDICAL CLINIC, OFFICE, PERSONAL SERVICE, PUBLIC NOTICE,
RETAIL GREENHOUSE/NURSERY, STANDARD RESTAURANT,
RETAIL STORE, AND TAVERN; (3) DELETE THE FOLLOWING
DEFINITIONS: MEDICAL LABORATORY, PROFESSIONAL OFFICE,
NONPUBLIC INDOOR RECREATION, NONPUBLIC OUTDOOR
RECREATION, PUBLIC RECREATION, RIDING STABLE, AND TRUCK
TERMINAL; (4) ADD REGULATIONS PROVIDING OWNERS OF LAND
OR MINERAL RIGHTS THE RIGHT TO REQUEST MAILED OR
ELECTRONIC NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS; (5) ESTABLISH THE
FOLLOWING ZONING DISTRICTS: PMU, PENN AVENUE MIXED
USE; PAC, PENN AVENUE COMMERCIAL; PAO, PENN AVENUE
OVERLAY; MI, MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL; AND
ESTABLISH REGULATIONS FOR THOSE ZONING DISTRICTS; (6)
DELETE THE PHC PLANNED HIGHWAY COMMERCE ZONING
DISTRICT; (7) · AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL
EXCEPTION USES, CONDITIONAL USES AND ACCESSORY USES IN
THE RHA, RURAL HOLDING AREA DISTRICT; (8) AMENDING USES
PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES, CONDITIONAL
USES AND ACCESSORY USES IN THE RC, RURAL CONSERVATION
DISTRICT; (9) AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL
EXCEPTION USES, CONDITIONAL USES AND ACCESSORY USES IN
THE RS, RURAL/SUBURBAN DISTRICT; (10) AMENDING USES
PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND
ACCESSORY USES IN THE LDS, LOW DENSITY SUBURBAN DISTRICT;
(11) AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION
USES AND ACCESSORY USES IN THE MDS, MODERATE DENSITY
SUBURBAN DISTRICT; (12) AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT,
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND ACCESSORY USES IN THE SS,
SUBURBAN/SEMIURBAN DISTRICT; (13) AMENDING USES
PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES, CONDITIONAL
USES AND ACCESSORY USES IN THE U, URBAN DISTRICT; (14)
AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
AND CONDITIONAL USES IN THE NC, NEIGHBORHOOD
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT; (15) AMENDING USES
PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES, CONDITIONAL
USES AND ACCESSORY USES IN THE PHI, PLANNED HIGHWAY
INTERCHANGE DISTRICT; (16) AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY
RIGHT, AND SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
IN THE PHT, PLANNED HIGHWAY TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT; (17)
AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION
USES, AND CONDITIONAL USES IN THE POB, PLANNED
OFFICE/BUSINESS DISTRICT; (18) AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY
RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES, CONDITIONAL USES AND
ACCESSORY USES IN THE PBR, PLANNED BUSINESS AND
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT; (19) AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY
RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES, CONDITIONAL USES AND
ACCESSORY USES IN THE PIB, PLANNED INDUSTRY /BUSINESS
DISTRICT; (20) AMENDING USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL
EXCEPTION USES AND CONDITIONAL USES IN THE EI,
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY DISTRICT; (21) AMENDING USES
PERMITTED BY RIGHT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND
CONDITIONAL USES FS, FUEL STORAGE DISTRICT; (22) ADD
COMPLIANCE AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ADULT DAY
CARE; APARTMENTS ON UPPER LEVEL OF BUILDINGS;
AUTOMOBILE AUCTIONS AND STORAGE YARDS; BEVERAGE
DISTRIBUTOR; BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT; CASINO OR GAMING
ESTABLISHMENT; CIVIC OR SOCIAL ASSOCIATION; COMMUNITY
CENTER; CONSTRUCTION COMPANY; HEAVY INDUSTRIAL USE;
INDOOR SPORTS FACILITY; LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE; MEMBERSHIP
CLUB AND CIVIC OR SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS; MINIATURE GOLF
COURSE (OUTDOOR); OFF-STREET PARKING NOT LOCATED ON
SAME LOT AS PERMITTED USE; PERSONAL SERVICE; PRISONS OR
PENITENTIARIES; RECYCLING FACILITY; SALE OF MULCH AND
LANDSCAPE MATERIALS; SEMIDETACHED COMMERCIAL
BUILDING; SLAUGHTERING, PROCESSING, RENDERING AND
PACKAGING OF FOOD PRODUCTS AND THEIR BY-PRODUCTS; AND
TAXI, LIMOUSINE SERVICE OR BUS TERMINAL; (23) AMEND
COMPLIANCE AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ADULT
BUSINESS USE; AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTER; AMUSEMENT
ESTABLISHMENTS; ANIMAL HOSPITAL; AUDITORIUM;
AUTOMOBILE, MOTORCYCLE, BOAT, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE,
TRAILER OR F ARM EQUIPMENT SALES; AUTOMOBILE REP AIR
STATION; AUTOMOBILE WRECKING OR JUNKYARD; BED AND
BREAKF AST; BOARDING HOUSE; CAMP OR CAMPGROUND;
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY; COMBINATION OF PERMITTED USES;
CONFERENCE CENTER; CONVENIENCE STORE; FAST FOOD
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD RESTAURANT WITH DRIVE-THRU
SERVICE, FOOD STAND; FUEL STORAGE TANK FARM OR FUEL
PRODUCTS TERMINAL; GOLF COURSE, CHIP AND PUTT COURSE;
HELIPORT; HOSPITAL OR MEDICAL CENTER; KENNEL; MEDICAL
OFFICE OR MEDICAL CLINIC; MULTIPLE USE BUILDING; NURSERY
SCHOOL OR DAY CARE CENTER; OFF-TRACK BETTING PARLOR;
OPEN AIR RETAIL; NON-MUNICIPAL INDOOR RECREATION; NONMUNICIPAL
OUTDOOR RECREATION; STANDARD RESTAURANT;
RETAIL STORE; PUBLIC, PRIVATE OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL;
SHOPPING CENTER; SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING IN
COMBINATION WITH COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY; COMMERCIAL
STABLE OR RIDING ACADEMY; OUTDOOR SWIMMING CLUB;
TAVERN OR NIGHTCLUB; TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES; OUTDOOR
TENNIS CLUBS; WAREHOUSE OR WHOLESALE; AND WILDLIFE
SANCTUARY; (24) DELETE COMPLIANCE AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS FOR BOTTLING INDUSTRY; HEALTH CLUB OR
EXERCISE CLUB; MEDICAL LABORATORY OR BLOOD DONOR
STATION; ORPHANAGE; PLACE OF WORSHIP; PRINTING
ESTABLISHMENTS AND PRINTING/PUBLISHING
ESTABLISHMENTS; SCIENTIFIC/ELECTRONIC INSTRUMENTS
MANUF ACTURING; AND TRUCK FREIGHT TERMINAL; (25) AMEND
SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES FOR ACCESSORY
USES, BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES; FENCES; WALLS; HOME j\
OCCUPATION; KEEPING ANIMALS OR FOWL; NONCOMMERCIAL
SWIMMING POOLS; AND TENNIS COURT OR SIMILAR IMPERVIOUS
ATHLETIC SURFACE; (26) AMEND GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR
PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS; MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDING-"""l'." .. ;;
PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS; AND ADDITIONAL USES
WITHIN REHABILITATED HISTORIC BUILDINGS; (27) AMEND SIGN
REGULATIONS PROHIBITING CERTAIN SIGNS IN ALL DISTRICTS;
LOCATION OF OFF-PREMISES SIGNS (BILLBOARDS); LOCATION OF
ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS; (28) AMEND NUMBER OF
REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES; GENERAL
REGULATIONS APPLYING TO OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES;
AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES;
(29) AMEND NOTICE REGULATIONS FOR HEARINGS;
AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE; (30) AMEND THE ZONING MAP
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania and it is hereby enacted and ordained
by the authority of the same as follows:
Section 1. Chapter XXXII, entitled "Zoning", of the Code of Ordinances of the
Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania is hereby amended and restated in its
entirety so as to hereafter read as follows:
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
CHAPTER XXXII
ZONING
Part 1
General Provisions
Section 101. Title
Section 102. Short Title
Section 103. Purpose
Section 104. Application
Section 105. Exemptions
Section 106. Interpretation
Part 2
Definitions
Section 201. General Interpretation
Section 202. Definitions
Section 203. Notice - Mailed Notice or Electronic Notice
Part 3
Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
9
9
9
10
11
11
12
12
62
Section 301. Establishment of Zoning Districts 65
Section 302. Application of District Regulations 65
Section 303. Zoning Map 66
Section 304. Rules for Interpreting District Boundaries 67
Section 305. Rural Holding Area District (RHA) 68
Section 306. Rural Conservation District (RC) 71
Section 307. Rural/Suburban District (RS) 76
Section 308. Low Density Suburban District (LDS) 80
Section 309. Moderate Density Suburban District (MDS) 83
Section 310. Suburban/Semiurban District (SS) 86
Section 311. Urban District (U)
Section 312. Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District (NC)
Section 313. Penn Avenue Mixed Use District (PMU)
Section 314 Penn Avenue Commercial District (PAC)
XXXII-l
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Page
Section 315 Penn A venue Overlay District 106
Section 316. Planned Highway Interchange District (PHI) 112
Section 317. Planned Highway Transitional District (PHT) 119
Section 318. Planned Office/Business District (POB) 123
Section 319. Planned Business and Residential District (PBR) 128
Section 320. Planned Industry/Business District (PIB) 134
Section 321. Extractive Industry District (EI) 137
Section 322. Manufacturing and Industrial District (MI) 141
Section 323. Fuel Storage District (FS) 144
Section 324. Compliance and Performance Standards for Certain 147
Principal Uses
(B) Additional Requirements. 147
(1) Adult Business Use. 147
(2) Adult Day Care. 148
(3) Agriculture, General. 149
(4) Agriculture, Intensive. 151
(5) Alternative Energy System, Principal. 155
(6) Ambulatory Surgical Center 161
(7) Amusement Establishments. 162
(8) Animal Hospital. 163
(9) Apartments, Garden. 164
(10) Apartments on the Upper Levels of Buildings. 164
(11) Auditorium. 164
(12) Automobile Auctions and Storage Yards. 165
(13) Automobile, Motorcycle, Boat, Recreational 165
Vehicle, Trailer or Farm Equipment Sales.
(14) Automobile Repair Station. 166
(15) Automobile Service Station. 166
(16) Automobile Wrecking or Junkyard. 167
(17) Bed and Breakfast. 168
(18) Beverage Distributer. 168
(19) Boarding House. 169
(20) Body Art Establishment. 170
(21) Camp or Campground. 170
(22) Carwash. 171
(23) Casino or Gaming Establishment. 172
(24) Cemetery. 173
(25) Civic or Social Association. 173
(26) College or University. 173
XXXII-2
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(27) Combination of Permitted Uses 174
(28) Communications Antennae and Associated 175
Communications Equipment Buildings.
(29) Communication Towers and Associated 176
Communications Equipment Buildings.
(30) Community Center. 181
(31) Conference Center. 181
(32) Construction Company. 182
(33) Convalescent or Nursing Home. 183
(34) Convenience Store. 185
(35) Day Care Center. 186
(36) Drive-In (Outdoor) Theater. 186
(37) Fast Food Restaurant, Fast Food Restaurant 187
with Drive-through Service, Food Stand.
(38) Financial Establishment. 188
(39) Fire Station. 188
(40) Forestry. 188
(41) Fuel Oil Company. 188
(42) Fuel Storage Tank Farm or Fuel Products Terminal. 188
(43) Garden Apartments or Single-Family Attached 189
Dwellings (Townhouses).
(44) Golf Course, Chip and Putt Course. 195
(45) Greenhouse /N ursery (Retail). 197
(46) Group Home. 197
(47) Gun Club/Outdoor Target Range. 198
(48) Heavy Industrial Use. 199
(49) Heliport. 202
(50) Holiday Tree Sales. 202
(51) Hospital or Medical Center. 204
(52) Hotel! Motel. 206
(53) Indoor Sports Facility. 206
(54) Kennel. 206
(55) Laundry /Laundromat. 207
(56) Light Industrial Use. 207
(57) Lumber Yard. 208
(58) Medical Office or Medical Clinic. 208
(59) Membership Club. 209
(60) Mineral Extraction. 209
(61) Miniature Golf Course (Outdoor).
(62) Mobile Home Park.
XXXII-3
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(63) Mobile/Manufactured Home. 213
(64) Multiple Use Building. 214
(65) Nursery School or Day Care Center. 215
(66) Off-Street Parking not Located on the Same 216
Lot as the Permitted Use.
(67) Off-Track Betting Parlor. 217
(68) Open Air Retail. 218
(69) Open Air Retail Sales of Agricultural Products. 218
(70) Open Space Development. 219
(71) Personal Service. 219
(72) Pet Grooming Establishment. 219
(73) Picnic Grove. 219
(74) Planned Business Development. 219
(75) Planned Residential Development (PRD). 219
(76) Prisons or Penitentiaries. 219
(77) Private Airport or Airstrip. 220
(78) Public Utility Facility. 220
(79) Racetracks, Automobile or Horse, with related 220
Wagering.
(80) Recreation, Non-municipal Indoor. 222
(81) Recreation, Non-Municipal Outdoor. 222
(82) Recycling Facility. 223
(83) Restaurants, Standard. 223
(84) Retail Store. 226
(85) Retirement Community. 228
(86) Sale of Mulch and Landscape Materials. 235
(87) School, Public, Private or Vocational. 235
(88) Self-Storage Facility. 236
(89) Semidetached Commercial Building. 237
(90) Shopping Centers. 238
(91) Single-Family Detached Dwelling. 243
(92) Single-family Detached Dwelling In 245
Combination With a Commercial Activity.
(93) Single-Family to Multi-Family Conversion. 245
(94) Slaughtering, Processing, Rendering, and 245
Packaging of Food Products and Their By-
Products.
(95) Solid Waste Disposal Area or Facility. 247
(96) Stable or Riding Academy, Commercial. 249
XXXII-4
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(97) Stadium. 250
(98) Swimming Club (outdoor). 250
(99) Tavern or Nightclub. 250
(100) Taxi, Limousine Service or Bus Terminal. 252
(101) Temporary Retail Sales. 252
(102) Tennis Clubs (outdoor). 253
(103) Timber Harvesting. 254
(104) Townhouses. 259
(105) Treatment Center. 259
(106) Vehicle Wash Preventative Maintenance Center. 260
(107) Warehouse or Wholesale. 261
(108) Wildlife Sanctuary. 262
Section 325. Special Exception Uses 263
Section 326. Conditional Uses 264
Section 327. Accessory Uses 264
(C) Special Standards 265
(1) Accessory Uses, Buildings or Structures. 265
(2) Alternative Energy System, Accessory (Solar and 266
Wind).
(3) Farm Pond. 272
(4) Fences, Walls, Hedges and Gates. 273
(5) Geothermal Energy System, Accessory. 274
(6) Heliport. 275
(7) Holiday Tree Sales. 275
(8) Home Occupation. 275
(9) Interior Service and Convenience Uses. 278
(10) Keeping Animals or Fowl. 279
(11) Noncommercial Swimming Pool. 280
(12) N 0-Impact Home-Based Business. 281
(13) Open Air Retail Sales of Agricultural Products. 282
(14) Outdoor Wood-Fired Boilers. 283
(15) Recreational Vehicle Storage. 285
(16) Seasonal Roadside Produce Market. 285
(17) Temporary Retail Sales. 286
(18) Tennis Court or Similar Impervious Athletic 286
Surfaces.
XXXII-5
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Part 4
General Regulations
Section 401. Limit of One Principal Use 287
Section 402. Principal Buildings 287
Section 403. Maximum Height of Buildings 288
Section 404. Buildings to Have Access 288
Section 405. Special Lot and Yard Requirements/Sight Distances and 288
Buffer Yards
Section 406. Establishment of Ultimate Right-of-Way Widths for 298
Streets
Section 407. Frontage Development Along Arterial and Collector 299
Streets
Section 408. Nonconformities
Section 409. Site Plan Review
Section 410. Easements
Section 411. Historic Buildings
Section 412. Airport Zoning
Part 5
Environmental Protection
Section 501. Environmental Preservation Required
Section 502. Prohibited Nuisances
Section 503. Slope Controls
Section 504. Areas with High Water Table
Section 505. Development Along Water Bodies
Section 506. Floodplain Regulations
Section 507. Filling, Excavation and Grading
Section 508. Tree Preservation
Section 509. Outdoor Storage Control
Section 510. Sewage Waste Treatment and Disposal Contract
Section 511. Noise Control
Section 512. Dust, Dirt, Smoke, Vapors, Gases and Odors Conh"ol
Section 513. Light, Glare and Heat Control
Section 514. Electric, Diesel, Gas or Other Power
Section 515. Control of Radioactivity, Electrical Emissions and
Electrical Disturbances
XXXII-6
300
304
313
313
316
318
318
318
321
321
321
322
322
323
324
325
327
327
327
328
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Page
Section 516. Manufacturing and Storing of Dangerous Material 328
Prohibited
Section 517. Wetland Buffers 329
Section 518. Riparian Buffers 330
Part 6
Signs
Section 601. Scope and Applicability 332
Section 602. General Sign Regulations 333
Section 603. Permitted Signs 336
Section 604. Signs Prohibited in All Districts 340
Section 605. Off-Premises Signs 342
Section 606. Electronic Changeable Copy Signs 344
Section 607. Area of Sign 347
Section 608. Supplemental Sign Regulations 347
Section 609. Sign Permits 348
Part 7
Off-Street Parking and Loading
Section 701. Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces 350
Section 702. General Regulations Applying to Required Off-Street 355
Parking Facilities
Section 703. Design Standards for Off-Street Parking Facilities 363
Section 704. Access Drives and Driveways 365
Section 705. Off-Street Loading 368
Section 706. Parking Lot Landscaping 370
Section 707. Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations 372
Part 8
Administration
Section 801. General Procedure 375
Section 802. Permits and Certificates 375
Section 803. Zoning Officer
Section 804. Zoning Hearing Board
XXXII-7
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 805. Zoning Hearing Board Functions
Section 806. Conditional Uses
Section 807. Hearings
Section 808. Challenge to the Validity of Ordinance or Map
Section 809. Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinions
Section 810. Amendments
Section 811. Curative Amendments
Section 812. Filing Fees and Costs
Section 813. Remedies and Penalties
Section 814. Savings Clause
Part 9
Appendices
386
388
391
394
398
399
400
402
403
404
Section 901. Open Space Developments 405
Section A.l0l. Purpose 405
Section A.l02. Qualifying Conditions 405
Section A.l03. Permitted Uses 406
Section A.l04. Lot Size Requirements 406
Section A.l05. Slope Controls 406
Section A.l06. Net Density and Area Regulations 407
Section A.l07. Design Standards 407
Section A.l08. Uses Allowed Within Common Open Space 409
Areas
Section A.l09. Common Open Space Ownership and 410
Maintenance Standards
Section A.110. Additional Requirements 413
Section 902. Street Classification Map 414
Section 903. Zoning Map 415
XXXII-8
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Part 1
General Provisions
Section 101. Title. A Chapter dividing the Township of Spring into districts and
regulating the use of land and the location, use and density of buildings within these
districts and providing for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter. This
Chapter permits, prohibits, regulates, restricts and determines the uses of land,
watercourses and other bodies of water; the size, height, bulk, location, erection,
construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of structures; the
areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and
structures, as well as areas, courts, yards and other open spaces and distances to be left
unoccupied by uses and structures; and the density of population and intensity of use;
and further the Chapter contains provisions for special exceptions and variances to be
administered by a Zoning Hearing Board; provisions for administration and
enforcement and such other provisions as may be necessary to implement the
requirements of this Chapter. Pursuant to the authority conferred by the State Act 247
(the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code), as amended, the Township
Supervisors of the Township of Spring do hereby ordain as follows. (Ordinance No.
335, March 26,2007, Section 101 of Section 2)
Section 102. Short Title. This Chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the
"Township of Spring Zoning Ordinance of 2015." (Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007,
Section 102 of Section 2)
Section 103. Purpose.
(A) This Chapter is hereby adopted in accordance:
(1) With the requirements of Act 247 (the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code), as amended.
(2) With the community development objectives of the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
(3) With consideration for the character of the Township, its
various parts and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses
and structures.
(B) In addition to carrying out the objective of the Comprehensive
Plan, this Chapter is designed:
XXXII-9
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) To promote, protect and facilitate one (1) or more of the
following: the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated
and practical community development, proper density of population, civil
defense, disaster evacuation, airports, and national defense facilities, the
provisions of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking
and loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, public grounds
and other public requirements.
(2) To prevent one (1) or more of the following: overcrowding
of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of
health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
(3) To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering
topography, soil type and classification, and present use.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 103 of Section 2)
Section 104. Application.
(A) No building, structure or land shall be used, occupied, erected,
moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations
of this Chapter.
(B) This Chapter regulates:
(1) The location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other
structures.
(2) The relation of such buildings or structures to streets and
highways, their intersections and interchanges, to steep slopes and natural
bodies of water, to public buildings and public grounds, to airports and
heliports, to historic buildings and places, and to identified floodplain
areas.
(3) Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be
occupied by uses and structures; the percentage of a lot that may be
occupied, the size and use of yards, courts and other open spaces.
(4) The density and distribution of population and intensity of
use.
(5) The uses of land, buildings and structures for residents,
trade, industry and other purposes.
XXXII-I 0
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 104 of Section 2)
Section 105. Exemptions. This Chapter shall not apply to any existing or
proposed building or extension thereof which is used or is to be used by a public utility
corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission decides after a public hearing that the present or proposed situation of the
building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the
public. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 105 of Section 2)
Section 106. Interpretation.
(A) Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this Chapter shall be
interpreted as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety,
morals and general welfare. Where this Chapter conflicts with any rule,
regulation or ordinance, the greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises, upon the height or bulk of a building or upon requiring larger open
spaces shall prevail, regardless of its source.
(B) Exemplary Lists. Any list of permitted or prohibited uses is not an
exhaustive list, but is included to clarify, emphasize and illustrate, by example,
uses which are desirable or undesirable.
(C) Time Limitations. In the event any time limitations as herein stated
do not conform to Act 247, or any other statute, the time limitation in Act 247, or
any other statute, shall prevail.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 106 of Section 2)
XXXII-II
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Part 2
Definitions
Section 201. General Interpretation. For the purposes of this Chapter, words and
terms used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
(A) Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(B) The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(C) The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter
and vice-versa.
(D) The word "shall" IS always mandatory, and the word "may" or
"should" is always permissive.
(E) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied."
(F) The word "person" includes "individual," "company,"
"unincorporated association," "corporation" or other similar entities.
(G) Any word or term not defined in this Chapter shall be used with a
meaning of standard usage.
(H) The words "street," "road" and "highway" shall have the same
meaning.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 201 of Section 2)
Section 202. Definitions. When used in the Chapter, the following words, terms
and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABUT - contiguous properties sharing a common property boundary and
properties across the street or streets from one another or directly across a
natural feature or right-of-way.
ACCESS DRIVE - a privately owned, constructed and maintained
vehicular access from a public or private street.
XXXU-12
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
ACCESSORY BUILDING - a building (such as a private garage, garden
shed, private toolhouse or children's playhouse or a noncommercial greenhouse)
which is subordinate and accessory to a principal building on the same lot and
which is used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal
building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE - a structure serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the use of the principal building and located on the same lot as the
principal building.
ACCESSORY USE - a use subordinate and customarily incidental to the
principal use on the same lot.
ACRE - 43,560 square feet.
ADJACENT - a state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one
another.
ADULT DAY CARE - a facility where a variety of health, social and
related support services are provided to adults, who have physical or mental
impairments that substantially limit one or more major life activities, in a
protected setting during any part of the day, but less than 24 hours.
ADULT BUSINESS USE - any adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult
theater, adult video rental and sales store, or adult mini-motion picture theater,
as defined below, and which, under the State Obscenity Code, as amended, must
exclude minors or may not knowingly disseminate to a minor.
ADULT BOOKSTORE - an establishment, having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock in trade (for sale or rental) books,
magazines, and other materials which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined by the State
Obscenity Code.
ADULT CABARET - a cabaret, tavern, theater or club which
features strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers
who exhibit, display or engage in nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse, as defined by the State Obscenity Code.
XXXII-I 3
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER - an enclosed
building offering video presentations distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons within
private viewing booths and! or by use of token or coin-operated viewing
booths and! or by use of token or coin-operated projectors or other video
machines as defined by the State Obscenity Code.
ADULT THEATER - any business, indoor or outdoor, which
exhibits a motion picture show or other presentations which, in whole or
in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct, sadomasochistic abuse as defined
by the State Obscenity Code, as amended.
ADULT VIDEO RENTAL AND SALES - an establishment that has
25% or more of its stock in videos for rental or sales, which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or an establishment
with a designated segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material.
MASSAGE PARLOR - any commercial place or establishment
where one person performs exercises upon another person by rubbing,
kneading, stroking or tapping with the hand or hands or with any
mechanical device. This shall include but not be limited to activities
conducted by a health care professional licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This use shall not include any place of
business where any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation
engages in, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on any
method of pressure on, friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing,
tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities or engaging in sexual activity as a business as
prohibited by relevant provisions of the State Obscenity Code.
OTHER ADULT USES - any business, activity or use including or
similar to or of the general nature of "Adult Bookstores", "Adult Motion
Picture Theaters", "Adult Video Sales and Rentals", or "Adult
Entertainment Cabarets" that provide goods or services distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on "Specified Sexual Activities" or
"Specified Anatomical Areas", such as escort bureaus, nude wrestling
studios, phone sex services, internet sex services and studios, or similar
businesses, activities or uses.
XXXII-14
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
ADULT USES, OTHER - any business, activity or use similar to or of the
general nature of II Adult Bookstores", /I Adult Motion Picture Theaters", /I Adult
Entertainment Cabarets" or II Adult Massage Parlors" that provides goods or
services distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on IISpecified Sexual
Activities" or II Specified Anatomical Areas", such as escort bureaus, nude
wrestling studios, phone sex services, internet sex services and studios, or similar
businesses, activities or uses.
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES - the processing, treating, packing or
storing of agricultural products. This definition does not include rendering or
slaughtering operations.
AGRICULTURE, GENERAL - the cultivation of the soil and the raising
and harvesting of the products of the soil. "General Agriculture" includes animal
husbandry, commercial crop storage and orchard, but does not include
commercial forestry, or the extraction of minerals or water from the ground for
any purpose other than in support of the on-site agricultural use.
AGRICULTURE, INTENSIVE - (a) specialized agricultural activities
including, but not limited to, mushroom production, poultry production and dry
lot livestock production, which due to the intensity of production, necessitate
development of specialized sanitary facilities and controls, (b) any agricultural
activity involving more animal equivalent units per acre than specified under
Section 324 for general agriculture.
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL ACT - 35 P.5. §4000 et seq. as amended
AIRPORT or AIRSTRIP - an area of land which is designed, used or
intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of airplanes or ultra-light aircraft
and any appurtenant areas which are designed to be used for airplane support
facilities such as maintenance, refueling and parking facilities. Airports and
airstrips shall be approved and shall meet all the applicable State and Federal
regulations.
PRIVATE USE AIRPORT or AIRSTRIP - an airport or
restricts usage to the owner and/ or operator or to persons
the owner and/ or operator.
XXXII-IS
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
PUBLIC USE AIRPORT or AIRSTRIP - an airport or airstrip open to
the general public and not requiring prior permission of the owner and/ or
operator to land. Public use at commercial airports are covered under the
Airport Zoning Act of October 10, 1980.
ALLEY - a private way affording only secondary means of access to
adjacent property.
ALTERATION - any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in
the existing facilities of a building or structure, or any enlargement thereof,
whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving of
such building from one location or position to another.
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM, PRINCIPAL - an energy conversion
system, either solar or wind generated, whose main purpose is to supply
electrical or thermal power primarily for off-site use. Principal alternative
energy systems could consist of one (1) or more free-standing ground, or roof
mounted wind turbines, solar collector devices, solar related equipment and
other accessory structures and buildings including light reflectors, concentrators,
and heat exchangers, substations, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and
other appurtenant structures.
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS ACCESSORY - an energy conversion
system, either solar or wind generated, which is intended to primarily reduce onsite
consumption of utility power. Accessory alternative energy systems could
consist of one (1) or more free-standing ground, or roof mounted solar arrays or
modules, a wind turbine, a tower, and associate control or conversion electronics.
AMBULANCE SERVICE - a facility housing ambulance or medical
emergency vehicles and attendant staff, including offices and supply storage.
AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTER - a facility designed to provide
elective surgical care in which the patient is admitted and discharged the same
day.
AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENTS - a building established for the use of
electronic and/ or mechanical coin-operated devices, including but not limited to
pinball machines, electronically operated shuffleboards, bowling, video games,
electronically operated tennis, billiards and other similar games of amusement.
ANIMAL EQUIV ALENT UNIT - 1,000-lbs. live weight of livestock or
poultry animals, regardless of the actual number of individual animals
comprising the unit. For purposes of such determination, averages may be used,
XXXII-16
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
with such averages being determined by the average weight of the type animal
being considered.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL - a building, structure or area of land where
animals are given medical care, other than the premises where such animals are
boarded. The definition of animal hospital shall include a veterinarian office.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY - the raising and keeping of livestock or poultry
for any commercial purpose. The keeping of livestock or poultry as farm pets
pursuant to the regulations of this Chapter and shall not be construed as animal
husbandry.
ANIMATED SIGN - a sign which uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or to create a visual effect or scene.
ARCADE - an area contiguous to a street or plaza that is open and
unobstructed, and that is accessible to the public at all times. Arcades may
include building columns, landscaping, statuary and fountains. Arcades do not
include off-street loading/unloading areas, driveways, access drives or parking
areas.
ARTICULATE - to give emphasis to or distinctly identify a particular
element. An articulated fac;ade would be the emphasis of elements on the face of
a wall including a change in setback, materials, roof pitch or height.
AUDITORIUM - a building containing a stage and seating for meetings
and performances. The definition of auditorium shall include a theater and a
motion picture theater; however, shall not include an adult motion picture
theater.
AUTOMOBILE ACCESSORIES - buildings where automobile parts and
supplies are sold at retait but where no vehicular repairs or services are
conducted. This shall not include the sale of gasoline.
AUTOMOBILE, RECREATION VEHICLE or BOAT SALES AREA - an
open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used
motor vehicles, recreation vehicles or boats in operable condition, and where no
major vehicular or boat repair work is done. A use may combine vehicle sales
with major vehicle repairs only if both uses are permitted in that district.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR STATION - buildings and land where
and other automobile parts and supplies are sold at retail and w
vehicular or boat repairs are conducted. The definition of auto
XXXII-I 7
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
station shall include an automobile body shop. See definitions of "major
vehicular or boat repairs. II
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION - buildings and land areas where
gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires or automobile accessories and parts are
supplied and dispensed at retail and where minor automobile repairs and
services are conducted and permitted. See definition of "Minor Automobile
Repairs and Services."
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING - the dismantling or disassembling of used
motor vehicles, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BACK-TO-BACK OR DOUBLE-FACE SIGN - a sh"ucture with two (2)
parallel sign faces oriented in opposite directions.
BANK - includes savings and loans, finance companies, credit unions and
other similar enterprises.
BANNER - a sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is attached
at one or more edges or corners to a pole or building.
BAR - see "tavern or bar."
BASEMENT - a story partly below the finished grade but having at least
one-half (1/2) of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling)
above the average level of the finished grade where such grade abuts the
exterior walls of the building. A basement shall be considered as one (1) story in
determining the permissible number of stories.
BED AND BREAKFAST - a dwelling in which the owner or tenant rents
at least one (1) (but not more than five (5» rental unit(s) for residential or
lodging purposes, and in which meals are served to overnight guests. For the
purpose of this definition, a rental unit is one (1) or more rooms intended to be
occupied by one (1) family as separate living quarters, but does not contain one
(1) or more of the following: sanitary facilities, kitchen facilities or direct access
from the outside or through a common hall.
BEVERAGE DISTRIBUTOR - a business establislunent engaged primarily
in the sale of alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption.
BILLBOARD - off-premises advertising signs.
XXXII-I 8
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
BLOCK - a tract of land or a lot or group of lots, bounded by streets,
public parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies of water, boundary
lines of the Township or by any combination of the above.
BOARD - the Zoning Hearing Board of the Township of Spring.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS - the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring.
BOARDING HOUSE (ROOMING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE) - a
dwelling in which the owner or tenant rents at least two (2), but not more than
five (5), rental unit(s) for residential or lodging purposes, regardless of whether
meals are furnished or not. For the purpose of this definition, a rental unit is one
(1) or more rooms intended to be occupied by one (1) family as separate living
quarters, but does not contain one (1) or more of the following: sanitary facilities,
kitchen facilities or direct access from the outside or through a common hall.
BODY ART - Physical body adornment using, but not limited to, body
piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding and scarification. This
definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures.
The definition shall not include piercing of the ears.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT - a place where body art is the principal or
primary activity. This definition includes facilities commonly referred to as
"tattoo parlors".
BRIGHTNESS OF SIGN - the maximum brightness of a sign, as measured
from the sign's face, in nits (candelas per square meter).
BUFFER YARD - a strip of land at least twenty (20) feet in width which
may be a part of the minimum setback distance and which is free of any
principal or accessory building, parking, outdoor storage or any other use than
open space.
BUILDING - any combination of materials forming any structure which is
erected on the ground and permanently affixed thereto, designed, intended or
arranged for the housing, shelter, enclosure or structural support of persons,
animals or property of any kind. A multifamily building divided by unpierced
masonry division walls extending from the ground to the underside of the roof
shall not be deemed to be more than one (1) building for purpose of this
Chapter.
BUILDING, ATTACHED - a building which has two (2) or mo
XXXII-19
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
portions thereof in common with an adjacent building.
BUILDING, DETACHED - a building which has no parts or walls In
common with an adjacent building.
BUILDING, SEMIDETACHED. a building which has one (1) wall In
common with an adjacent building.
BUILDING COVERAGE - the ratio obtained by dividing the maximum
horizontal cross section of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot by the
total area of the lot upon which the buildings are located, excluding area within
all existing and future or ultimate sh'eet rights-of-way.
BUILDING HEIGHT - the vertical distance from the grade at the front of
the building or the average of the grade of the street fronts, if building faces
more than one (1) street, to the highest point of the roof beams of a flat roof and
to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gabled, hipped and pitched
roofs.
BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE - a line, established by
this Chapter, within a property, defining the minimum distance between any
building or structure or portion thereof to be erected or altered, and an adjacent
right-of-way or street line. Such line shall be measured at right angles from the
street right-of-way line and shall be parallel to said right-of-way line. See
definition of "right-of-way line."
BUILDING MASS - a building's expense or bulk. This term is typically
used in reference to structures of considerable size.
XXXII-20
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
BUS SHELTER - an open, roofed structure used as a shield or protection
from inclement weather conditions by persons awaiting a bus. This shall include
only those structures utilized by a school district or transportation authority.
BUS STATION or BUS TERMINAL - any premises for the housing or
parking of buses and the loading and unloading of passengers.
CAMPGROUND - an area used for seasonal occupancy of recreational
vehicles, temporary tents or cabins by transient visitors to the area, in
combination with outdoor recreation andlor outdoor educational programs.
This term shall only include facilities that are primarily used during warmer
months.
CANDELAS - a unit of luminous intensity, which can be defined as the
amount of luminous flux (total luminous power emitted from a source and
expressed as lumens) per unit solid angle in a given direction.
CARPORT - a building open on two (2) or more sides and used in
conjunction with a dwelling for storage of private vehicles.
CARTWAY - the paved portion of a street or highway designed for
vehicular traffic and paved areas intended for on street parking.
CARW ASH - a facility devoted to the washing and waxing of the exterior
of vehicles and the cleaning of their interiors by automated equipment and
employees of the establishment, but where no sale of gasoline, preventive
maintenance or repair to the vehicles shall be offered and performed.
CASINO or GAMING ESTABLISHMENT - a facility which legally
operates as a government-licensed enterprise open to the public in which gaming
devices and games of chance are offered to players with food, beverages and
retail products normally sold to patrons.
CATERING ESTABLISHMENT - an establishment in which food and
beverages are prepared for consumption off the premises and are not served to
customers on the premises or to take out.
CELLAR - a story partly below the finished grade, having more than onehalf
(1/2) of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling) below
the average level of the adjoining finished grade where such grade ab ts the
exterior walls of the building. A cellar shall not be considered a
determining the permissible number of stories.
XXXII-21
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (NON-ELECTRONIC) - a sign or portion
thereof which has a readerboard of text information in which alphanumeric
character, graphic or symbol is defined by objects, not consisting of an
illumination device and may be changed or re-arranged manually or
mechanically with characters or illustrations which can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face or surface of the sign. A sign which shows the date,
time, and/ or temperature, or other similar information of general interest, shall
not be considered a changeable copy sign.
CHIMNEY - Any vertical structure enclosing a flue or flues that convey
smoke or exhaust from a furnace.
CHRISTMAS TREE FARM - the raising and harvesting of Christmas trees
for commercial purposes.
CIVIC OR SOCIAL ORGANIZATION - an association, corporation, or
other organization that is operated for the promotion of the welfare,
improvement, and enhancement of that community. This definition may include
non-profit organizations.
CLEAN WOOD - Natural wood that has no paint, stains or other types of
coatings, and natural wood that has not been treated with copper chromium
arsenate, creosote or pentachlorophenol, among other treatments.
CLUB - see "membership club."
COMBINATION OF PERMITTED USES - a grouping of principal uses on
a lot where such uses are otherwise permitted individually in that zoning
district. This does not include a combination of uses within the same building.
(See also multiple use building).
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE - a motor vehicle licensed by the
Commonwealth in a class other than Class I or Class II. For purposes of this
Chapter, a recreational vehicle (see definition) shall not be considered a
commercial motor vehicle.
COMMERCIAL STABLE or RIDING ACADEMY - a principal use at
which the operator offers services and facilities to board, train, and exercise
horses that are owned by non-residents of the subject property. This use also
expressly includes the recreational riding of horses for a fee, riding lessons,
periodic competitions and similar events related to the care, use and enjoyment
of the horses.
XXXII-22
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
COMMISSION - the Planning Commission of the Township of Spring.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA - any device used for the transmission
or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile
radio service or any other wireless communications signals including, without
limitation, omnidirectional or whip antennae and directional or panel antennae,
owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device. This definition
shall not include private residence mounted satellite dishes or television
antennae or amateur radio equipment including, without limitation, ham or
citizen band radio antennae.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING - an unmanned buiJding
or cabinet containing communications equipment required for the operation of
communications antennae and covering an area on the ground not greater than
two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER - a structure other than a building, such as
a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used to support
communications antennae.
COMMUNITY CENTER - a building or portion of a building in
which members of a community may gather for social, educational,
recreational or cultural activities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - the document titled IISuburban Berks West
Joint Comprehensive Plan/ or any part thereof, adopted by the Board of
Supervisors.
CONDITIONAL USE - certain specified uses which are allowed or denied
by the Board of Supervisors after recommendation by the Plamling Commission
pursuant to express standards and criteria set forth in this Chapter.
CONDOMINIUM - real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions, created under either the
Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of July 3, 1963, or the Pennsylvania Uniform
Condominium Act.
CONFERENCE CENTER - an establishment used for the holdV'\g of
conventions, seminars, workshops or similar activities, including din¢'g, ~nd
lodging facilities for the use of participants, as well as compatible ,~~ y
facilities. l\~?(l
\'\!d,~~ ri\-\ '1-\\0.
,111;'1'2'''' '\
11Llij!i ,"'\ ' XXXII -23 FOUNDI'iD I5f:Xi" \
'~~-"'~"~""~
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
CONSTRUCTION - includes the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastening in a temporary or permanent position; and the
demolition of a preexisting building, provided that further construction be
diligently carried on.
CONVENIENCE STORE - an establishment where food, tobacco, drugs,
periodicals, or similar items of household convenience are kept for retail sale to
residents of the immediate neighborhood. Stores catering primarily to passing
traffic originating outside of the surrounding neighborhood are not included in
this definition.
CONVERSION - to change or adapt land or structures to a different use,
occupancy or purpose.
CONVALESCENT or NURSING HOME - an establishment containing
sleeping rooms used by persons who are lodged and furnished with meals and
are provided with needed support services, including the availability of basic
nursing care. Such a facility mayor may not include skilled nursing or medical
care, but shall not include surgery or other treatments which are customarily
provided in hospitals. This definition shall be limited to facilities licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a nursing center or personal care center.
CONVENTIONAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT - a residential use of
land that includes the division of property into building lots based upon the
standard provisions within a zoning district for lot area, width, building
coverage and minimum yard requirements. This definition does not include
open space developments or planned residential developments.
COPY CENTER - a place of business that reproduces drawings, plans,
maps, or other documents by means of blueprinting or photocopying.
CORRECTIONAL or PENAL INSTITUTION - a facility, the primary
purpose of which is to house or confine those held in lawful custody as a result
of allegation, convictions, or adjudications of criminal or delinquent conduct.
COUNTY - the County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION - the Berks County Planning
Commission.
XXXII-24
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
CREMATORIUM - a building fitted with the proper appliances for the
purposes of the cremation of human remains and includes everything incidental
or ancillary thereto.
CULTURAL CENTER - a building and/ or land open to the public which
contains exhibits of a cultural interest, such as a museum, nature study area, etc.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT - a proposed zoning amendment made to the
Board of Supervisors by any landowner who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of an ordinance which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest.
CUSTOMER SERVICE WINDOW - an opening on the exterior of a
building through which the customers receive goods or services in exchange for
monetary compensation.
DAY CARE CENTER - a facility where care is provided at anyone time
for seven (7) or more children under the age of twelve (12), where the child care
area(s) are not being used as a family residence and where full-time adult
supervision is provided.
DEMOLITION - the dismantling, tearing down, removal or razing of the
exterior of a building, in whole or in part; provided such changes do not alter the
structural integrity of the building. This term shall not include changes to the
interior of a building.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT - the absence of routine maintenance and
repair which leads to structural weakness, decay and deterioration in a building
to a point that causes a need for major repair or may cause a need for total
demolition of the structure.
DENSITY - unless otherwise stipulated in this Chapter, the term "density"
shall mean gross density which shall be determined by dividing the total
number of dwelling units by the total amount of land in the tract to be
developed minus all land within the ultimate right-of-way of existing and
proposed streets.
DETACHED - a state of being surrounded on all sides by yards.
DISTRICT (or ZONING DISTRICT) - a portion of the territory of the
Township within which certain uniform regulations and requireme
various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Chapter.
XXXII-25
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
DRIVE-IN - a business establishment so developed that its retail or service
character is dependent upon providing an access drive approach or spaces for
motor vehicles to service patrons while in or on the motor vehicle, rather than
within a building.
DRIVE-THROUGH - a feature of an establishment which encourages or
permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in or on a
motor vehicle.
DRIVE-THROUGH CUSTOMER WINDOW - see customer service
window.
DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT - see restaurant, fast food with drivethrough
service.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE UNIT - an individual drive-through lane at
a drive-through establishment, which may contain one (1) or more components
(such as menu boards, pay windows, pickup windows, etc.). When multiple
vehicles are able to be served simultaneously, the number of units is equal to the
number of simultaneously served vehicles.
DRIVEWAY - a privately owned, constructed and maintained vehicular
access from a street or access drive to a single dwelling unit or a non-residential
use that has three (3) or less off-street parking spaces.
DWELLING UNIT - one (1) or more living or sleeping rooms together
with separate cooking and sanitary facilities which are accessible from the
outdoors, whether directly or through an entrance hall shared with other
dwelling units and used or intended to be used by a family.
DWELLING - a building designed or used as a living quarters for one (1)
or more families. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include rooming
house, tourist home, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, dormitory, fraternity,
sorority house or other group residence. For purposes of this Chapter, the
following types of dwellings are defined:
(1) Single-Family Detached Dwelling. A detached building
arranged, designed and intended for occupancy exclusively by one (1)
family. The term "single-family detached dwelling II shall be deemed to
include a factory-built "modular horne" placed on a permanent perimeter
foundation.
XXXII-26
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
_I
(a) Modular Home Dwelling (defined by the
Pennsylvania Industrialized Housing Act/ Act 70). Any structure
designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or in
substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation, on the building site; housing units defined as mobile
homes are excluded from this definition.
(b) Mobile/Manufactured Home. A transportable,
single-family detached dwelling designed so that it can be used for
permanent occupancy, contained in one (1) unit or in two (2) units
designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may
be used with or without a permanent foundation.
Mobile/manufactured homes shall be constructed in accordance
with the Safety and Construction Standards of the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development. The term
"mobile/manufactured home II shall not be deemed to include
"recreation vehicle II nor a "modular home" placed on a permanent
perimeter foundation.
(2) Two-Family Semidetached Dwelling. A building arranged,
designed and intended for occupancy by two (2) families living
independent of each other in separate dwelling units which are entirely
separated by vertical walls and which are unpierced except for access to
the outside. This type of dwelling is commonly called a twin or a
semidetached dwelling.
(3) Two-Family Detached Dwelling. A building arranged,
designed or intended for occupancy by two (2) families living
independently of each other in separate dwelling units that are separated
primarily by horizontal floors as opposed to vertical walls. This type of
dwelling is commonly called a duplex.
(4) Multiple-Family Building. A building arranged, designed
and intended for three (3) or more dwelling units and which include the
following housing types:
XXXII-27
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) Garden Apartment. A multifamily building in which
the individual dwelling units have entrances from common
hallways. The building is on a lot which is held in single and
separate ownership which have yards in common but which may
also have other joint facilities and services.
(b) Single-Family Attached Dwelling. A dwelling unit
within a building which has no more than six (6) attached dwelling
units (including the end unit). Each unit is arranged, designed,
intended for and occupied exclusively by one (1) family. Each
dwelling unit is separated by unpierced vertical fire walls and has
at least one (1) separate entrance. Each internal dwelling unit has
no side yards and each end unit has one (1) side yard. This
includes most dwellings commonly referred to as "townhouses" or
"row houses."
(5) Apartments on Upper Levels. A building arranged,
designed or intended for one (1) or more dwelling units on the upper
floor(s) where the ground or first floor is used solely for a permitted
nomesidential use.
NOTE: See following page for sketches that illustrate the types of dwelling units.
XXXII-28
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
XXXII-29
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED
TWO FAMILY DETACHED
GARDEN APARTMENTS
TWO FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED
TOWNHOUSES OR
SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED
DWELLINGS
NONRESIDENTIAL USE
UPPER LEVEL APARTMENTS
XXXII-30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN - a sign or portion thereof
that displays electronic text information, static images, static graphics, static
pictures, or any combination thereof, defined by a small number of matrix.
elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED's), fiber
optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area where the
message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, repixilization
or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include
computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital
displays. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include official or time and
temperature signs. Electronic changeable copy signs include projected images or
messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
ELECTRONIC NOTICE - notice given by the Township through the
internet of the time and place of a public hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing.
EPA - Environmental Protection Agency or such successor agency.
F AC;:ADE - the portion of any exterior elevation on a building extending
from grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and extending the entire
length of a building on all sides.
FADE - a mode of message or image transition on an electronic
changeable copy sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first
message or image gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible
and the subsequent message or image gradually increases in intensity to the
point of legibility.
FAMILY - one (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, foster
relationship or adoption (or a group of not more than three (3) persons not
related by blood, marriage or adoption) living together in a single dwelling and
maintaining and functioning as a common household. The term" family" shall
be deemed to include any domestic employees or gratuitous guests, but shall not
include any roomer, boarder, or lodger. The term shall include such number of
unrelated disabled persons who are residing together in a Group Home, in
accordance with the provisions for Group Homes as provided herein.
FARM ANIMALS - animals that are customarily kept only on a farm or
where agricultural activities take place, including but not limited to horses,
cattle, pigs, swine, sheep, goats, poultry, rabbits, or similar animals.
F ARM POND - a manmade body of water at least two thousand
square feet in area used for agricultural or recreational purposes.
XXXII-31
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
FENCE - a manmade barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation
between lots or to enclose a lot or portion thereof. The term "fence" shall be
deemed to include a wall.
FLASHING SIGN - a directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion
thereof that exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide
intermittent illumination that changes light intensity in sudden transitory burst
and creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by streaming, graphic bursts
showing movement, or any mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
twinkling or sparkling. Illuminated signs which indicate the date, time, and/ or
temperature, or other similar information of general interest, shall not be
considered a flashing sign.
FLOODPLAIN AREA - as defined in the Township of Spring Floodplain
Ordinance (Chapter X).
FLOOR AREA (GROSS FLOOR AREA) - the total space of all floors, as
measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls (or from the center line of
party walls separating two (2) buildings), but excluding cellars, crawl spaces,
garages, carports, attics without floors, open porches, balconies and terraces.
FORESTRY - the management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes.
FREE-STANDING SIGN - an in-ground of surface-mounted sign which is
constructed to be independent of all adjoining structures or which is supported
or suspended from a free-standing column or other support located in or upon
the ground surface.
FUEL STORAGE TANK FARM - an establishment primarily engaged in
the bulk storage and distribution of petroleum, gasoline, fuel oil, gas or other
similar inflammable products in fuel storage tanks.
FUNERAL HOME - a building designed for the purpose of furnishing
funeral supplies and services to the public and includes facilities intended for the
preparation of the dead human body for internment or cremation.
GAMING - the activity or practice of playing at a game of chance for
money or other stakes.
XXXII-32
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM, ACCESSORY - a sealed, watertight
loop of pipe buried outside of a building foundation, intended to re-circulate a
liquid solution through a heat exchanger. This includes, but is not limited to:
vertical closed loop, horizontal closed loop and body of water closed loop.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM, CLOSED LOOP - a geothermal
energy system designed and constructed so that the liquid does not come in
contact with groundwater.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM, OPEN LOOP - a geothermal energy
system designed and constructed to pump groundwater to the heating and
cooling equipment. The groundwater is then discharged into the ground, to the
ground surface or to a body of water.
GLARE - a situation created when illumination sources shine with visibly
harsh, uncomfortably bright light which: causes discomfort; distracts attention;
or leads to reduction or loss of visibility or visual performances (up to and
including situations of blinding glare, as defined in the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America's current Lighting Handbook). These situations are
typically caused by insufficiently shielded light sources, or high luminance
(luminance that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are
adapted).
GOVERNING BODY - the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Spring.
GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES - municipal, County, State or Federal
government buildings or facilities designed and intended to be occupied by the
government or designed and intended for public use sponsored by such
governments or its designee, but not including group homes.
GRADE - (a) the elevation of existing or finished ground or paving, (b)
the slope of existing or finished ground or paving. See definition of "slope".
GREENHOUSE/NURSERY (RETAIL) - the raising of trees (for
transplanting), ornamentals, shrubs, flowers or houseplants for any commercial
purpose.
GROUP HOME - a building occupied as a residence by more than three
(3) disabled residents who receive twenty-four (24) hour resident superv·,~ion,
licensed under the applicable State program. Such use shall not include f SiF'l;fes
occupied by those convicted of or being detained on criminal ch 'St{!~r
adjudicated on charges of delinquency. The term" disabled", for the p . "
XXXII-33
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
this definition and for some purpose of the definition of "family", as set forth
above, shall mean those individuals with a "handicap" as defined in the Federal
Fair Housing Act of 1988, as amended.
GUN CLUB or OUTDOOR TARGET RANGE - a facility, not completely
enclosed within a building, that is designed and constructed for the safe
discharge of firearms and other projectile-type weapons (e.g., guns, rifles, pistols,
air gums, archery cross-bows, etc.) by persons for the practice of marksmanship,
recreation, competition, skill development, training, or any combination thereof.
This definition shall not include hunting when conducted in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
HEALTH CLUB - A private or public indoor facility utilized for
recreational activities, including sports, exercise, and athletic contests, but not
including athletic or other performances for viewing by more than twenty-five
(25) spectators at anyone time. All activities relating to an adult business shall
be prohibited within a health club.
REA VY INDUSTRIAL USE - a principal use that involves:
(1) The production and processing of asphalt and asphalt
products, bricks, cement and cement blocks, tar and other synthetic
paving and masonry-like materials;
(2) The production and processing of chemicals, dyes, solvents,
fertilizers, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda, cellulose, chlorine, carbon
black, bone black, creosote, hydrogen, oxygen, pharmaceutical and
industrial alcohol, nitrates, potash, plastic and synthetic resins, pyroxylin,
rayon, and hydrochlQric, nitric, picric and sulfuric acids;
(3) The production, processing and/or distillation of gelatin,
glue, soap, starch and other plant and animal by-products not associated
with food processing;
(4) The production and processing of linoleum, oil cloth, paint,
varnish, turpentine, vinyl, rubber (natural and synthetic) and other similar
materials;
(5) The production and processing of glass and glass products;
(6) A metal foundry, reduction, refinishing, smelting, alloying
and/ or refining operation;
XXXII-34
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(7) The milling or processing of flour or grain;
(8) Principal waste handling, processing, transfer and disposal
facilities, including solid waste disposal areas or facilities;
(9) Truck or motor freight terminals and truck stops;
(10) The production and/ or assembly of passenger vehicles and
heavy equipment and manufactured homes; and,
(11) The production of wood pulp and paper;
(12) Sawmill; or
(13) Any operation of assembly, conversion, distribution,
manufacture, production, processing, storage, warehousing and/ or
wholesaling of goods, materials and products not otherwise listed in this
Chapter.
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER - the vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications
tower, including antennae mounted on the tower.
HEIGHT OF SIGNS OR OTHER STRUCTURES - the vertical distance
measured from the grade at the front of the structure or sign to its highest point.
The highest point in the case of a sign shall include the supporting structure.
HELIPORT - any area of land, water or a structural surface which is
designed, used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters
and any appurtenant areas which are designed to be used for helicopter support
facilities such as maintenance, refueling and parking. All heliports shall be
approved and shall meet all the applicable State and Federal regulations for their
use.
PRIV ATE USE HELIPORT - any heliport that restricts usage to the
owner and/ or operator or to persons authorized by the owner and/ or
operator.
PUBLIC USE HELIPORT - any heliport open to the general public
and not requiring prior permission of the owner and/ or operator to land.
XXXII-35
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
HOLIDAY TREE SALES - the offering of holiday trees for sale to the
public from a temporary structure or from a location out-of-doors where goods
are not normally displayed as part of a permanent, ongoing retail establishment.
HOME OCCUPATION - an accessory use which:
(1) Is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling
unit.
(2) Is carried on only within the dwelling unit.
HOME-RELATED BUSINESS - an accessory use which:
(1) Is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling
unit.
(2) Is not carried on within a dwelling unit, like a home
occupation, but may be administered out of the dwelling unit.
HOSPIT AL OR MEDICAL CENTER - an institution providing physical or
mental health services or medical or surgical care to the sick, handicapped or
injured, including facilities for overnight accommodation of patients. This
definition does not include an animal hospital.
HOSPITAL STAFF DORMITORY - a structure providing residential
accommodations (including cooking facilities) for employees or students of the
hospital.
HOTEL (MOTEL) - a building or group of buildings which contains six
(6) or more rental units for overnight lodging of travelers or for the temporary
occupancy of transients, licensed under applicable laws.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA - as described in the Township of
Spring Floodplain Ordinance (Chapter X).
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE - the percentage of the total area of a lot,
excluding area within all existing and future or ultimate street rights-of-way, that
is covered by surfaces (such as bituminous paving) that has a runoff coefficient
of 0.8 or greater and by buildings or other nonporous structures. In addition,
areas covered by gravel or stone that are intended for vehicular movement or
parking shall be considered to be impervious for the purposes of this Chapter.
XXXII-36
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
INDOOR SPORTS FACILITY - facilities for amateur or recreational
uses that take place entirely within a wholly-enclosed building, including
basketball, soccer, ice skating, ice hockey, roller skating, or similar uses.
INTERIOR SERVICE AND CONVENIENCE USES - a use which is clearly
incidental to the principal use of a building, and which is located within the same
building and primarily serves the occupants of said building. Interior service
and convenience uses include, but are not limited to, eating and drinking places,
specialized retail food sales, barber/beauty shop, photo copy service, pharmacy,
optician, daycare/ nursery, and fitness center.
JUNK - any and all discarded material or articles; including scrap metal,
junk motor vehicles, glass, industrial waste, paper, abandoned machinery,
equipment, containers, structures, used plumbing supplies and other used
building materials.
JUNKY ARDS - a lot, land or structure or parts thereof used for the
collection, storage, dismantling, salvage or sale of used and discarded materials
including, but not limited to, waste paper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap,
salvage or discarded material, vehicles or machinery. The deposit or storage of
two (2) or more unlicensed, wrecked or disabled vehicles shall be deemed to be
ajunkyard.
KENNEL - any lot on which six (6) or more adult (over six (6) months of
age) dogs or cats are kept at anyone time. This use specifically does not include
breeding of dogs and cats. Any such use shall fully comply with State Act 225 of
1982.
KITCHEN - an area or room within a dwelling or structure containing
kitchen facilities. All three amenities defined as kitchen facilities must be
present for the area or room to be considered a kitchen.
KITCHEN FACILITIES - all the following shall be included: sink with
piped water, a permanent cookstove and a refrigerator.
LANDOWNER - the owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such
option or contract is subject to any condition) or a lessee (if he is authorized
under the lease to exercise the right of the landowner), or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE - a principal use that involves:
XXXII-37
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) Bookbinding, printing, and publishing operations;
(2) Heavy equipment sales;
(3) Laboratories for medical, scientific, or industrial research
and development;
(4) Machine, tool and die, and metal fabrication shops;
(5) Shops, offices or equipment buildings for construction
companies utilizing heavy and earthmoving equipment, or involving the
outdoor storage of construction equipment or materials;
(6) Recycling facilities;
(7) Manufacturing, packaging, storage and/ or wholesaling of
the following:
(a) Furniture, cabinets, plumbing, heating, aIr
conditioning, ventilation and electrical fixtures, ceramic, stone,
vinyl, fiberglass and linoleum tiles, carpets and rugs, windows,
doors, insulation, ceiling and roofing tiles, household appliances,
finished lumber and other household appointments;
(b) Scientific, medical, optical, specialized, and technical
instruments and equipment;
(c) Audio visual components, computers, vending
machines, electronic equipment, software and video games;
(d) Office equipment, supplies, furnishings, and
equipment;
(e) Packaging materials, supplies and equipment;
(f) Finished textile products;
(g) Cosmetics, drugs, dyes, toiletries, perfumes and other
pharmaceuticals;
(h) Brushes, brooms, and combs;
(i) Hot tubs, spas, saunas, and swimming pools;
G) Jewelry, and other precious or semi-precious metals
and stones;
(k) Photographic, lighting, and timekeeping equipment;
(1) Hand tools, hardware, power tools and small engine
equipment and vehicles including but not limited to lawn mowers,
chain saws, compressors, power washing equipment, motorcycles,
and outboard boat motors;
XXXII-38
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(m) Musical instruments, sporting equipment, bicycles
and toys; and,
(n) Small or novelty products from prepared materials.
(8) Welding shops; or
(9) Processing, packaging, bottling, storage and/ or wholesaling
of food products excluding:
(a) Pickling processes;
(b) Rendering or slaughtering operations; and,
(c) Sugar refineries.
LIVING UNIT FOR THE ELDERLY - a dwelling unit in which at least one
resident shall be at least 60 years of age.
LODGING HOUSE - see "boarding house."
LOT - a tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint
ownership, not necessarily a lot or lots shown on a duly recorded map, which is
occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures and accessory
building, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required. The
term lot shall also mean parcel, plot, site or any similar term.
(1) Corner Lot. A lot situated at and abutting the intersection
of two (2) streets having an interior angle of intersection not greater than
one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
(2) Interior Lot. A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which
do not abut a street.
(3) Through Lot. An interior lot having frontage on two (2)
parallel or approximately parallel streets
(4) Flag Lot or Keyhole Lot. An irregularly shaped lot
characterized by an elongated extension from a street to the principal part
of the lot. The flag or keyhole shape of the lot is normally intended to
provide for access to an otherwise land- locked interior parcel.
LOT AREA - the space contained within the lot lines, excluding space
within all existing and future or ultimate street rights-of-way.
LOT DEPTH - the mean average horizontal distance between th
and the rear lot lines.
XXXII-39
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
LOT LINES - any line dividing one (1) lot from another.
FRONT LOT LINE (STREET LINE) - a lot line separating the lot
from a street right-of-way. The front lot line shall be the same as an
existing or ultimate right-of-way line (whichever establishes a greater
width).
REAR LOT LINE - a lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line. (A three (3) sided lot has no rear lot line.)
SIDE LOT LINE - any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A
"side street lot line" is a side lot line separating a lot from a street.
2
2 3 2
3 3
2 2
3 33 33 3
STREET
5lREET RIGHT OF WAY UNES--=-=----
LOT WIDTH - the horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at the minimum front yard setback lines. (See §405(G), Exceptions to
Minimum Lot Areas, Lot Widths and Yards.) In no case shall the minimum
street frontage be less than one-half (1/2) of the required lot width
Note: See Terms for Lot Requirements on Next Page.
XXXII-40
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
,SIDE LOT LlNE~-j
F. REQUIRED FRONT I LOT WIOT7 :
YARD DEPTH~
I· I
SID
~ VF: REQUIRED FRONT I YARO ~E PTH _----L'L---__ F lOR GREATER)
= S--~---'! I . ~ ---~FRO"HLOTLINE
----------____ / lSTREET LINES}
........ ""'--.. ______ --PTERMS
FOR LOT REQUIREMENTS
For General Illustrative Purposes Only
REAR LOT LINE ~\
REQUIRED REAR YARD
E LOT L1NE\ I I IrSI DE LOT LINE
REQ'D REQ'D
SIDE YARD SIDE YARD
L ~ /
LOT WIDTH
REQUIRED FRONT YARD 1__ - - -
STREET RIGHT - OF - WAY LINE
BUILDING LINE OR
BUILDING SETBACK LINE
FRONT LOT LINE OR
STREET LINE
CARTWAY-< STREET CENTER UNE::::::----
______ _ _ _ STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY L1NE~.. .. _____
XXXII-41
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
STREET FRONT LOT UNE
(SlREET UNES)
LUMENS - the luminous flux emitted per unit solid angle from a uniform
point source whose luminous intensity is one (1) candela.
MAILED NOTICE - notice given by the Township by first class mail of the
time and place of a public hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing.
MAINTENANCE AND REP AIR - work that does not alter the appearance
or harm the stability of exterior features of a building.
MAJOR VEHICULAR or BOAT REPAIRS - include major mechanical and
body /hull work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding/patching,
storage of vehicles or boats not in operating condition, or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found in automobile service stations.
MEDICAL OFFICE OR MEDICAL CLINIC - a place, building or portion
of a building used exclusively by physicians, optometrists, chiropractors,
dentists, physical therapists, massage therapists, or other drugless practitioners
involving non-surgical treatment, care, examination and diagnosis, and
preventative health services, including inoculation and educational services to
outpatients. This definition includes blood donor stations and medical
laboratories, or other facilities providing medical analysis services including the
taking, analyzing and testing of physical samples and specimens for the
diagnosis and treatment of patients. This definition does not include
veterinarian offices.
XXXII-42
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
MEMBERSHIP CLUB - an area of land or building owned, leased or
occupied by an association of persons, operated solely for a recreational, social, ,
religious, political or athletic purpose and whose activities are confined to the
members and guests and are not extended to the general public. For the
purposes of this Chapter, the definition of "membership club" shall not include a
tavern or restaurant unless a tavern or restaurant is also permitted in that
district.
MINERAL EXTRACTION - a site where a mineral, stone, sand, gravel or
topsoil is excavated.
MINIATURE GOLF COURSE - a commercial recreational use based upon
golf that requires only a putter and is typically, but not necessarily, illuminated
for night play.
MINOR AUTOMOBILE REP AIRS AND SERVICES - Includes:
(1) Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries and distributors
and distributor parts.
(2) Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving.
(3) Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hoses, fan
belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield
wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and
the like.
(4) Radiator cleaning and flushing.
(5) Washing and polishing and sale of automotive washing and
polishing materials.
(6) Greasing and lubrication.
(7) Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil filters and lines.
(8) Minor servicing and repair of carburetors.
(9) Emergency electrical repairs.
(10) Adjusting and repairing brakes.
XXXII-43
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(11) Minor motor adjustment not involving removal of the head
or crankcase or racing the motor.
(12) Mini grocery store with sales of packaged foods, beverages,
tobacco and similar convenience goods for filling station customers, as
accessory to principal operation.
(13) Provision of street maps and other informational material to
customers, provision of restroom facilities.
(14) Safety and emission inspections.
MOBILEjMANUF ACTURED HOME PARK - a parcel of land under
single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of
two (2) or more mobile homes for nontransient residential use.
MOTEL - see "hotel."
MULTIFAMILY - includes the following dwelling types: single-family
attached dwellings and garden apartment dwellings. These are described under
"dwelling types."
MULTIPLE-USE BUILDING - a building for two (2) or more principal
uses that are either permitted by right or by condition in the zoning district
where this Chapter permits a multiple-use building.
MULTI-VISION SIGN - a sign composed in whole or in part of a series of
vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that produces a different image and when
functioning properly allows on a single sign structure the display at any given
time of one of two or more images.
NIGHTCLUB - a type of tavern that offers the sale of liquor In
conjunction with live entertainment andj or dancing.
NITS - a photometric unit defined as cdjm2 (candelas per square meter).
NO-IMP ACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS - a business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer,
client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or
removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use.
XXXII-44
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
NONCONFORMING LOT - a lot which does not meet with the minimum
lot width, or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is situated,
but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this Chapter or is
legally established through the granting of a variance by the Board.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE or BUILDING - a structure or
building, or part thereof, which does not meet the applicable provisions or
requirements of the district in which it is located, either at the time of enactment
of this Chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto, where such
building or structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or amendment. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE - a building, structure, sign or use of land
which does not conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is
located, either at the time of the enactment of this Chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments thereto, but which did not violate any applicable use
regulations prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendments. However,
no existing use shall be deemed nonconforming solely because of the existence
of less than the required off-street parking spaces.
NUISANCE - the unreasonable, unwarrantable or unlawful use of public
or private property which causes injury, damage, hurt, inconvenience,
annoyance or discomfort to any person in the legitimate enjoyment of his
reasonable rights of person or property.
OFFICE - a use that involves administrative, clerical, financial,
governmental and professional operations and operations of a similar character.
This use shall not include retail or industrial uses. The use shall not include a
medical office or clinic, a medical laboratory, a veterinarian office or an animal
hospital.
OFFICIAL MAP - the official map as adopted or amended
by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with Act 247, as amended.
OFFICIAL STREET CLASSIFICATION MAP - the map as adopted or
amended by the Board of Supervisors classifying the streets of the Township
into functional categories.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP - the map as adopted or amended by,
of Supervisors which designates the location and boundaries of zoni ..... 1''''' ... '''....,.
XXXII-45
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
OFF-PREMISES SIGN - a sign which directs attention to an object,
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business
located or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is located, or
to which it is affixed.
OFF-STREET PARKING SETBACK - the distance that any paved area is
required to be set back from the existing street right-of-way line. This shall not
apply to driveways, sidewalks or curbs.
OFF-TRACK BETTING PARLOR - a commercial use where persons can
wager upon, and observe by remote television, the outcomes of events that are
taking place elsewhere.
ON-PREMISES SIGN - a sign which directs attention to an object, product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business located or
offered on the premises upon which the sign is displayed or to which the sign is
affixed.
OPEN AIR RET AIL - buildings or open areas in which stalls or sales areas
are set aside, and rented or otherwise provided, and which are intended for use
by various individuals for the selling of homemade, homegrown, homecrafted,
old, new or antique retail goods. This definition would include a /I flea market".
OPEN SPACE - the area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory
structures, streets, driveways or parking areas; but includes areas occupied by
walkways, patios, porches without roofs, playgrounds, outdoor recreation or
play apparatus, gardens or trees.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON - a parcel or parcels of land, or an area of
water or a combination of land and water within a development site which is
open space designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development or the Township.
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT - a development design option which
allows the minimum lot area and yard requirements to be reduced so that
buildings and lots can be grouped together in a more efficient and environmental
sensitive configuration, provided that the remaining area is set aside and
preserved as common open space in compliance with the regulations contained
in Section 901 (Appendix A).
ORCHARD - the raising and keeping of tree crops for any commercial
purpose.
XXXII-46
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
ORDINANCE - the "Spring Township Zoning Ordinance," including the
official zoning map, official street classification map and any amendments
enacted by the Board of Supervisors.
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER - A fuel-burning device, also known
as an outdoor wood-fired furnace, outdoor wood-burning appliance or outdoor
hydronic heater, designed:
(1) to burn clean wood or other approved solid fuels;
(2) by the manufacturer specifically for outdoor installation or
installation in structures not normally intended for habitation by humans
or domestic animals (e.g., garages); and,
(3) to heat building space and/or water via distribution,
typically through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or
a water/antifreeze mixture.
PADEP the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
PARALLEL SIGN - a sign which is attached to or is part of the facade of a
building and does not extend more than one foot (I') from such facade.
PARALLEL SIGN, GROSS SURF ACE AREA OF - the entire area within a
single continuous perimeter composed of rectangles which enclose the extreme
limits of the emblems and/ or design together with any frame or background
which is used to differentiate such sign from the wall against which it is placed.
If a parallel sign is comprised of emblems, designs, words or
numerals with separate background or frames, the intervening air space
between the background frames shall not be included in the sign area
calculations.
Where a sign consists only of individual letters, monograms,
numerals, symbols or similar components and is painted on or attached
flat onto the wall of a building, and where such individual components
are without integrated background definition and are not within a
circumscribed frame area. The total area of the sign shall be the sum of
the areas of the squares or rectangles surrounding each individua sign
component.
XXXII-47
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
P ARENT TRACT - a lawful lot of record, that is held in single ownership
as of the date of adoption of this Chapter, according to the Office of Recorder of
Deeds of Berks County.
PARKING FACILITIES - outdoor areas or specially designed buildings or
garages used for the storage of vehicles.
PATIENT HOSTEL - a residential facility for the sole use of patients of a
hospital or medical center and their immediate families. The facility may include
a shared dining facility which is restricted to use by the hostel occupants.
PERMANENT - having a life span of six (6) months or more at a
particular location.
PERMIT - a document issued by the appropriate Township authority
authorizing the applicant to undertake certain activities.
BUILDING PERMIT - a permit indicating that a proposed
construction, alteration or reconstruction of a structure is in accordance
with the construction provisions of any building code which may be
adopted by the Township which authorizes an applicant to commence
with said consh'uction, alteration or reconsh·uction.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT - a permit issued upon completion of the
construction of a structure, or change in use of structure or parcel of land
or reoccupancy of a structure or land indicating that the premises comply
with the provisions of this Chapter and may be used for the purposes set
forth in the occupancy permit.
ZONING PERMIT - a permit issued indicating that a proposed
use, building or structure is in accordance with this Chapter which
authorizes an applicant to proceed with said use, building or structure.
PERMITTED BY RIGHT USE - a use which does not require zoning
approval by the Board or by the Board of Supervisors before a zoning permit is
granted by the Zoning Officer, although a site plan review is required for many
uses under this Chapter.
PERSON - an individual, partnership, organization, association, trust or
corporation. When used in a penalty provision, "person" shall include the
members of such partnership, the trustees of such trust and the officers of such
organization, association or corporation.
XXXU-48
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
PERSONAL SERVICE - an establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs which does not involve primarily retail sales of goods or
professional advisory services. Personal services include barber and beauty
shops, tanning salons, shoe repair shops, household appliance repair shops,
laundromats, laundry and dry cleaning shops (but not laundry or dry cleaning
plants), tailor and seamstress shops, and other similar establishments.
PHASE 1 OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER - An outdoor wood-fired
boiler that has been certified or qualified by the EPA's meeting a particulate
matter emission limit of 0.60 pounds particulates per million British Thermal
Unit output and is labeled accordingly. Phase 1 outdoor wood-fired boiler
models will be identified with an orange hang tag.
PHASE 2 OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER - An outdoor wood-fired
boiler that has been certified or qualified by the EPA as meeting a particulate
matter emission limit of 0.32 pounds particulates per million British Thermal
Units output and is labeled accordingly. Phase 2 outdoor wood-fired boiler
models will be identified with a white hang tag.
PLACE OF WORSHIP - buildings, synagogues, churches and shrines used
principally for religious and/ or spiritual worship. Such facilities may include
religious education, social and day care facilities provided that such facilities are
clearly accessory uses and not a principal use.
PLANNED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT - a development containing one
or more of a variety of specified nonresidential uses and approved by the Board
of Supervisors as a Conditional Use complying with specified standards within
the Planned Highway Interchange District (PHI).
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) - an area of land
controlled by a single landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwelling units in a variety of housing types, and which has a
development plan that does not comply with regulations on lot size, bulk or
type of dwelling, density, lot coverage or required open space and which further
complies with §301 and all other applicable provisions of the Township of Spring
PRD ordinance (Chapter XXI).
PLANNING COMMISSION - the Planning Commission for the Township
of Spring.
PORTABLE SIGN - a sign designed to be transported, includin
limited to signs transported by wheels, signs converted to A-frames,
sandwich board signs, balloons used as signs, and signs attached to
XXXII-49
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
on vehicles that are parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said
vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of a business.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING - the building in which the principal use of a lot
is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE - the single dominant use or single main use on a lot.
PROJECTING SIGN -a sign which is attached to the facade of a building
and extends more than one foot (1'), but not more than six (6') feet, from such
facade.
PUBLIC NOTICE - notice required by Act 247, the Pennsylvania
Municipality Planning Code. Currently Act 247 requires notice to be given not
more than thirty (30) days and not less than seven (7) days in advance of any
public hearing required by this Chapter. Such notice shall be published once
each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER - a structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the PeIIDsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead electricity
transmission lines.
RADIO/TV TRANSMITTER - any structure used for the transmission or
retransmission of a commercial radio or television broadcast signal.
RECREATION - three (3) types of recreation are classified for this
Chapter:
NON-MUNICIPAL INDOOR RECREATION - this includes
recreation uses that do not meet the definition of municipal recreation
and that are primarily within a building. This includes uses owned by
commercial ventures or by nonprofit organizations. This includes indoor
miniature golf, bowling alleys, indoor swimming clubs, indoor tennis
clubs, racquetball clubs, dance studios, health clubs, exercise clubs and
closely similar uses. This definition does not include amusement
establishments, CIVIC or social organizations, membership clubs,
community centers, theaters, auditoriums, indoor sports facilities or offtrack
betting parlors.
XXXII-50
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
NON-MUNICIPAL OUTDOOR RECREATION - this includes
recreation uses that do not meet the definition of municipal recreation
and that are primarily conducted outside of a building. This includes
uses owned by commercial ventures or by nonprofit organizations. This
includes golf courses, chip and putt courses, picnic groves, wildlife
sanctuaries and closely similar uses. This definition does not include
automobile or horse race tracks, camps or campgrounds, civic or social
organizations, membership clubs, gun clubs, outdoor target ranges,
swimming clubs, tennis clubs, stadiums or commercial stables.
MUNICIPAL RECREATION - this includes indoor or outdoor and
active or passive recreation facilities that are owned by a Federal, State,
County or Township agency for recreation purposes. A Jee may be
charged for admittance and such facilities may be operated by a private
contractor. This shall include publicly owned parks, golf courses,
community centers, playgrounds and swimming pools.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - a vehicle (regardless of size) which is
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses
(regardless of whether it is self-propelled or is designed to be towed or carried
by another vehicle). "Recreation vehicle" includes campers, pickup coaches,
travel trailers, motor homes or vans designed principally for recreational use.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - this includes the following zoning districts:
Rural/Suburban, Low Density Suburban, Moderate Density Suburban,
Suburban/Semiurban and the Urban Districts.
RESTAURANT - four (4) types of restaurants are classified for this
Chapter:
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT WITH DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICEa
fast food restaurant as defined below that also provides service to
customers remaining seated in automobiles, either through an exterior
window or service area or through serve to parked automobiles.
FOOD STAND - a fast food restaurant as defined below, but with
no inside seating facilities. This shall include a snack bar or ice cream
stand.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD - an establishment that principally
sells food, frozen desserts and nonalcoholic beverages in a rea
consume state primarily in disposable containers, in bags or on tr
customer primarily orders and receives the food at an inside
XXXII-51
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
outdoor walk-up window without the assistance of a waiter or waitress.
A cafeteria-style restaurant shall be considered a standard restaurant.
RESTAURANT, STANDARD - a restaurant that does not meet the
definition of a fast food restaurant or food stand. This includes
restaurants where the majority of the food is consumed within the
restaurant at tables. A restaurant where the total sale of alcoholic
beverages exceeds of the total sale of food shall be considered a tavern and
shall comply with the provisions for such use.
RET AIL STORE - a building in which retail merchandise is sold or rented,
including a furniture store, a gift shop, office equipment sales, musical
instrument sales and an establishment for the sale of automobile accessories.
This shall not include an adult business use.
RETAINING WALL - For the purposes of this Chapter, a retaining wall
shall be defined as any wall designed and constructed to resist the lateral
pressure of soil when there is a desired change in the ground elevation exceeding
24 inches in height. A foundation wall supporting an approved building or
similar structure shall not be defined as a retaining wall.
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY - a development consisting of a building or
group of buildings designed and used specifically for the residence and care of
elderly and disabled persons.
RIGHT -OF-WAY - land reserved for the public or others for use as a
street or other purpose.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE -land reserved for the public or others for
future use as a street or other purposes. The ultimate right-of-way line is usually
wider than the official legal existing right-of-way that is currently owned by the
Township or PennDOT.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE - the line that separates the street right-of-way
from the lot. In cases where an area has been required to be reserved for future
dedication as an ultimate right-of-way, this ultimate right-of-way shall be used
as the basis for all building setbacks.
RIPARIAN BUFFER - a strip of land adjacent to any stream or
watercourse, within which woodland disturbances or land disturbances are
limited.
ROOMING HOUSE - see "boarding house. II
XXXII-52
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
SANITARY FACILITIES - all of the following facilities having piped
water: sink, a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
SCREEN - a fence or natural obstruction of sufficient height (but not less
than six (6) feet high) to effectively visually obscure the area being screened from
adjoining areas.
SEASONAL ROADSIDE PRODUCT MARKET - an accessory use for the
sale of dairy, farm, greenhouse or nursery products.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY - a building or group of buildings divided
into individual separate access units which are rented or leased forth storage of
personal property.
SEMIDET ACHED COMMERCIAL BUILDING - A building arranged,
designed and intended for occupancy by two (2) nonresidential uses which are
independent of each other and are entirely separated by vertical walls and
which are unpierced except for access to the outside. One or both sides of such
building may also be occupied as a residential dwelling.
SETBACK - see "building line" and "off-street parking setback."
SEW AGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - a system designed to collect, treat and
dispose of sewage from users in compliance with regulations of the appropriate
State agency and of the Township.
CENTRALIZED SEW AGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - a sewage disposal
system which collects, treats and disposes sewage from more than one (1)
dwelling, principal use or lot.
ONLOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - a sewage disposal system
which collects, treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only
one (1) dwelling, principal use or lot.
SHOPPING CENTER - a group of commercial establishments built on a
site that is planned, developed, owned and managed as a single operating unit
related in location, size and type of shops and distinguished from a commercial
area comprised of unrelated individual uses.
SIGN - Any object, device display, or structure that is used to
identify, display, direct, or attract attention, including structural eleme
sign faces, trim and borders.
XXXII-53
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
SIGN, GROSS SURF ACE AREA OF - the entire area within a single
continuous perimeter composed of rectangles enclosing the extreme limits of a
sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of the
sign. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing
elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of
the display. More descriptive definitions are provided for freestanding and
parallel signs.
SIGN, OFFICIAL - a sign placed by a governmental unit, such as a traffic,
directional, informational or street name sign or an historical marker.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING IN COMBINATION WITH A
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY - the utilization of a lot, tract or parcel of land for a
single-family detached dwelling and a commercial principal use permitted by
right, by condition or by special exception in a Zoning District where this
Chapter permits a single-family detached dwelling in combination with a
commercial activity.
SITE ALTERATION - includes regrading the existing topography, filling
lakes, ponds, marshes or floodplains, clearing vegetation or altering
watercourses.
SLOPE - the rate of vertical change of ground surface expressed as a
percentage and determined by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal
distance.
SOLAR ACCESS - the capability of receiving direct sunlight between 9:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m. (solar time) on any area of a lot not within required yard
areas.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM - a solar photovoltaic cell, module, or array, or
solar hot air or water collector device, which relies upon solar radiation as an
energy source for collection, inversion, storage, and distribution of solar energy
for electricity generation or transfer of stored heat.
SOLAR ARRAY - a grouping of multiple solar modules with
purpose of harvesting solar energy.
SOLAR CELL - the smallest basic solar electric device which
generates electricity when exposed to light.
XXXII-54
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
SOLAR MODULE - a grouping of solar cells with the purpose of
harvesting solar energy.
SOLAR PANEL - that part or portion of a solar energy system containing
one or more receptive cells or modules, the purpose of which is to convert solar
energy for use in space heating or cooling, for water heating and/ or for
electricity.
SOLAR RELATED EQUIPMENT - items including a solar photovoltaic
cell, module, panel, or array, or solar hot air or water collector device panels,
lines, pumps, batteries, mounting brackets, framing and possibly foundations or
other structures used for or intended to be used for collection of solar energy.
WIND ENERGY TOWER HEIGHT - the height above grade of the fixed
portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT - the height above grade to a blade tip
at its highest point of travel.
WIND TURBINE - a component of a wind energy conversion system that
converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator
and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and pad, if any.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA or FACILITY - a place including, but
not limited to, a sanitary landfill where garbage, trash or junk is disposed of or
is processed or recycled for disposal or reuse. Such use shall not include the
disposal or processing of hazardous or radioactive materials.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE - a use for which the Board may grant
permission following a public hearing and findings of fact consistent with this
Chapter, provided the use complies with the conditions and standards required
by this Chapter.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS -less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region or female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - human male genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual interc
sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
female breast.
XXXII-55
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
STACKING SPACE, OFF-STREET - an area, separate from or in addition
to the required parking area, reserved for the temporary retention of vehicles
which are queuing up or utilizing the services of a drive-through service unit.
STATE OBSCENITY CODE - 53 Pa.C.S. §5901, et seq., as amended.
STEEP SLOPE AREA - those areas having slopes of fifteen percent (15 % )
or more.
STEEP SLOPE LOT - a lot having an average slope of fifteen percent
(15 %) of more.
STORY (and HALF-STORY) - that portion of a building, included
between the surface of any floor and the ceiling next above it, having a vertical
distance of not less than seven (7) feet shall be considered a full story. Any such
portion of a building having a vertical distance of less than seven (7) feet shall be
considered a half-story. Basements shall be considered full stories while cellars
shall not be considered as being stories or half-stories.
STREET - a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property and contains a right-of-way area (in
addition to the cartway); including avenue, place, way, parkway, lane,
boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley, access
drive or driveway. The official street classification map in this Chapter shall be
used to define each street by its function.
ARTERIAL STREET - streets designed primarily to carry medium
to heavy volumes of traffic at moderately high speeds and generally
should not provide access to land which would interfere with their
primary traffic functions.
COLLECTOR STREET - streets designed to carry a moderate
volume of traffic between local streets and arterials at moderate speeds
and provide only limited vehicular access to the abutting properties.
EXPRESSWAY - a high-speed street with access available only
using ramps at interchanges.
LOCAL STREET - streets designed to provide direct access from
abutting properties to collector and arterial streets.
STREET LINE - see "right-of-way line."
XXXII-56
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION - any change in the structural parts of a
structure such as walls, columns, beams, girders, floors, roof or ceiling or any
addition to any structure; or the moving of a structure from one location to
another. "Structural alteration II does not include normal maintenance, minor
repairs or interior alterations.
STRUCTURE - any manmade object having an ascertainable, stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land or something
located on the land. The term "structurell shall include: buildings, signs, fences,
walls, towers, swimming pools, porches, garages and similar structure.
"Structure" shall be interpreted as including the words "or part thereof."
SUBTERRANEAN BUILDING - a building covered by land on at least
fifty percent (50%) of the total surface of its walls and roof.
SWIMMING CLUB - an area containing a swimming pool which is used
by the public or by members for a fee.
SWIMMING POOL - a body of water or receptacle for water having a
depth at any point greater than twenty-four (24) inches which is primarily used
or intended to be used for swimming or bathing.
TATTOO PARLOR - see "body art establishment."
TAVERN or BAR - a building or part thereof where, in consideration for
payment therefore, liquor, beer or wine or any combination thereof are served
for consumption on the premises, with or without food. A restaurant where
the total sale of alcoholic beverages exceeds the total sale of food shall be
considered a tavern.
TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES - the offering of goods for sale to the public
from a temporary structure or from a location out-of-doors where goods are not
normally displayed as part of a permanent, ongoing retail establishment.
Examples of temporary retail sales include the selling of flowers before and on
holidays such as Mother's Day and the sale of fireworks on July 4. This term
does not include holiday tree sales.
TEMPORARY SIGN - a sign which is not permanently mounted or affixed
to the ground, building, or display window and which is displayed for a specific
period of time.
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN - any sign which displays "-J\fI,.~~F~
current time and temperature information.
XXXII-57
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
TOWNHOUSE - see "dwelling types, single-family attached dwelling."
TOWNSHIP - the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
TRACT SIZE - for the purposes of regulating the minimum land area of
certain types of development, the tract size is the amount of land area that the
applicant presently owns or has an option to purchase. The Township may
allow land controlled by more than one (1) applicant to qualify as a tract if there
is clear evidence of a commitment to very closely coordinate the development of
their lands. To be considered a tract, land must be proposed to be developed in a
well laid out, coordinated and comprehensive manner, especially in terms of
traffic access and internal circulation.
TRAILER - see "mobile home" (listed under "dwelling") and "recreation
vehicle."
TRANSITION - a visual effect used on an electronic changeable copy sign
to change from one message or image to another.
TRAVEL TRAILER - see "recreation vehicle."
TREATMENT CENTER - a use involving any of the following:
(1) a use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing
housing for three (3) or more unrelated persons who need
specialized housing, treatment and/ or counseling because of:
(a) criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal
halfway house;
(b) current addiction to a controlled substance that
was used in an illegal manner or alcohol; and / or
(c) a type of mental illness or other behavior that
causes a person to be a threat to the physical safety of others.
(2) A use that otherwise would meet the definition of a
group home but that exceeds the number of residents allowed by
this Chapter within a group home shall be regulated as a treatment
center, unless otherwise approved under Section 805(B)(5) of this
Chapter.
(3) A non-residential use that involves distribution of
XXXII-58
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
methadone, other than a hospital."
TREE FARM (CROP)- the raising and harvesting of trees for commercial
purposes that were specifically planted for that purpose. This shall include a
Christmas tree farm. See also the definition of II forestry. II
USE - the specific purpose for which land, sign, structure or building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it may be occupied or maintained, or
any activity, occupation, business or operation which may be carried on thereon
or therein. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE - the granting of permission by the Board to use or alter land
or structures which requires a variation from the strict application of a
requirement of this Chapter. A variance shall only be granted if the situation
complies with State Act 247 of 1968, as amended, especially §912.
VEHICLE WASH PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE CENTER - a facility
devoted to the washing and waxing of the exterior of vehicles and the cleaning of
their interiors by automated equipment and employees of the establishment
where minor preventive maintenance to the vehicles shall be offered and
performed, including specifically oil and filter changes, brake replacement,
headlamp and other light bulb replacement, replacements of belts, supplying
fluids used by the vehicles and other similar preventive maintenance not
involving body work and/ or major repairs. Customer lounges with customer
services shall be permitted at the facility. Sale of gasoline and other fuels shall
not be permitted at the facility.
VETERINARIAN OFFICE - see "animal hospital."
VIDEO DISPLAY SIGN - a sign that changes its message or background in
a manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery,
which mayor may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to
imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a
progression of frames which give the illusion of motion, including but not
limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or
expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs.
Video display signs include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
V-TYPE SIGN - a structure or structures with two (2) or three
sign faces, forming the shape of the letter "V" or a triangle when vi
XXXII-59
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
above, with an angle between any two (2) faces of not more than ninety (90)
degrees.
WALL SIGN - a sign which is attached parallel to a building wall with the
face of said sign extending no more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the
wall.
WAREHOUSE and WHOLESALE TRADE - a building or group of
buildings primarily used for the commercial storage, transfer and distribution of
products and materials.
WATERCOURSE - a chamlel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM - a system designed to transmit water from a
source to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate State
agencies and the Township.
CENTRALIZED WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM - a water supply
system which transmits water from a common source to more than one (1)
dwelling, principal use or lot.
ONLOT WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM - a water supply system which
transmits water from a source on the lot to one (1) dwelling, principal use
or lot.
WETLAND - any area meeting the official wetland definition of the U.s.
Army Corps of Engineers or the P ADEP, as amended. In the event that the
definition of a wetland accepted by the u.s. Army Corps of Engineers conflicts
with the definition of a wetland accepted by the P ADEP, the more restrictive
definition shall apply.
WETLAND BUFFER - a strip of land at least thirty-five (35) feet in width,
adjacent to any jurisdictional wetland, within which removal of vegetation, earth
moving activities, structures, and impervious surfaces are limited.
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY - includes nature center, outdoor education
laboratory, woodland preserve or arboretum.
WINDOW SIGN - a sign affixed to or visible through a window from the
exterior of a building.
XXXII-60
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
WOODLAND - a tree mass or plant community in which tree species are
dominant or co-dominant, and the branches of the trees form a complete, or
nearly complete, aerial canopy. For the purposes of this Chapter, the extent of
any woodland plant community, or any part thereof, shall be measured from the
outer-most drip line of all the trees within the community. Woodland shall
include any area where timber has been harvested within the previous three
years, and/or woodland disturbance has occurred within the previous three
years, which would have met the definition of woodland prior to timbering or
disturbance. Woodlands do not include orchards.
WOODLAND DISTURBANCE - any activity which alters the existing
structure of a woodland or hedgerow. Alterations include the cutting or removal
of canopy trees, subcanopy trees, understory shrubs and vines, woody and
herbaceous woodland floor speCies.as well as removal of humus or duff from the
ground. Woodland disturbance includes any land disturbance within a
woodland or hedgerow.
YARD - an open space on the same lot with a structure (or a group of
structures) which lies between the structure (or a group of structures) and a lot
line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except
as herein permitted.
FRONT YARD - a yard extending the full width of the lot between
a structure and the front lot line. On lots abutting more than one (1) street
other than an alley, the front yard requirements shall apply fronting each
street, unless otherwise specified in this Chapter.
REAR YARD - a yard extending the full width of the lot between a
structure and a rear lot line.
SIDE YARD - a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a structure and the nearest side lot line.
XXXII-61
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
The following graphic provides an illustrative example of different types
of yards:
SIDE LOT LINE
REAR LOT LINE
REQUIRED REAR YARD
II
REQ'D I SIDE YARD IREQ'D
SIDE YARD
L~
LOT WIDTH
REQUIRED FRONT YARD
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
CAATWAY~ - -~ ---
'\ STREET CENTER LlNE---------
SIDE LOT LINE
BUILDING LINE OR
BUILDING SETBACK LINE
FRONT LOT LINE OR
STREET LINE
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LlNE~~ __ _
ZONE - see "district."
ZONING HEARING BOARD - see "Board."
ZONING OFFICER - the administrative officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 202 of Section 2; amended by
Ordinance No. 366, January 12, 2009, Sections 1 & 2)
Section 203. Notice - Mailed Notice or Electronic Notice. In any case in which
Mailed Notice or Electronic Notice is required by this Chapter, the following shall
apply:
(A) An owner of a tract or parcel of land located within the Township
or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the Township
may request that the Township provide the Mailed Notice or Electronic Notice of
a public hearing which may affect such tract or parcel of land.
XXXII-62
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(B) Mailed Notice shall be required only if an owner of a tract or parcel
of land located within the Township or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract
or parcel of land within the Township has made a written request that the notice
be mailed and has supplied the Township with a stamped, self-addressed
envelope prior to a public hearing.
(C) Electronic Notice shall be required only if an owner of a tract or
parcel of land located within the Township or an owner of the mineral rights in a
tract or parcel of land within the Township has made a written request that
notice be sent electronically and has supplied the Township with an electronic
address prior to a public hearing and only if the Township maintains the
capability of generating an Electronic Notice. An owner of a tract or parcel of
land located within a Township or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or
parcel of land within the Township making the request and supplying an
electronic address may at any time notify the Township that the owner of the
tract or parcel of land located within the Township or the owner of the mineral
rights in the tract or parcel of land within the Township no longer will accept
Electronic Notice, and, in that event, the Township may no longer provide
Electronic Notice.
(D) An owner of a tract or parcel of land located within the Township
or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the Township
who has requested a Mailed Notice shall be solely responsible for the number,
accuracy and sufficiency of the envelopes supplied. The Township shall not be
responsible or liable if the owner of a tract or parcel of land located within the
Township or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the
Township does not provide to the Township notice of any changes in the owner1s
mailing address.
(E) An owner of a tract or parcel of land located within the Township
or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the Township
who has requested Electronic Notice shall be solely responsible for the accuracy
and functioning of the electronic address provided to the Township. The
Township shall not be responsible or liable if the owner of a tract or parcel of
land located within the Township or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or
parcel of land within the Township does not provide to the Township notice of
any changes to the owner1s electronic address.
(F) The Township shall deposit a Mailed Notice in the United States
mail or provide Electronic Notice not more than thirty (30) and not les9 than
seven (7) days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing as shown on the ~.
~.-J~~~"~ ~
,-,<-\$,'<*
~""'~1\\~
~,'\ '\
XXXII-63'1'~§1C_~'1
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(G) For each public hearing, the Township secretary or Zoning Officer
shall prepare, sign and maintain a list of all Mailed Notices, mailing dates,
Electronic Notices and Electronic Notice dates. The signed list shall constitute a
presumption that the notice was given.
(H) The Mailed Notice shall be deemed received by an owner of a tract
or parcel of land located within the Township or an owner of the mineral rights
in a tract or parcel of land within the Township on the date deposited in the
United States mail.
(1) The Electronic Notice shall be deemed received by an owner of a
tract or parcel of land located within the Township or an owner of the mineral
rights in a tract or parcel of land within the Township on the date the Township
electronically notifies the owner.
(J) Failure of an owner of a tract or parcel of land located within the
Township or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the
Township to receive a requested Mailed Notice or Electronic Notice shall not be
deemed to invalidate any action or proceedings under Chapter.
XXXII-64
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Part 3
Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Section 301. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
(A) For the purpose of this Chapter, zoning districts are hereby
established as follows:
RHA Rural Holding Area
RC Rural Conservation
RS Rural! Suburban
LDS Low Density Suburban
MDS Moderate Density Suburban
SS Suburban/Semiurban
U Urban
NC Neighborhood Convenience Commercial
PMU Penn A venue Mixed Use
PAC Penn A venue Commercial
PAO Penn A venue Overlay
PHI Planned Highway Interchange
PHT Planned Highway Transitional
POB Planned Office/Business
PBR Planned Business and Residential
PI/B Planned Industry/Business
EI Extractive Industry
MI Manufacturing and Industrial
FS Fuel Storage
(B) For the purposes of this Chapter, the zoning districts named in
Subsection (A) above shall be of the number, size, shape and location shown on
the official zoning map adopted and included in its entirety as a part of this
Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 301 of Section 2)
Section 302. Application of District Regulations.
(A) Unless otherwise provided by law or specifically in this Chapter, no
land or building or structure shall be used or occupied except for a use permitted
in the zoning district within which the land or building or structure is located.
/\
(B) The regulations set by this Chapter shall apply uniformly . ),h
class or kind of structure or land, except as provided for in this Chapter.
XXXII-65
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(C) No building, structure or land shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, and no building or
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be used or occupied unless it is in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the use and district in which
it is located.
(D) No part of yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading
space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of
complying with this Chapter, shall be included as part of a yard, open space or
off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
(E) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.
Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Chapter shall meet at least the
minimum requirements established by this Chapter.
(F) Any territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Township shall
be classified as the zoning district of the Township most similar to the zoning of
such territory before annexation (as determined by the Board) until otherwise
classified.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 302 of Section 2)
Section 303. Zoning Map.
(A) A map entitled "Zoning Map for the Township of Spring"
accompanies this Chapter and is declared a part of this Chapter.
(B) The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors attested by the Township Secretary and
shall bear the adoption date of this Chapter and the seal of the Township under
the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map
adopted (date) as part of the Spring Township Zoning
Ordinance. II
(C) Changes of any nature to the official zoning map shall be made in
conformity with the amendment procedures set forth in this Chapter. All changes
shall be noted by date with a brief description of the nature of the change.
(D) Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zarling
map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map
shall be located in the Township Office and shall be the final authority on
XXXIl-66
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
boundaries and districts. The Zoning Officer shall have a certified copy of the
official zoning map for official use.
(1) If the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost
or difficult to interpret because of changes and additions, the Board of
Supervisors may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map which
shall supersede the prior official zoning map.
(2) The new official zoning map may include corrections of
drafting or clerical errors or omissions from the prior Official Zoning Map,
but shall not include any amendment or boundary change without
completing the procedures required under Act 247.
(3) The new official zoning map shall be identified by the
signatures of the Board of Supervisors, attested to by the Township
Secretary and bearing the following words: IIThis is to certify that this
Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map
adopted (date) as part of the Spring Township Zoning
Ordinance. II
(4) Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any part or parts thereof remaining
shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its
adoption or amendment.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 303 of Section 2; As Amended by Map
Amendment Only Ordinance No. 357, April 28, 2008, Section 1 )
Section 304. Rules for Interpreting District Boundaries.
(A) Zoning boundaries drawn approximately following the center lines
of streams, drainageways, streets, alleys, railroads or other rights-of-way shall be
construed to follow such center lines. In the event of any change in the center
line, the zoning boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual center
line.
(B) Boundaries approximately following property lines shall be
construed as following such property lot lines.
(C) Where a district boundary line does not follow such a line, position
is shown on the official zoning map by reference to an ordinance describi1)t,uch
lines or by a specific dimension expressing its distance, in feet, from a shoe "~~\er
line or other boundary line as indicated and running parallel thereto. ;&~i~
~":,\
~/;:;,
\ ~"'."~.
XXXII-67
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(D) Where physical features existing on the ground vary with those
shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by
subsection (A) through (C) above, the Board shall interpret the district
boundaries.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 304 of Section 2)
Section 305. Rural Holding Area District (RHA).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Holding Area District is to retain
this area's rural character and scenic landscape while providing an opportunity
for families and others to live in single-family dwellings that are on large lots.
The preservation of forests, watercourses, underground water, steep slopes and
other natural features and resources are emphasized in this area. Open space
developments on smaller lots to preserve the natural environment is encouraged.
Land uses that are compatible with a rural living environment are also provided
in this district.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Rural Holding Area District by
the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Agriculture, general**.
(2) Agricultural industry.
(3) Civic or social organization.*,**
(4) Commercial stable or riding academy*,**.
(5) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and cOImnunication
equipment buildings*, **.
(6) Community center*,**.
(7) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(8) Membership club*,**.
(9) Miniature golf (outdoor)*,**.
(10) Open Space Development in accordance with Section 901
(Appendix A)*,**.
(11) Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
(12)
(13)
(14)
Recreation, municipal* .
Recreation, non-municipal outdoor*,**.
Retail greenhouse / nursery**.
(15) Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §305(F), §305(G), and §324 **.
XXXII-68
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(16) Swimming club (outdoor)*,**.
(17) Tennis club (outdoor)*,**.
(18) Township-owned use, including Township park and fire
station.
*Site plan review required. (see §409)
**See §324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural Holding Area District by the
Board in accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
buildings*.
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
Agriculture, intensive*.
Bed and breakfast*.
Boarding House *.
Camp or campground*.
Communications towers and communications equipment
Cemetery or Mausoleum*.
Cultural center.
Gun club/target range*.
Heliport *.
Indoor sports facility*.
Kennel*.
Nursery school or day care center*.
Open air retail sales of agricultural products*.
Place of Worship.
Private airstrip and airport*.
Public utility facility*.
Recreation, non-municipal indoor*.
School, public/private not including vocational school *.
Solid waste disposal area or facility*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural Holding Area District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Alternative energy system, principal*.
(2) Race tracks, automobile or horse, with related wa
XXXII-69
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(3) Single-family detached dwelling, 111 accordance with the
provisions of §305(F), §305(G), and §324 *.
(4) Stadium*.
(5) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use, in accordance with the
applicable provisions of §327.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Rural Holding Area District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §305(G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Rural Holding Area District only if such use complies with the relevant
standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
G)
(k)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Horse barn.
Keeping animals and fowl.
(1) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(m) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(n) Outdoor storage shed.
(0) Outdoor wood-fired boiler.
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
(v)
(w)
Private greenhouse.
Recreational vehicle.
Seasonal roadside produce market.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pool (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
Tennis court or similar impervious athletic surface.
Storage in an accessory structure.
XXXII-70
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural
Holding Area District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(acres)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Any use 5 300 5 10 2-1/2
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 305.(G) for the particular
use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural Holding Area District,
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
50
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
25 60
Rear Yard
(feet)
30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 305 of Section 2)
Section 306. Rural Conservation District (RC).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Conservation District is to
encourage low density single-family dwellings on lots large enough to provide for
both onlot sewage disposal and water supply while providing for the opportunity
to have somewhat smaller lots if public water and sewage facilities are r vided
off the lot. Open space developments are provided in this district to
desirable alternative to conventional single-family developments.
XXXII-71
30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Rural Conservation District by
the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Agriculture, general**.
(2) Agricultural industry.
(3) Civic, social organization*,**.
(4) Commercial stable or riding academy*,**.
(5) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment building*,**.
(6) Community Center*,**.
(7) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(8) Membership club*,**.
(9) Miniature golf (outdoor)*,**.
(10) Open Space Development in accordance with Section 901
(Appendix A)*,**.
(11) Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
(12)
(13)
(14)
Recreation, municipal*.
Recreation, non-municipal outdoor*,**.
Retail greenhouse / nursery**.
(15) Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §306(F), §306(G), and §324 **.
(16) Swimming club (outdoor)*,**.
(17) Tennis club (outdoor)*,**.
(18) Township-owned use, including Township park and fire
station.
* Site plan review required. (See §409)
** See §324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural Conservation District by the
Board in accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter:
(1) Agriculture, intensive*.
(2) Bed and breakfast*.
(3) Camp or campground*.
(4) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(5) College or university*.
(6) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
XXXII-72
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(7) Convalescent or nursing home*.
(8) Cultural center.
(9) Indoor sports facility*.
(10) Nursery school or day care center*.
(11) Open air retail sales of agricultural products*.
(12) Place of worship.
(13) Public utility facility*.
(14) Recreation, non-municipal indoor*.
(15) School, publici private not including vocational school *.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural Conservation District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards of §326
of this Chapter:
(1) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use, in accordance with the
applicable provisions of §327.
(2) Alternative energy system, principal*.
(3) Mobile home park*.
(4) Single-family detached dwelling, In accordance with the
provisions of §306(F), §306(G), and §324 *.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Rural Conservation District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §306(F), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Rural Conservation District only if such use complies with the relevant
standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a) Alternative energy system, accessory.
(b) Bus shelter.
(c) Farm pond.
XXXII-73
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
G)
(k)
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Horse barn.
Keeping animals and fowl.
(1) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(m) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(n) Outdoor storage shed.
(0) Outdoor wood-fired boiler.
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
(v)
Private greenhouse.
Recreational vehicle.
Seasonal roadside produce market.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pools (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
Tennis court or similar impervious athletic surface.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural
Conservation District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
XXXII-74
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Single-Family (In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Detached Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
(In accordance with the Township PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
Mobile/Manufact (In accordance with §324(B)(62) & (63) of this Chapter and the Township's
ured Home Park Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII))
Any Other
Permitted Use:
-With Both
Centralized
Sewer/Water
-WithOnlot
Sewer or Onlot
Water
20,000
130,680
(3 acres)
150
200
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
10 20 2-1/2
5 10 2-1/2
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 306.(G) for the particular
use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural Conservation District,
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
50
Side Yard
One
(feet)
25
Both
(feet)
60
Rear Yard
(feet)
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
XXXII-75
30
30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 306 of Section 2)
Section 307. Rural/Suburban District (RS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Rural/Suburban District is to provide
for low to moderate density (depending upon the availability of centralized water
and sewer) residential areas which are protected from incompatible land uses.
Single-family homes are encouraged in this district. Open space developments
are also provided as a desirable alternative to conventional single-family
developments.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Rural/Suburban District by the
Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional and all other applicable
requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Agriculture, general*/*.
(2) Agricultural industry.
(3) Civic, social organization*/*.
(4) Commercial stable or riding academy*/*.
(5) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure and communications
equipment buildings*, **.
(6) Community center*,**.
(7) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*/*.
(8) Membership club*/*.
(9) Miniature golf (outdoor)*/*.
(10) Open Space Development in accordance with Section 901
(Appendix A)*/*.
(11) Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
(12)
(13)
(14)
Recreation, municipal*.
Recreation, non-municipal outdoor*,**.
Retail greenhouse/ nursery*, **.
(15) Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §307(F), §307(G), and §324 **.
(16) Swimming club (outdoor)*/*.
(17) Tennis club (outdoor)*/*.
(18) Township-owned use, including Township park and fire
station.
XXXII-76
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
* Site plan review required (see §409).
** See §324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural/Suburban District by the
Board in accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
buildings*.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Bed and breakfast*.
Cemetery or mausoleum*.
College or university*.
Communications towers and communications equipment
Convalescent or nursing home*.
Nursery school or day care center*.
Open air retail sales of agricultural products*.
Place of worship.
Public utility facility*.
Recreation, non-municipal indoor*.
Retirement community*.
School, publici private, not including vocational school*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Rural/Suburban District when authorized
by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards contained in §326 of
this Chapter:
(1) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use, in accordance with the
applicable provisions of §327.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Rural/Suburban Dish"ict shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §307(G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
XXXII-77
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Rural/Suburban District only if such use complies with the relevant
standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
G)
(k)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Holiday tree sales.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Horse barn.
Keeping animals or fowl.
(1) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(m) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(n) Outdoor storage shed.
(0) Private greenl10use.
(p) Recreational vehicle.
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
Seasonal roadside produce market.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pool (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
Tennis court or similar impervious athletic surface.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Rural/Suburban District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
XXXII-78
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Single-family (In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Detached Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
Mobile/Manufact (In accordance with §324(B)(62) & (63) of this Chapter and the Township's
ured Home Park Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII))
Any Other
Permitted Use:
-With Both
Centralized
Sewer & Water
-With Onlot
Sewer or Onlot
Water
15,000
43,560
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
100
150
25 40 2-1/2
10 20 2-1/2
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §307(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Rural/Suburban District, except
as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
XXXII-79
30
30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Side Yard
FrontYard* One Both Rear Yard
Principal Use (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Any Use:
-With Both 50 10 25 30
Centralized Sewer &
Water
-With Onlot Sewer or 50 20 50 30
Onlot Water
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 307 of Section 2)
Section 308. Low Density Suburban District (LDS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Low Density Suburban District is to
provide for relatively low density single-family residential development and to
allow for the natural expansion of those areas which have the potential for being
served by public water and sewer facilities.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Low Density Suburban District
by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(2) Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
(3) Recreation, municipal*.
(4) Single-family detached dwelling.
(5) Township-owned use, including Township park and fire
station.
* Site plan review required (see §409).
**See §324 for additional requirements.
XXXII-80
~--
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Low Density Suburban District by
the Board in accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter:
(1) Bed and breakfast*.
(2) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(3) Convalescent or nursing home*.
(4) Nursery school or day care center.*
(5) Picnic grove*.
(6) Place of worship.
(7) Public utility facility*.
(8) Recreation, non-municipal indoor*.
(9) School, publici private, not including vocational school*.
(10) Swimming club (outdoor)*.
(11) Tennis club (outdoor)*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Low Density Suburban District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use, in accordance with the
applicable provisions of §327.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Low Density Suburban District
shall comply with the minimum yard requirements contained in §308(G),
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Low Density Suburban District only if such use complies with the relevant
standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a) Alternative energy system, accessory.
(b) Bus shelter.
(c) Farm pond.
(d) Fence and wall.
(e) Garage.
(f) Geothermal energy system, accessory.
XXXII-81
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(g) Holiday tree sales.
(h) Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
(i) Home occupation, including day care center.
G) Horse barn.
(k) Keeping animals or fowl.
(1) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(m) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(n) Outdoor storage shed.
(0) Private greenhouse.
(p) Recreational vehicle.
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
Swimming pool (noncommercial).
Temporary retail sales.
Tennis court or similar impervious athletic surface.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Low
Density Suburban District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Any Permitted
Use With Both
Centralized
Sewer/Water
Any Permitted
Use Without Both
Centralized
Sewer/Water
10,000
43,560
80
150
40 55
25 40
Single-Family (In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Detached Cluster
Development
3
3
Planned (In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
Residential
Development
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
XXXII-82
30
30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 308.(G) for the particular
use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Low Density Suburban District,
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Any Permitted Use 30 8 20 30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 308 of Section 2)
Section 309. Moderate Density Suburban District (MDS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Moderate Density Suburban District is
to provide for moderate density single-family residential development and to
allow for the natural expansion of those areas which have the potential for being
served by public water and sewer facilities.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Moderate Density Suburban
District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all
other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(2) Group home**.
(3) Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
(4) Recreation, municipal*.
(5) Single-family detached dwelling.
(6) Township-owned use, including Township park and fire
station.
* Site plan review required (see §409).
** See §324 for additional requirements.
XXXII-83
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Moderate Density Suburban District
by the Board in accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter.
(1) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(2) Community center*.
(3) Convalescent or nursing home*.
(4) Nursery school or day care center*.
(5) Picnic grove*.
(6) Place of worship.
(7) Public utility facility*.
(8) Recreation, non-municipal indoor*.
(9) School, publici private, not including vocational school*.
(10) Swimming club (outdoor)*.
(11) Tennis club (outdoor)*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Moderate Density Suburban District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use, in accordance with the
applicable provisions of §327.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Moderate Density Suburban
District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of §309(G),
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Moderate Density Suburban District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a) Alternative energy system, accessory.
(b) Bus shelter.
(c) Fence and wall.
(d) Garage.
(e) Geothermal energy system, accessory.
(f) Holiday tree sales.
XXXII-84
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(g) Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
(h) Home occupation, including day care center.
(i) Keeping animals or fowl.
G) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(k) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(1) Outdoor storage shed.
(m) Private greenhouse.
(n) Recreational vehicle.
(0) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(p) Swimming pools (noncommercial).
(q) Temporary retail sales.
(r) Tennis court or similar impervious athletic surface.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Moderate Density Suburban District, except as specifically provided for this
Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted
Use with Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Permitted
Use Without Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Single-Family
Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
8,000
43,560
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
70
150
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By
Buildings
45
20
By Total
Impervious
Cover
60
40
(In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance
XXXII-85
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
3 30
3 30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §309(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Moderate Density Suburban
District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
30
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
8 20
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
Rear Yard
(feet)
30
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 309 of Section 2)
Section 310. Suburban/Semiurban District (SS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the SuburbanjSemiurban District is to
provide opportunities for single-family and two-family dwellings at moderate to
high densities to retain and continue the existing suburbanj semiurban character.
Single-family cluster and planned residential development are provided as a
desirable form of residential development that will permit the preservation of
open space.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the SuburbanjSemiurban District by
the Zoning Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(2) Garden apartment*,**.
(3) Group home**.
(4) Recreation, municipal*.
(5) Retirement community*,**.
(6) Single-family attached dwelling*,**.
(7) Single-family detached dwelling.
(8) Single-family to multifamily conversions*.
XXXU-86
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(9) Township-owned use, including Township park and fire
station.
(10) Two-family detached dwelling*.
(11) Two-family semidetached dwelling*.
*Site plan review required. (see §409)
**See §324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the SuburbanjSemiurban District by the
Board in accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter:
(1) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(2) College or university*.
(3) Community center*.
(4) Nursery school or day care center*.
(5) Picnic grove*.
(6) Place of worship.
(7) Public utility facility*.
(8) Recreation, non-municipal indoor*.
(9) School, publicj private not including vocational school *.
(10) Swimming club (outdoor)*.
(11) Tennis club (outdoor)*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the SuburbanjSemiurban District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Accessory uses, structures or buildings not located on the
same lot with the permitted principal use, in accordance with the
applicable provisions of §327.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(2) Each accessory use in the SuburbanjSemiurban District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §310(H), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(3) Each of the following accessory uses shall be
SuburbanjSemiurban District only if such use complies with
standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
XXXII-87
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) Alternative energy system, accessory.
(b) Bus shelter.
(c) Fence and wall.
(d) Garage.
(e) Geothermal energy system, accessory.
(f) Holiday tree sales.
(g) Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
(h) Home occupation, including day care center.
(i) Keeping animals or fowl.
G) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(k) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(1) Outdoor storage shed.
(m) Private greenhouse.
(n) Recreational vehicle.
(0) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(p) Swimming pool (noncommercial).
(q) Temporary retail sales.
(r) Tennis court or similar impervious athletic surface.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
SuburbanjSemiurban District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
XXXII-88
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Any Permitted
Use with Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Permitted
Use Without Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Planned
Residential
Development
5,000 50 50 70 3
43,560 150 20 40 3
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §310(H) for the particular use.
(G) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Restrictions for
Single-Family Attached Dwellings and Garden Apartments. The requirements
listed in §324 under "Garden Apartment or Single-Family Attached Dwellings"
shall apply, except the following additional standards shall also apply within the
SS District:
(1) Numbers of Units Attached. A maximum of six (6) singlefamily
attached and/ or garden apartment dwelling units shall be attached
inany form.
(2) Maximum Gross Density. A maximum gross density of
seven (7) units per acre shall apply for garden apartments or single-family
attached dwellings in the SS District rather than the maximum gross
density stated in §324 for garden apartments and single-family attached
dwellings.
/\
(3) Setback of Garden Apartments From an Exterior Lot L~pr~,\A
garden apartment shall be located a minimum of eighty (80) feet f ~~'K
exterior lot line of a development.
XXXU-89
30
30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(H) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the SuburbanjSemiurban District,
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
30
Side Yard
One
(feet)
5
Both
(feet)
15
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
Rear Yard
(feet)
25
(I) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 310 of Section 2)
Section 311. Urban District (U).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Urban District is to provide for more
intensively developed residential areas where a wide variety of housing types are
encouraged including single-family attached dwellings and apartments.
Maintaining sufficient open area within residential developments in this district is
encouraged to permit the dwellings to blend with the land's natural features and
to ensure the new dwellings will be compatible with existing housing.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Urban District by the Zoning
Officer, provided that the use type, dimensional and all other applicable
requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(2) Garden apartments*,**.
(3) Group home**.
(4) Recreation, municipal*.
(5) Retirement community*,**.
(6) Single-family attached dwelling*,**.
(7) Single-family detached dwelling.
(8) Single-family to multifamily conversions*.
(9) Township-owned use, including Township park and fire
station.
(10) Two-family semidetached dwelling*.
XXXII-90
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(11) Two-family detached dwelling*.
*Site plan review required (see §409).
** See §324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Urban District by the Board in
accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter:
(1) Bed and breakfast*.
(2) Boarding house*.
(3) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(4) College or university*.
(5) Convalescent or nursing home*.
(6) Nursery school or day care center*.
(7) Orphanages*.
(8) Picnic grove*.
(9) Place of worship.
(10) Public utility facility*.
(11) Recreation, non-municipal indoor*.
(12) Swimming club (outdoor)*.
(13) Tennis club (outdoor)*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Urban District when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards contained in §326 of this
Chapter.
(1) Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use *.
* See Section 324 for additional requirements and for specific location
where this use is permitted.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Urban District shall comply with
the minimum yard requirements in §311(F), except as specif¥\ally
provided for in this Chapter. 1'/.\
XXXII-91
f..\~
,\\9~\
~'\I'\ ],~;,,\
-\\'~'~
'~~
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Urban District only if such use complies with the relevant standards
contained in §327 of this Chapter.
(a)
(b)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
(c) Fence and wall.
(d) Garage.
(e) Geothermal energy system, accessory.
(f) Holiday tree sales.
(g) Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
(h) Home occupation, including day care center.
(i) Keeping of animals or fowl.
G) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(k) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(1) Outdoor storage shed.
(m) Private greenhouse.
(n) Recreational vehicle.
(0) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(p) Swimming pool (noncommercial).
(q) Temporary retail sales.
(r) Tennis court or similar impervious athletic surface.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Urban
District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
XXXII-92
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Any Use Other
Than Garden
Apartments or
Single-F amil y
Attached
Dwellings
3,500 35 50 70 3
Garden
Apartments or
Single-Family
Attached
Dwellings
(See "Garden Apartments and Single-Family Attached Dwellings" in
§324.)
*For residential uses, this shall be the minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §311(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Urban District, except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
Other Than Garden
Apartments or
Townhouses
Garden Apartments
or Townhouses
FrontYard*
(feet)
20
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
5 15
Rear Yard
(feet)
20
See "Garden Apartments and Townhouses" in §324.
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as ar
§319(H) shall apply.
XXXII-93
30
FINAL (Revised 5 -19-15)
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 311 of Section 2)
Section 312. Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District (NC).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District is to provide opportunities for small retail, personal and
professional service uses which provide convenience goods and services to
Township residents and others. This district, which would be located at selected
existing highway/street intersections, will have development controls to ensure
sign control, attractive setbacks and landscaping.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type,
dimensional and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
Catering establishment*.
Combination of uses permitted by right*,**
Convenience stores*,**.
Copy center*.
Cultural center*.
Financial establishment*,**.
Food stand*,**.
Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
Indoor civic or social organization*,**.
Medical clinic or medical office*,**.
Membership club or lodge*,**.
Miniature golf (outdoor)*,**.
Multiple use building*,**.
Nursery school or day care center*,**.
Office*.
(16) Personal service establishment*,**.
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
Recreation, municipal*.
Recreation, non-municipal indoor*,**.
Restaurant, fast food*,**.
Restaurant, standard*,**.
Retail greenhouse / nursery*, **.
Retail store*,**.
(23) Township-owned use, including Township park fire station.
* Site plan review required (see §409).
** See §324 for additional requirements.
XXXII-94
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District by the Board in accordance with the standards contained in
§325 of this Chapter:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Amusement Establishment*.
Animal hospital*.
Automobile service station*.
Bakery.
Carwash*.
(6) Cemetery or mausoleum*.
(7) Combination of uses, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(8) Convalescent or nursing home*.
(9) Multiple use building, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(10) Orphanages*.
(11) Outdoor civic or social association*.
(12) Place of worship.
(13) Public utility facility*.
(14) School, public/private*.
(15) Vocational school*.
* See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Neighborhood Convenience Commercial
District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
standards contained in §326 of this Chapter.
(1) Hotelfmotel*.
(2) Shopping center*.
(3) Single-family detached dwelling.
(4) Two-family semidetached dwelling.
* See §324 for additional requirements.
XXXII-95
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of
§312(G), except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District only if such use complies
with the relevant standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
(c) Fence and wall.
(d) Garage.
(e) Geothermal energy system, accessory.
(f) Holiday tree sales.
(g) Home occupation.
(h) Interior service and convenience uses.
(i) Keeping of animals or fowl.
G) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(k) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(1) Outdoor storage shed.
(m) Private greenhouse.
(n) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(0) Swimming pool (non-commercial).
(p) Temporary retail sales.
(q) Warehousing and storage in an accessory structure.
(r) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Neighborhood Convenience Cormuercial District, except as otherwise provided
for in this Chapter:
XXXII-96
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Maximum Land Maximum Building
Coverage (%) Height
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* LotWidth** By Impervious (Stories) (Feet)
Principal Use (sq. ft.) (feet) Buildings Cover (Whichever is Less)
Any Use with 10,000 40 60 75 2-1/2
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Use without 43,560 100 40 60 2-1/2
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §312(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Neighborhood Convenience
Commercial District, except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
25
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
10 20
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
Rear Yard
(feet)
25
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 312 of Section 2)
Section 313. Penn Avenue Mixed Use District (PMU)
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Penn Avenue Mixed Use District is to
provide opportunities for a compatible mixture of retail, personal
businesses and residential. This district includes commercial uses
benefit from the proximity to Penn Avenue, but would integrate well
neighborhood character and maintain the livability of the existing
This district also permits single-family dwellings and apartments in
XXXII-97
30
30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
with commercial uses. Development controls will ensure sign control, attractive
landscaping, traffic control and desirable setbacks.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Penn Avenue Mixed Use District
by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Ambulatory surgical center*,**.
(2) Animal hospital*,**.
(3) Apartments on the upper levels of buildings containing a
permitted nonresidential use*,**.
(4) Art or photography studio*.
(5) Beverage distributor*,**.
(6) Bakery*.
(7) Catering establishment*.
(8) College, excluding those with dormitories *,**.
(9) Combination of uses permitted by right*,**
(10) Construction company, excluding those that have outdoor
storage of construction equipment or materials*,**.
(11) Convenience store, excluding the sale of gasoline*,**.
(12) Copy center*.
(13) Cultural center*.
(14) Financial establishment*,**.
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
Food stand*,**.
Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
Funeral home*.
Group home**.
Health club*,**.
Holiday tree sales**.
Indoor civic or social organization*,**.
Indoor membership club or lodge*,**.
Medical clinic or medical office*,**.
Multiple use building*,**.
Nursery school or day care center *,**.
Office*.
Personal service establishment*,**.
Pet grooming establishment*. **.
Recreation, municipal*.
Recreation, non-municipal indoor*,**.
Restaurant, fast food*,**.
Restaurant, standard*,**.
Retail greenhouse / nursery*, **.
XXXII-98
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(34) Retail store*,**.
(35) Semidetached commercial building*,**.
(36) Single-family detached dwelling.
(37) Temporary retail sales*,**.
(38) Township-owned use, including Township park.
(39) Two-family semidetached dwelling.
* Site Plan Review required (see Section 409)
** See Section 324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Penn Avenue Mixed Use Dish<ict by
the Board as a special exception in accordance with the standards contained in
Section 325 of this Part.
(1)
(2)
Amusement Establishment*.
Bed and breakfast*.
(3) Body art establishments*.
(4) Combination of uses, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(5) Fire station*.
(6) Multiple use building, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(7) Off-track betting parlor*.
(8) Place of worship.
(9) Public utility facility*.
(10) Single-family detached dwelling 111 combination with a
commercial activity*.
(11) Tavern*.
(12) Vocational school*.
* See Section 324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Penn Avenue Mixed Use District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §326 of this Chapter.
(1) Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use*.
* See Section 324 for additional requirements.
XXXII-99
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Penn Avenue Mixed Use District
shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of Section 313(G),
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Penn Avenue Mixed Use District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in Section 327 of this Part.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
G)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Interior service and convenience uses.
Keeping animals or fowl.
(k) No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(1) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(m) Outdoor storage shed.
(n) Private greenhouse.
(0) Recreational vehicle.
(p) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(q) Swimming pool (noncommercial).
(r) Temporary retail sales.
(s) Tennis court.
(t) Warehousing and storage in an accessory structure.
(u) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage, and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Penn
Avenue Mixed Use District, except as provided for in this Chapter.
XXXII-l 00
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Single-Family
Detached
Dwellings or
Two-Family
Semidetached
Dwellings
Any Other Use
with Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Use without
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
3,500
5,000
43,560
35
50
150
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
50 70 3
50 75 2-1/2
25 60 2-1/2
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 313.(G) for the particular
use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Penn Avenue Mixed Use District,
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
5
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
5 15
Rear Yard
(feet)
20
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback
XXXU-IOI
30
30
30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) An off-street parking setback shall apply to all nonresidential
uses.
(2) No off-street parking shall be located within five (5) feet of
the existing right-of-way line of any public street.
Section 314. Penn Avenue Commercial District (PAC)
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Penn Avenue Commercial District is
to accommodate a wide variety of commercial activities which provide goods and
services to the Township residents and others. This district includes commercial
uses which will benefit from the proximity to Penn Avenue. This district permits
limited residential uses in combination with a commercial use. Development
controls will ensure sign conh"ol, attractive landscaping, traffic control and
desirable setbacks.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Penn Avenue Commercial
District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all
other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Adult day care*,**.
(2) Ambulatory surgical center*,**.
(3) Animal hospital*,**.
(4) Apartments on the upper levels of buildings containing a
permitted nonresidential use*,**.
(5) Art or photography studio*.
(6) Beverage distributor*,**.
(7) Bakery*.
(8) Catering establishment*.
(9) College, excluding those with dormitories*,**.
(10) Combination of uses permitted by right*,**.
(11) Community center*,**.
(12) Construction company, excluding those that have substantial
outdoor storage of equipment or materials*'**.
(13) Convenience store*,**.
(14) Copy center*.
(15) Cultural center*.
(16) Financial establishment*,**.
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
Food stand*,**.
Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
Funeral home*.
Health Club*,**.
XXXII-I 02
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(21) Holiday tree sales**.
(22) Hospital or medical center*,**.
(23) Indoor civic or social organization*,**.
(24) Indoor membership club or lodge*,**.
(25) Medical clinic or medical office*,**.
(26) Miniature golf (outdoor)*,**.
(27) Multiple use building*,**.
(28) Nursery school or day care center*,**.
(29) Office*.
(30) Personal service establishment*,**.
(31) Pet grooming establishment*. **.
(32) Recreation, municipal*.
(33) Recreation, non-municipal indoor*,**.
(34) Restaurant, fast food*,**.
(35) Restaurant, fast food with drive-through service*,**.
(36) Restaurant, standard*,**.
(37) Retail greenhouse / nursery*, **.
(38) Retail store*,**.
(39) Temporary retail sales*,**.
(40) Township-owned use, including Township park and fire
station.
(41) Vocational school*,**.
* Site Plan Review required (see Section 409)
** See Section 324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Penn Avenue Commercial District by
the Board as a special exception in accordance with the standards contained in
Section 325 of this Part.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Amusement Establishment*.
Auditorium*.
Automobile repair*.
Automobile sales*.
Automobile service station*.
Body art establishments*.
Carwash*.
(8) Combination of uses, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(10) Lumber yard*.
(11) Multiple use building, where one or more of the
permitted by special exception*.
XXXII-l 03
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(12) Off-track betting parlor*,**.
(13) Place of worship.
(14) Public utility facility*.
(15) Tavern or nightclub*.
(16) Taxi, limousine or bus terminal*.
* See Section 324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Penn Avenue Commercial District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §326 of this Chapter.
(1) Hoteljmotel*.
(2) Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use*.
(3) Shopping center*.
* See Section 324 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Penn Avenue Commercial District
shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of Section 314(G),
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Penn Avenue Commercial District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in Section 327 of this Part.
(a) Alternative energy system, accessory.
(b) Bus shelter.
(c) Fence and wall.
(d) Garage.
(e) Geothermal energy system, accessory.
(f) Holiday tree sales.
(g) Home occupation, including day care center.
(h) Interior service and convenience uses.
(i) Keeping animals or fowl.
G) No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(k) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(1) Outdoor storage shed.
XXXII-l 04
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(m) Recreational vehicle.
(n) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(0) Temporary retail sales.
(p) Warehousing and storage in an accessory structure.
(q) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage, and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Penn
Avenue Commercial District, except as provided for in this Chapter.
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Any Use with
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Use without
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
10,000
43,560
100
150
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
60 75 3
25 60 2-1/2
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 314(G) for the particular
use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Penn Avenue Commercial
District, except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
5
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
10 20
Rear Yard
(feet)
25
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback.
XXXII-lOS
40
30
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) An off-street parking setback shall apply to all nomesidential
uses.
(2) No off-street parking shall be located within five (5) feet of
the existing right-of-way line of any public street.
(I) Setbacks of Non-residential Buildings from Residential Uses. Any
nonresidential buildings shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from
the boundary of any residential district.
Section 315. Penn Avenue Overlay District (P AO)
(A) Purpose. The provisions of the Penn Avenue Overlay (PAO)
District shall be supplemental to the regulations of the Penn Avenue Mixed Use
(PMU) District and the Penn Avenue Commercial (PAC) District. These
additional provisions do not replace the underlying zoning district regulations,
but enhance those standards for the following purposes:
(1) To make the Penn Avenue corridor a sh"onger, more
pedestrian friendly, business center.
(2) To heighten interest In redeveloping the corridor's
underutilized properties.
(3) To encourage expansion of existing businesses and start-ups
of new businesses.
(B) The Peml. Avenue Overlay District shall not be an independent
zoning district, but shall be a set a special zoning regulations and standards to be
applied over and above the zoning regulations otherwise controlling on a tract of
land. The dish"ict upon which the overlay district is superimposed is referred to
herein as the '/underlying district".
(C) Location. The Penn Avenue Overlay District shall be comprised of
the areas designated as the Penn Avenue Mixed Use (PMU) District and the Penn
Avenue Commercial (PAC) District.
(D) Permitted Principal Uses. The principal uses permitted within the
Penn Avenue Overlay District shall be those listed as uses permitted by right, by
condition or by special exception within the underlying zoning district, and in
accordance with the provisions for those uses.
XXXII-l 06
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(E) Illustrative Sketches. This section includes illustrative sketches
intended to display specific concepts employed within the Penn Avenue Overlay
District. These sketches are not drawn "to scale" and are not intended to display
all relevant requirements and regulations that may impact a proposed use or
structure, but are meant to demonstrate the specific provisions of the Penn
Avenue Overlay District for which they have been provided.
(F) Parking
(1) Parking Relief. Within the Penn Avenue Overlay District,
applicants for new or expanded buildings or uses shall be required to
provide 75% of the number of off-street parking spaces specified for that
use within Table 7.1 "Off-Street Parking Requiremehts" in Part 7 of this
Chapter. This decrease in the required number of parking spaces shall be
applied only to the standard number of spaces specified in Table 7.1, and
shall not be applied to the number of parking spaces determined by the
common parking lot provisions under Section 702(G) "Joint Use" or the
parking reduction provisions under Section 702(0).
(2) Parking Space Size. The minimum dimensions for off-street
parking spaces within the Penn Avenue Overlay District shall be reduced
from the provisions of 703(C) to a minimum of 9-1/2 feet by 18 feet. This
reduced parking space size shall not be applied to parallel parking spaces,
which shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section
703(C).
Aisle Width
as required by
Section 703(D)
Parking Space Size Example
XXXII-I 07
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(3) Enlargement or Alteration of an Existing Building or Use.
Within the Penn Avenue Overlay District, where parking facilities lawfully
existed before this Chapter was passed or amended, an enlargement or
alteration of an existing building or an existing use served by those parking
facilities shall require that the current parking requirements of this Chapter
be met only relative to the expanded or altered portion of the existing
building or existing use. The current parking requirements shall not be
applied to the existing portion or use, unless those requirements result in a
lower number of required parking spaces.
(G) Signs.
(1) Free-standing signs within the Penn Avenue Overlay District
shall have the following maximum heights:
(a) Fifteen (15) feet within the area designated as the PMU
District.
(b) Twenty (20) feet within the area designated as the PAC
District.
Free-Standing
Sign Within
Penn Avenue
Overlay District
....,
i·wb
::r::
§
.§
rxn
~....,
0
0
'H
I
If)
.-<
~~
,,.
Free-Standing
Sign Outside of
Penn Avenue
Overlay District
Sign Height Example
(2) Free-standing signs within the Penn A venue Overlay District
shall not be required to be set back ten (10) feet from the right of way line
of Penn Avenue, however, the clear sight triangle requirements of Sections
314(1), 315(H) and 405(H) must be met.
XXXII-I 08
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(H) Damage or Destruction. Within the Penn Avenue Overlay District, a
nonconforming building that lawfully existed before this Chapter was passed or
amended, which is destroyed or partially destroyed by fire, explosion or by any
means, may be reconstructed or reused to the same extent as its previous
nonconformity. No such nonconforming building may be reconstructed, reused,
enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity.
(1) Clear Sight Triangles. At signalized intersections within the Penn
Avenue Overlay District, where an existing building encroaches into the clear
sight triangle required by the provisions of Section 405(H), a new building, or a
building enlargement or alteration, may encroach into the clear sight triangle to
the same extent as the existing building. However, in no case shall a new
building, or a building enlargement or alteration encroach upon the state road
sight distance requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
Signalized
Intersection
Penn Avenue
1--.1--------------.,..----...---- Street Centerline
/
/
'"'-----,.~-Encroachment permitted within
Clear Sight Triangle required
by Section 405(H)
Penn Avenue Overlay District
Curb Line
Right-of-Way Line
Clear Sight Triangle Example
(J) Suggested Development Standards. Within the Penn Avenue
Overlay District applicants for developments and building or site improvements
are strongly encouraged to make a good faith effort to observe the following
standards and provisions:
(1) Building Height.
XXXII-l 09
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) A minimum building height of 20 feet or 2 stories for
new buildings.
(b) The maximum building height shall be in accordance
with the requirements of the underlying zoning district.
·'v"c -
B ~
t)CIl~ I-----------t ·C <:'1.!!:1
."..',, ..-.-.,....
-.-I I Q)
QC0r,
O .... ,.c:
I-----------t P<-. Q0) .,.Sc!:
J:le:
o
'i"
Suggested
Minimuln Height
Required
MaxilnuIll Height
Building Height Example
(2) Building Location.
(a) The 5-foot minimum building setback line shall be
considered a "build-to line." To the maximum extent feasible, new
buildings shall place at this build-to line.
(b) At least 60% of an individual building fa<;ade shall be
located along the build-to line. Up to 40% of the facade may be
offset from the build-to line by a maximum of four (4) feet in order
to provide architectural recesses, projects or open space, and to
promote visual diversity and architectural enhancement.
(c) Where a building is constructed to the build-to line,
but does not extend the full length of a lot, a street edge treatment
shall complete the remainder of the build-to line otherwise formed
by a fa<;ade. Such street edge treatments shall consist of walls,
fences, hedges or piers.
XXXII-IIO
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Curb Line (Typ.)
SMow.1k (Typ.J ~
5-ft. Building Setback
(Build-To Line)~
Street Edge Treatment !Jfiiilj"'illil""'.'%>Il"l'~"B~;;&".
(wall, fence, hedge or piers)
Penn Avenue
Right-of-Way Line
Building Location Example
(3) Private Garages.
T
(a) Attached, front-loaded garages shall be set back a
minimum of 15 feet from the primary fac;ade's vertical plane.
(b) Detached, front-loaded garages shall be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from a street right-of-way.
(4) Parking Location.
(a) Off-street parking shall be located to the rear of
buildings, or behind the build-to line if side yard parking location is
necessary due to lot configuration.
XXXII-Ill
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Penn Avenue
Limited Parking to Rear of Building
due to Lot Configuration
Parking to Rear of Building
Parking Location Example
(b) Off-street parking lots shall not be located at street
corners along Penn Avenue.
(c) Where possible, off-street parking lots and garages
shall be accessed from alleys, unless no alleys exist and alley
construction is not feasible due to lot configuration.
Section 316. Planned Highway Interchange District (PHI).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Highway Interchange District
is to accommodate a variety of commercial activities which principally rely upon
vehicular use. The District provides opportunities for office buildings and other
compatible businesses that will serve industries/businesses as well as the needs
for medical, financial, legal, engineering, architectural and other professional
serVIces.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Highway Interchange
District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all
other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied. These uses are
permitted by right whether or not a Plam1.ed Business Development has been
approved for the property on which these uses are proposed:
XXXII-112
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) Automobile repair*,**.
(2) Automobile service station*,**.
(3) Bakery*.
(4) Beverage distributor*,**.
(5) Carwash*,**.
(6) Civic or social organization*,**.
(7) Combination of uses permitted by right*,**
(8) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and communication
equipment buildings*,**.
(9) Copy center*.
(10) Food stand*,**.
(11) Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(12) Funeral home.
(13) Holiday tree sales**.
(14) Indoor sports facility*,**.
(15) Membership club*,**.
(16) Miniature golf (outdoor)*,**.
(17) Multiple use building*,**.
(18) Office*.
(19) Personal service establishment*,**.
(20) Recreation, municipal*.
(21) Recreation, non-municipal indoor*,**.
(22) Recreation, non-municipal outdoor*,**.
(23) Retail greenhouse/nursery*,**.
(24) Self-storage facility*,**.
(25) Temporary retail sales*,**.
(26) Township-owned use, including Township park fire station.
* Site Plan Review required (see Section 409)
** See Section 324 for additional requirements.
(C) Uses Permitted by Right (Within a Planned Business Development).
Each of the following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by
right by the Zoning Officer within a Planned Business Development, for which
Conditional Use approval has been obtained in the Planned Highway Interchange
District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Chapter are satisfied. See definition of Planned Business
Development in Part 2:
(1) Ambulatory surgical center*,**.
(2) Animal hospital*,**.
XXXII-I13
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Automobile sales*,**.
Combination of uses permitted by right*,**.
Convenience store*,**.
Financial establishment*,**.
(7) Hospital or medical center*/*.
(8) Hoteljmotel*,**.
(9) Medical clinic or medical office*,**.
(10) Multiple use building, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*/*.
(11) Nursery school or day care center*/*.
(12) Off-track betting parlor*/*.
(13) Restaurant, fast food*,**.
(14)
(15)
Restaurant, fast food with drive-through service*,**.
Restaurant, standard*,**.
(16) Retail store*,**.
(17) Shopping center*, **.
(18) Tavern*,**.
(19) Taxi, limousine or bus terminal*/*.
* Site Plan Review required (see Section 409)
** See Section 324 for additional requirements.
(D) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Highway Interchange
District by the Board as a special exception in accordance with the standards
contained in Section 325 of this Chapter.
(1) Amusement establishment*.
(2) Auditorium*.
(3) Combination of uses, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(4) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Conference center*.
Cultural center
Drive-in theater*.
Lumber yard*.
Public utility facility*.
* See §324 for additional requirements.
(E) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses may be
permitted within the Planned Highway Interchange District when authorized by
XXXII-114
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards of Section 326 of this
Chapter.
(1) Casino or gaming establishment*.
(2) Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use*.
(3) Planned Business Development. See Section 316(G).
* See Section 324 for additional requirements.
(F) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use In the Planned Highway Interchange
District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of
Section 316(I), except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Planned Highway Interchange District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in Section 327 of this Chapter.
(a)
(b)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
(c) Fence and wall.
(d) Garage.
(e) Geothermal energy system, accessory.
(f) Holiday tree sales.
(g) Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
(h) Home occupation, including day care center.
(i) Interior service and convenience uses.
G) Keeping animals or fowl.
(k) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(1) No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(m) Outdoor storage shed.
(n) Private greenhouse.
(0) Recreational vehicle.
(p) Seasonal roadside produce market.
(q) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(r) Temporary retail sales.
(s) Warehousing and storage in an accessory structure.
(t) Accessory uses and structures which are
customary and incidental to the principal use.
XXXII-115
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(G) Standards for Approval of a Planned Business Development. To
assure that the intent and requirements of the Planned Highway Interchange
District are complied with, review and approval of a Planned Business
Development is required, where specified, as a conditional use.
(1) Minimum Tract Size. 10 acres. See definition of tract size in
Part 2.
(2) Retail and Shopping Center. No more than 10 acres of the
Planned Business Development shall be devoted to retail and shopping
center uses.
(3) Site Plan. A Site Plan is required. See Section 409.
(4) Information. The applicant shall present all available
information on the types of tenants or uses that are intended or expected
within the different portions of the development.
(5) Relationship to Surroundings. The applicant shall show how
the development will be coordinated with access and utilities of other
existing or proposed developments in the vicinity.
(6) Open Space and Landscaping. The application shall include
an overall plan of open spaces and landscaping. The plan shall be
implemented through a series of deed restrictions on each lot.
(7) Access.
(a) Coordinated access. Any Planned Business
Development shall make the absolute maximum use possible of the
interior streets, as opposed to numerous driveways entering onto
existing public streets. Deed restrictions shall be placed on any
individual lots that are created, to require access to the interior street
system only.
(b) Easements for Access. The Board of Supervisors may,
at the time of approval of a subdivision or land development within
a Planned Business Development, require a lot or tract to provide
an easement, stub street extension and/ or street right of way
extension for vehicular traffic to adjoining tracts to allow an efficient
interior access system.
XXXU-116
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(8) Traffic Impact Study. When the proposed development
would meet the criteria for a traffic study specified in the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII), or when determined
necessary by the Township Engineer, an application for a Planned Business
Development shall include a Traffic Impact Study addressing the
anticipated impact of the proposed development.
(9) Staged Construction. If development is to occur in
progressive stages, each stage shall be planned and occur so that the
purposes and requirements of this Chapter are fully complied with at the
completion of each stage. Each stage shall be shown on the plan.
(10) Lot Regulations. Any lot proposed to be created presently or
in the future within a Plmmed Business Development shall be capable of
complying with the Lot and Yard requirements of Sections 316(H) and (I)
of this Chapter.
(11) Information on Covenants. A Planned Business
Development shall include a reasonable set of deed restrictions or
covenants imposed by the developer on each lot. These covenants should
cover types of uses, maintenance of lots and commercial operations, with a
proper means for enforcement. The covenants shall also be written to carry
out the purposes and requirements of a Planned Business Development.
The language of these covenants shall be presented to the Township before
a Planned Business Development is approved.
(12) Sewer and Water. All lots within a Planned Business
Development shall be provided with centralized sewer and water services.
(H) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage, and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Highway Interchange District, except as provided for in this Chapter:
XXXII-I 17
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Maximum Land Maximum Building
Coverage (%} Height
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* LotWidth** By Impervious (Stories) (Feet)
Principal Use (sq. ft.} (feet} Buildings Cover (Whichever is Less}
Any Use with 10,000 100 60 75 3-1/2
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
Any Use without 43,560 150 40 60 3-1/2
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
*
use.
Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 316(1) for the particular
(I) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned Highway Interchange
District, except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
Principal Use
Any Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
50
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
20 40
Rear Yard
(feet)
30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(J) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
Section 319(H) shall apply.
(K) Setbacks of Industrial Uses from Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in Section 319(1) shall apply.
(L) Setbacks of Non-Residential Buildings from Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 318(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 314 of Section 2)
XXXII-lIS
60
60
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 317. Planned Highway Transitional District (PHT)
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Highway Transitional District
is to provide an area to allow for a smooth transition between the uses permitted
within the Planned Highway Interchange District and the adjoining residential
districts. This District permits low density single-family dwellings on lots large
enough to provide for both on-lot sewage disposal and water supply while
providing for the opportunity to have somewhat smaller lots if public water and
sewage facilities become available. This District also permits selective commercial
development to promote a compatible mix of professional, business and
residential uses. Open space developments and planned residential development
are also provided as a desirable alternative to conventional single-family
developments.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Highway Transitional
District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all
other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Catering establishment*.
(2) Civic or social organization*,**.
(3) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility, transmission tower, building or other structure, and communication
equipment buildings*,**,
(4) Copy center*.
(5) Financial establishment**.
(6) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(7) Indoor sports facility*,**.
(8) Membership club*,**.
(9) Miniature golf (outdoor)*,**.
(10) Nursery school or day care center*,**.
(11) Open Space Development in accordance with Section 901
(Appendix A)*,**.
(12) Recreation, municipal*.
(13) Recreation, non-municipal indoor*,**.
(14) Recreation, non-municipal outdoor*,**.
(15) Retail greenhouse/nursery*,**.
(16) Single-family detached dwelling, in accordance with the
provisions of §317(F), §317(G), and §324 **.
(17) Township-owned use, including Township park
station.
* Site Plan Review required (see Section 409)
XXXII-119
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
** See Section 324(B) for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Highway Transitional
District by the Board as a special exception in accordance with the standards
contained in Section 325 of this Chapter.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
buildings*.
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
Amusement Establishment*.
Animal hospital*.
Bed and breakfast*.
Cemetery*.
Communications towers and communications equipment
Conference center*.
Drive in theater*.
Lumber yard*.
Medical clinic or medical office*.
Office*.
Place of worship.
Public utility facility*.
School, publici private, not including vocational school *.
Swimming club (outdoor)*.
Tennis club (outdoor)*.
* See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted within the Planned Highway Transitional
District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
standards contained in Section 326 of this Chapter.
(1) Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use*.
* See Section 324 for additional requirements
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use In the Planned Highway Transitional
District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of
Section 317(G), except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
XXXII-l20
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Planned Highway Transitional District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in Section 327 of this Chapter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
G)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Horse barn.
(k) Interior services and convenience uses.
(1) Keeping animals or fowl.
(m) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(n) No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(0) Outdoor storage shed.
(p) Private greenhouse
(q) Recreational vehicle.
(r) Seasonal roadside produce market.
(s) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(t) Storage in an accessory structure.
(u) Swimming pool (non-commercial).
(v) Temporary retail sales.
(w) Tennis court.
(x) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage, and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Highway Transitional District, except as provided for in this Chapter.
XXXII-121
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Single-Family
Detached
Dwelling &
Mobile/Manufact
uredHome:
-With Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Single-Family
Cluster
Development
Planned
Residential
Development
All Other
Permitted Uses
with Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
- Per Lot
Any Permitted
Uses Without
Centralized
Sewer and Water
20,000 150 10 20 2-1/2
(In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
20,000
130,680
(3 acres)
150
200
10
5
20 2-1/2
10 2-1/2
* Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
** Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in Section 317(G) for the particular
use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned Highway Transitional
District, except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter:
XXXII-122
30
30
30
) -
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
50
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
25 60
Rear Yard
(feet)
30
* The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
Section 319(H) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 315 of Section 2)
Section 318. Planned Office/Business District (POB).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Office/Business District is to
provide opportunities for modern office buildings, residential uses and other
compatible businesses that will serve industries/businesses as well as the needs
for medical, financial, legal, architectural and other professional services.
Development controls will ensure sign control, attractive landscaping, desirable
setbacks, traffic control and compatibility with adjacent residential uses.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Office/Business
Commercial District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type,
dimensional and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied.
(1) Apartments on the upper levels of buildings containing a
permitted nomesidential use*,**.
(2) Art or photography studio*.
(3) Civic or social organization*,**.
(4) Combination of uses permitted by right*,**.
(5) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment buildings*,**.
(6) Conference/training center*,**.
(7) Convenience store*,**.
(8) Copy center*.
(9) Cultural center*.
(10) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harvest~
(11) Financial establishments, including banking
operations center and automated banking machines*,**.
XXXII-123
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(12) Indoor sports facility*,**.
(13) Medical office or medical clinic*,**.
(14) Membership club*,**.
(15) Miniature golf (outdoor)*,**.
(16) Multiple use building*,**.
(17) Nursery school or day care center*,**.
(18) Office*.
(19) Recreation, municipal*.
(20) Recreation, non-municipal indoor*,**.
(21) Recreation, non-municipal outdoor*,**.
(22) Restaurant, standard*,**.
(23) Retail greenhouse/nursery*,**
(24) Retail store, having a total floor area less than 50,000 square
feet *,**.
(25) Township-owned use, including Township park fire station.
* Site plan review required. (see §409)
** See §324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Office/Business
Commercial District by the Board in accordance with the standards contained in
§325 of this Chapter:
(1) Ambulatory surgical center*.
(2) Amusement establishment*.
(3) Animal hospital*.
(4) Auditorium*.
(5) Cemetery / mausoleum*.
(6) Colleges or universities, including dormitories as a clearly
accessory use, restricted to students of such college or institution*.
(7) Combination of uses, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(8) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(9) Heliport *.
(10) Multiple use building, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(11) Off-track betting parlor*.
(12) Personal service establishment*.
(13) Place of worship.
(14) Public utility facility*.
(15) School, publici private*.
XXXII-124
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(16) Swimming club (outdoor)*.
(17) Tennis club (outdoor)*.
(18) Vocational school*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Plam1.ed Office/Business Commercial
District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
standards contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Hospital or medical center*.
(2) Hotel, motel including restaurants*.
(3) Off-street parking not located on the same lot as the
permitted principal use*.
(4) Nightclub*.
(5) Retail store, having a total floor area in excess of 50,000
square feet*.
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Shopping center, including restaurants and health clubs*.
Single-family detached dwellings*.
Tavern*.
Vehicle wash preventive maintenance center*.
* See §324 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Planned Office/Business District
shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of §318(G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Planned Office/Business District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
Fence and wall.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Holiday tree sales.
Interior service and convenience uses.
(g) No-Impact home-based businesses, subject
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
XXXII-125
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(h) Off-street parking.
(i) Outdoor storage shed.
G) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(k) Temporary retail sales.
(1) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Office/Business Commercial District, except as specifically provided for in this
Chapter:
XXXII-126
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Principal Use
Single-Family
Detached
Dwelling &
Mobile/Manufact
ured Home: With
Both Centralized
Sewer and Water
Single-Family
Cluster
Development
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
10,000
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
70
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
By
Buildings
40
By Total
Impervious
Cover
55
(In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Maximum Building
Height
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
2-1/2 30
Planned
Residential
Development
(In accordance with the Township's PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI))
All Other
Permitted Uses
with Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
- Per Lot
10,000 100 60 75 3-1/2 60
Any Use Without
Centralized
Water and Sewer
43,560 150 40 60 3-1/2 60
(whichever is less)
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §318(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use of the Plam1.ed Office/Business
Commercial District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Princi al Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
XXXII-127
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
N on-Residential Use
Residential Use
-SFD
-SFD Cluster
50
30
20
20
8
5
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
40
20
10
30
30
30
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(1) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in §319(I) shall apply.
(J) Setbacks of Nonresidential Buildings From Residential Uses. Any
nonresidential buildings shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet
from the property boundary line of any existing principally residential use and
from the boundary of any residential district, and furthermore, wherever a zoning
district boundary line exists between a planned office business (PO/B) zoning
district and any residential zoning district which does not coincide with a
property boundary, the aforementioned setback shall be measured from the
portion of the property boundary line located within the residential zoning
dish'ict, which does not coincide with the zoning district boundary line. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to industrial buildings and/ or uses
(see §318(I)).
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 316 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 354, March 10,2008, Sections 1 and 2)
Section 319. Planned Business and Residential District (PBR).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Business and Residential
District is to provide opportunities for a compatible mixture of retail, personal
service, other business and residential uses. Development controls will ensure
sign control, attractive landscaping, desirable setbacks and compatibility between
adjoining uses.
XXXII-128
i r--.- --
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Business and
Residential Commercial District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use,
type, dimensional and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter are
satisfied. Permitted uses are subject to the performance standards contained in
Part 5.
(1) Agriculture, general**.
(2) Agricultural industry.
(3) Animal hospital*,**.
(4) Art or photography studio*.
(5) Bakery.
(6) Beverage distributor*,**.
(7) Catering establishment*.
(8) Civic or social organization*,**.
(9) Combination of uses permitted by right*,**
(10) Commercial stable or riding academy*,**.
(11) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment building*,**.
(12) Community center*,**.
(13) Construction company*,**.
(14) Convenience store*,**.
(15) Copy center*.
(16) Cultural center*.
(17) Financial establishment*,**.
(18) Food stand*,**.
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
Funeral home*.
Group home**.
Holiday tree sales**.
Medical clinic or medical office*,**.
Membership club*,**.
Miniature golf (outdoor)*,**.
Multiple use building*,**.
Nursery school or day care center*,**.
Office*.
Open air retail *, **.
Open air retail sales of agricultural products*, **.
Orchard or Christmas tree farm.
Personal service establishment*,**.
Pet grooming establishment*,**.
Recreation, municipal*.
XXXII-129
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
(40)
(41)
Recreation, non-municipal indoor*,**.
Recreation, non-municipal outdoor*,**.
Restaurant, fast food*,**.
Restaurant, standard*,**.
Retail greenhouse/nursery*,**.
Retail store*,**.
Self-storage facility*,**.
(42) Single-family detached dwelling,
provisions of §319(F), §319(G), and §324 **.
(43) Swimming club (outdoor)*,**.
(44) Temporary retail sales*,**.
(45) Tennis club (outdoor)*,**.
(46) Township-owned use, including
station.
(47) Two-family detached dwelling*.
111 accordance with the
Township park and fire
(48) Two-family semidetached dwelling*.
(49) Warehouse*,**.
(50) Wholesale*,**.
* Site plan review required (see Section 409)
** See §324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Business and Residential
Commercial District by the Board in accordance with the standards contained in
§325 of this Chapter:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Automobile repair*.
Automobile service station*.
Bed and breakfast*.
(4) Boarding house*.
(5) Carwash*.
(6) Cemetery*.
(7) Combination of uses, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(8) Fuel oil company*.
(9) Lumber yard*.
(10) Multiple use building, where one or more of the uses are
pennitted by special exception*.
(11) Place of worship.
(12) Public utility facility*.
(13) Single-family detached dwelling in combination with a
commercial activity*.
XXXII-130
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(14) Tavern*.
* See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Business and Residential
Commercial District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the standards contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Alternative energy system, principal*.
* See §324 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Planned Business and Residential
Commercial District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of
§319(G) except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Planned Business and Residential Commercial District only if such use
complies with the relevant standards contained in §327 of this Chapter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
G)
(k)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Holiday tree sales.
Home gardening, nursery or greenhouse.
Home occupation, including day care center.
Horse barn.
Keeping animals and fowl.
(1) No-Impact Home-Based Businesses, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(m) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(n) Outdoor storage shed.
(0) Outdoor wood-fired boiler.
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
Private greenhouse.
Recreational vehicle.
Seasonal roadside produce market.
Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
XXXII-131
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(t) Swimming pools (noncommercial).
(u) Temporary retail sales.
(v) Tennis court or similar impervious athletic surface.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Business and Residential Commercial District, except as specifically provided for
in this Chapter:
Maximum Land Maximum Building
Coverage (%) Height
Minimum Minimum By Total
Lot Area* LotWidth** By Impervious (Stories) (Feet)
Principal Use (sq. ft.) (feet) Buildings Cover (Whichever is Less)
Residential Uses 5,000 50 50 70 2-1/2 30
With Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Commercial Uses 20,000 100 40 75 2-1/2 30
With Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Industrial Use 20,000 150 60 75 2-1/2 30
With Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
Open Space (In accordance with Section 901 (Appendix A))
Development
Any Permitted 43,560 150 60 75 2-1/2 30
Use Without Both
Centralized
Sewer and Water
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §319(G) for the particular use.
XXXII-132
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Plam1ed Business and Residential
Commercial District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Residential Use
Any Other Permitted
Use
Ind us trial Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
30
25
50
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
5 15
10** 10**
50 100
25 50
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
**I£ only one side yard.
(H) Off-Street Parking Setback
Rear Yard
(feet)
25
50
25
(1) An off-street parking setback shall apply to all nomesidential
uses and to garden apartments.
(2) No off-street parking shall be located within ten (10) feet of
the existing right-of-way line of any public street.
(3) In addition, if a lot or a tract has an average width greater
than two hundred and fifty (250) feet, a front yard improvement setback of
twenty-five (25) feet shall be required from the existing right-of-way line of
any arterial street.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. No industrial
structure or use, loading or unloading area, truck parking area nor outside
storage area shall be located within one hundred and twenty (120) feet of the lot
line of an existing principally residential use and the boundary of an RS, LDS,
MDS, SS or U District, unless the property owner of that adjacent land specifically
waives their right to the setback in writing.
(J) Setbacks of Non-Residential Buildings from Residential Uses
same requirements as are listed in Section 318(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 317 of Section 2)
XXXII-133
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 320. Planned Industry/Business District (PIB).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Plamled Industry jBusiness District is
to provide opportunities for light industrial uses and for a variety of compatible
businesses, offices and appropriate commercial uses. Development controls will
ensure excellence in site planning, stringent traffic control and attractive and
compatible development.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Planned Industry jBusiness
Industrial District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional
and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Auditorium*,**.
(2) Beverage dish"ibutor*,**.
(3) Catering establishment*.
(4) Combination of uses permitted by right*,**
(5) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment buildings*,**.
(6) Community center*,**.
(7) Convenience store*,**.
(8) Copy center*.
(9) Financial establishment*,**.
(10) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(11) Funeral home*.
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
Indoor civic or social organization*,**.
Indoor membership club*,**.
Indoor sports facility*,**.
Medical office or medical clinic*,**.
Multiple use building*,**.
Nursery school or day care center*,**.
Office*.
Recreation, municipal*.
Recreation, non-municipal indoor*,**.
Restaurant, standard*,**.
Retail greenhouse j nursery*, **.
Retail stores*,**.
Self-storage facility*,**.
Township-owned use, including Township park fire station.
Warehouse*,**.
Wholesale*,** .
XXXII-134
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
*Site plan review required (see §409).
**See §324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Industry /Business
Industrial District by the Board in accordance with the standards contained in
§325 of this Chapter:
(1) Amusement Establishment*.
(2) Animal hospital*.
(3) Bakery.
(4) Combination of uses, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(5) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(6) Construction company*.
(7) Heliport *.
(8) Light industrial use*.
(9) Lumber yard*.
(10) Multiple use building, where one or more of the uses are
permitted by special exception*.
(11) Public utility facility*.
(12) Taxi, limousine or bus terminal*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Planned Industry/Business Industrial
District when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
standards contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Alternative energy system, principal*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Planned Industry /Business
Industrial District shall comply with the minimum yard requireme s of
§320(G), except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
XXXII-135
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Planned Industry/Business Industrial District only if such use complies
with the relevant standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
Farm pond.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Holiday tree sales.
Interior service and convenience uses.
(i) No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
G) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(k) Outdoor storage shed.
(1) Private greenhouse.
(m) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(n) Temporary retail sales.
(0) Warehousing or storage in an accessory structure.
(p) Retail use accompanying an industrial use for the sale
of the product(s) manufactured, produced or stored in the same
building.
(q) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned
Industry /Business Industrial District, except as specifically provided for in this
Chapter:
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Any Permitted
Uses
87,120
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
200 50 75 3-1/2
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §320(G) for the particular use.
XXXII-136
50
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Planned Industry/Business
Industrial District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
50
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
25 50
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
Rear Yard
(feet)
25
(H) Improvement Setbacks. The same requirements as are listed In
§319(H) shall apply.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in §319(I) shall apply.
(J) Setbacks of Non-residential Buildings from Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 318(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 318 of Section 2)
Section 321. Extractive Industry District (EI).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Extractive Industry District is to
provide opportunities for uses which depend upon open areas for mining,
manufacturing or storage. Development controls will ensure these uses are
located, operated and maintained so as not to adversely affect either adjoining
properties or the public health, safety and welfare of present and future Township
residents.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Extractive Industry District by
the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Automobile auctions and storage yards*,**.
(2) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure/I and
communications equipment buildings*,**. l '
(3) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harve$'(
(4) MI· nera1 extract.I on*, * * . /'/!>~-~;'1. 'ii\>
~~¥,
• T
XXXII-137
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Orchard.
Recreation, municipal*.
Retail greenhouse/ nursery*,**.
Self-storage facility*, **
Township-owned use, including Township park fire station.
Warehouse*,**.
(11) Wholesale*,**.
*Site plan review requirements (See §409).
**See §324 for additional requirements.
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Extractive Industry District by the
Board in accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter:
(1)
(2)
buildings*.
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Automobile wrecking or junkyard*.
Communications towers and communications equipment
Construction company*.
Heliport *.
Public utility facility*.
Recycling facility*.
Sale of mulch and landscape materials*.
Single-family detached dwelling.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Extractive Industry District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Alternative energy system, principal*.
See §324 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Extractive Industry District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §321 (G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
XXXU-138
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Extractive Industry District only if such use complies with the relevant
standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Holiday tree sales.
Interior service and convenience uses.
(h) No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(i) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
G) Outdoor storage shed.
(k) Private greenhouse.
(1) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(m) Temporary retail sales.
(n) Warehousing or storage in an accessory structure.
(0) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Extractive Industry District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
XXXII-139
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(acres)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Any Permitted
Use
5
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
500 60 75 3-1/2
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §321(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Extractive Industry District,
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
20
Side Yard
One Both
(feet) (feet)
100 200
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
Rear Yard
(feet)
100
(H) Off-Street Parking Setbacks. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in §319(I) shall apply.
(J) Setbacks of Non-residential Buildings From Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 318(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 319 of Section 2)
XXXII-140
50
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 322. Manufacturing and Industrial Dish"ict (MI).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Manufacturing and Industrial District
is to provide an area to accommodate manufacturing, industrial and storage uses.
Development controls will ensure these uses are located, operated and
maintained so as not to adversely affect either adjoining properties or the public
health, safety and welfare of present and future Township residents.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Manufacturing and Industrial
District by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional and all
other applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Automobile auctions and storage yards*,**.
Automobile repair*,**.
Automobile sales*,**.
(4) Automobile service station*,**.
(5) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment building*, **.
(6) Forestry, including but not limited to timber harvesting*,**.
(7) Fuel oil company*,**.
(8) Light industrial use*,**.
(9) Lumber yard*,**.
(10) Office*.
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
station.
Retail greenhouse/ nursery*, **.
Sale of mulch and landscape materials*,**.
Self-storage facility*,**.
Township-owned use, including Township
(15) Warehouse*,**.
(16) Wholesale*,**.
*Site Plan review requirements (See Section 409).
**See Section 324 for additional requirements
park and fire
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Manufacturing and Industrial
District by the Board in accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this
Chapter:
(1) Automobile wrecking/junkyard*.
XXXII-141
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2)
buildings*.
(3)
(4)
(5)
Communications towers and communications equipment
Heavy industrial use*.
Heliport *.
Public utility facility*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Manufacturing and Industrial District
when authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Alternative energy system, principal*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(F) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Manufacturing and Industrial
District shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of §322(G),
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Manufacturing and Industrial District only if such use complies with the
relevant standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Alternative energy system, accessory.
Bus shelter.
Fence and wall.
Garage.
Geothermal energy system, accessory.
Holiday tree sales.
Interior service and convenience uses.
(h) No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
(i) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
G) Outdoor storage shed.
(k) Private greenl10use.
(1) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
(m) Temporary retail sales.
(n) Warehousing or storage in an accessory sh"ucture.
XXXII-142
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(0) Accessory uses and structures which are clearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(G) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the
Manufacturing and Industrial District, except as specifically provided for in this
Chapter:
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Minimum
Lot Area*
(acres)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
By
Buildings
By Total
Impervious
Cover
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
Any Permitted
Use
1
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
150 60 75 3-1/2
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §322(G) for the particular use.
(H) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Manufacturing and Industrial
District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
30
Side Yard
One Both
( feet) (feet)
20 40
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
Rear Yard
(feet)
30
(I) Off-Street Parking Setbacks. The same requirements as are listed in.
§319(H) shall apply.
(J) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in §319(I) shall apply.
(K) Setbacks of Non-residential Buildings From Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 318(J) shall apply.
XXXII-143
50
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 323. Fuel Storage District (FS).
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Fuel Storage District is to provide an
area to accommodate fuel storage facilities. Special performance standards,
attractive landscaping and screening and other development controls will help
ensure the safe operation of uses in this district and help ensure compatibility
with adjoining land uses.
(B) Uses Permitted by Right. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses are permitted by right in the Fuel Storage Industrial District
by the Zoning Officer, provided that the use, type, dimensional and all other
applicable requirements of this Chapter are satisfied:
(1) Catering establishment*.
(2) Communications antennae mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment building*,**.
(3) Construction company*,**.
(4) Forestry, including but not limited to, timber harvesting*,**.
(5) Fuel oil company*,**.
(6) Fuel storage tank farm or fuel products terminal*,**.
(7) Light industrial use*,**.
(8) O££ice*.
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
Orchard.
Recreation, municipal.
Retail greenhouse / nursery*, **.
Self-storage facility*, **
Township-owned use, including Township park fire station.
Warehouse*, **.
Wholesale*,**.
**Site Plan review requirements (See Section 409).
**See Section 324 for additional requirements
(C) Special Exception Uses. Each of the following principal uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted in the Fuel Storage Industrial District by
the Board in accordance with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter:
(1) Adult business use*.
(2) Automobile wrecking or junkyard*.
(3) Communications towers and communications equipment
buildings*.
(4) Heavy industrial use*.
XXXU-144
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(5) Heliport*.
(6) Public utility facility*.
(7) Prison or penitentiary*.
(8) Sale of mulch and landscape materials*.
(9) Slaughtering, Processing, Rendering, and Packaging of Food
Products and Their By-Products*.
(10) Treatment center*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(D) Conditional Uses. Each of the following principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted in the Fuel Storage Industrial District when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the standards
contained in §326 of this Chapter:
(1) Alternative energy system, principal*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(E) Accessory Uses.
(1) Each accessory use in the Fuel Storage Industrial District shall
comply with the minimum yard requirements of §323 (G), except as
specifically provided for in this Chapter.
(2) Each of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the
Fuel Storage Industrial District only if such use complies with the relevant
standards contained in §327 of this Chapter:
(a) Alternative energy system, accessory.
(b) Bus shelter.
(c) Farm pond.
(d) Fence and wall.
(e) Garage.
(f) Geothermal energy system, accessory.
(g) Holiday tree sales.
(h) Interior service and convenience uses.
(i) No-impact home-based business, subject to the
provisions of Section 327(C)(12).
G) Off-street parking, in accordance with Part 7.
(k) Outdoor storage shed.
(1) Private greenhouse.
(m) Signs, in accordance with Part 6.
XXXII-145
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(n) Temporary retail sales.
(0) Warehousing or storage in an accessory structure.
(p) Accessory uses and structures which are dearly
customary and incidental to the principal use.
(F) Lot Area, Width, Building Coverage and Height Regulations. Each
of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to each use in the Fuel
Storage Industrial District, except as specifically provided for in this Chapter.
Maximum Land
Coverage (%)
Maximum Building
Height
Principal Use
Adult business
use or Treatment
Center
Minimum
Lot Area*
(acres)
Minimum
LotWidth**
(feet)
150
By
Buildings
10
By Total
Impervious
Cover
15
(Stories) (Feet)
(Whichever is Less)
2 2-1/2 30
Any Permitted
Use
5
*Per dwelling unit for residential uses.
500 60 75 3-1/2
**Measured at the Minimum Front Yard listed in §323(G) for the particular use.
(G) Minimum Yard Requirements. Each of the following minimum
yard requirements shall apply to each use in the Fuel Storage Industrial District,
except as specifically provided for in this Chapter:
Principal Use
Any Permitted Use
FrontYard*
(feet)
50
Side Yard
One
(feet)
30
Both
(feet)
60
*The depth at which the minimum lot width shall be measured.
Rear Yard
(feet)
50
(H) Off-Street Parking Setbacks. The same requirements as are listed in
§319(H) shall apply.
(I) Setbacks of Industrial Uses From Residential Uses. The same
requirements as are listed in §319(I) shall apply.
XXXII-146
50
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(J) Setbacks of Non-residential Buildings from Residential Uses. The
same requirements as are listed in Section 318(J) shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 320 of Section 2)
Section 324. Compliance and Performance Standards for Certain Principal Uses.
(A) Compliance Required. Each of the following principal uses shall
also comply with the additional requirements for that use listed in this Section. (A
site plan may be required per §409).
(B) Additional Requirements.
(1) Adult Business Use.
(a) No such use shall be located within five hundred (500)
feet of the boundary of any residential district or the property
boundary line of any existing principally residential use, public or
private school, nursery school or day care center, place of worship,
playground or public recreation facility or another adult business
use.
(b) A thirty (30) foot buffer yard shall be provided along
the side and rear lot lines in accordance with §405(I).
(c) No adult business use shall be conducted many
manner that permits the observation of any material depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas from outside the establishment or business. This
provision shall apply to any display decoration, sign, show window,
door or other opening.
(d) No adult business use shall be conducted in a mamler
that violates any of the provisions of this Chapter or any other
Federal, State, County or Municipal regulation.
(e) Precautions shall be made to prohibit mmors from
entering the premises.
(f) No such use shall be combined with the
alcoholic or intoxicating beverages.
XXXII-147
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(g) No adult business use may change to another type of
adult business use except upon application to and approval by the
Board of such change as a Special Exception.
(h) If employees or patrons of an adult business use
promote, solicit, allow or engages in acts of prostitution on the
premises, as charged by the appropriate law enforcement
authorities, then the zoning permit shall be suspended. Should said
employees or patrons be convicted or plead guilty to said charges of
prostitution as described above, then the zoning permit shall be
revoked.
(2) Adult Day Care.
(a) Shall, at a minimum, comply with the standards and
guidelines for adult day care services as provided by the National
Adult Day Services Association, a unit of the National Council on
Aging, Inc.
(b) Shall meet all federal, state and local regulations,
including, but not limited to licensing, health, safety and building
code requirements.
(c) Shall not provide care to individuals with histories of
criminal or violent behavior.
(d) Shall be located and operated in a manner that
reduces or eliminates potential hazards to the persons being cared
for at the facility. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Township, full compliance
with this provision.
(e) Off-Street Parking Spaces. Parking shall comply with
the requirements of Part 7 of this Chapter.
(f) There shall be a one (1) acre minimum lot size.
(g) There shall be an adequate drop-off area with a
minimum of two (2) spaces and located so that vehicles transporting
persons being cared for at the facility shall not back up onto a public
street.
XXXII-148
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(3) Agriculture, General.
(a) The minimum size of a farm shall be three (3) acres,
except that five (5) acres shall be required in the RHA District and
ten (10) acres shall be required wherever the agricultural activity
includes animal husbandry.
(b) Farm outbuildings for agricultural activities not
involving animal husbandry, other than a dwelling, shall not be
consh-ucted closer than seventy-five (75) feet to any exterior
property line.
(c) When the agricultural activities involve animal
husbandry, barns, animal shelters, stables, feed yards, slaughter
areas or manure storage areas, such activities shall not be located
closer than five hundred (500) feet from all exterior property lines
and dwellings except the dwelling of the owner or lessee.
(d) When the agricultural activities involve animal
husbandry, additions to existing barns, animal shelters, stables, feed
yards or manure storage areas, such activities shall not be located
closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from all exterior property
lines.
(e) All grazing or pasture areas utilized for this purpose
shall be fenced.
(f) Crop storage areas shall not occupy any part of the
required front, side or rear yards. The applicable outdoor storage
control provisions of §509 shall be met.
(g) A farm use shall be maintained in a way which does
not create a danger to public safety or health. The fact that a farm
use creates an am10yance or inconvenience shall not be deemed a
danger to public safety or health.
(h) Any new or expanded structure or concentrated
feeding areas for the keeping of livestock or poultry shall be located
a minimum of: (1) 1000 feet from any lot line of an existing dwel ing
and from the boundary of a residential district; (2) 300 feet fro 1y
other exterior lot line.
XXXII-149
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(i) The setbacks from property lines in this Section shall
not apply from dwellings or residential lots owned by: (1) the owner
or operator of the livestock use; or (2) affected property owners
providing a written notarized letter waiving such setback. A waiver
of the setback by the current owner shall be binding upon future
owners. The Township may require that such waiver be recorded
with the deed.
G) Any agricultural use that exceeds an average of 2 or
more "animal equivalent units" (" AEUs") per acre shall be
regulated as an intensive agriculture use. The following minimum
contiguous acreage in common ownership shall be required for the
following average AEUs per acre:
Acres of Contiguous Land
Less than 10 acres
10 to 25 acres
(See intensive agriculture)
Acres of Contiguous Land
Less than 10 acres
10 to 25 acres
More than 25 acres
(See intensive agriculture)
Maximum Average AEUs per
Acre If the Use does not Primarily
Involve Swine or Ducks
0.5
2.0
Greater than 2.0
Maximum Average AEUs per
Acre If the Use Primarily Involves
Swine or Ducks
0.5
1.5
2.0
Greater than 2.0
The term "primarily" shall be based upon the weight of the animals.
Therefore, if a lot includes 20,000 pounds of swine and 10,000
pounds of chicken, it shall be considered to primarily involve swine.
(k) The following intensive agriculture activities shall be
prohibited:
1) The construction or operation of a separate
building for the cultivation of mushrooms.
XXXII-I 50
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
2) The raising of pigs and poultry, if such activity
constitutes more than one-third (1/3) of all farm income.
3) The ownership of horses, donkeys, mules, cows,
sheep, goats and pigs, if the total number of such animals
shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) the number of farm
acres.
4) The seasonal display and sale of farm products.
See §327, "Seasonal Roadside Produce Market."
(4) Agriculture, Intensive. Intensive agriculture activities
include, but are not limited to, mushroom farms, poultry and egg
production and dry lot farms, wherein the character of the activity involves
a more intense use of land than found in normal farming operation.
(a) A minimum lot size of ten (10) acres is required for
intensive agricultural activities; which shall be so located on the lot
as to provide front, side and rear yards of two hundred (200) feet.
The maximum height of buildings used for intensive agricultural
use is thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2 1/2) stories,
excluding appurtenances.
(b) A minimum lot SIze of 25 acres is required for
intensive agricultural activities not primarily involving swine or
ducks having an average AEU per acre exceeding 5.0.
(c) A minimum lot size of 25 acres is required for
intensive agricultural activities involving swine or ducks having an
average AEU per acre exceeding 2.0.
(d) A fence shall be maintained along the property lines.
Where Board approval is necessary, the Board may require fencing
along streams where necessary to control water pollution and
erosion from animals.
(e) Commercial composting is prohibited. Any onsite
composting shall be limited for use on the premises on which such
composting is made and produced.
(f) Solid and liquid wastes shall be disposed of da'
mam1er to avoid creating insect or rodent problems, or
nuisance. No emission of noxious, unpleasant
XXXII-151
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
permitted in such quantities as to be offensive outside the lot lines of
the tract occupied by an intensive agricultural user.
(g) Dry lot feeding situation shall be permanently paved.
(h) The raising of mushrooms shall comply with the
P ADEP publication entitled "Best Practices for Environmental
Protection in the Mushroom Farm Community", (1997) or its
successor publication. Such document is hereby incorporated by
reference. Any raising of mushrooms shall use bunker composting
within a substantially enclosed building using positive aeration or a
method that the applicant proves has a similar reduction on odors.
Any area used for the storage, loading, processing and/ or
packaging of septage or spent mushroom compost as part of the
raising of mushrooms shall be setback a minimum of: (1) 1000 feet
from any lot line of an existing dwelling and from the boundary of a
residential district; (2) 500 feet from any other exterior lot line,
unless written permission for a smaller setback is obtained from the
adjoining property owner(s).
(i) Any new or expanded structure or concentrated
feeding areas for the keeping of livestock or poulh-y shall be located
a minimum of: (1) 1000 feet from any lot line of an existing dwelling
and from the boundary of a residential district; (2) 500 feet from any
other exterior lot line, unless written permission for a smaller
setback is obtained from the adjoining property owner(s).
G) The setbacks from property lines in this Section shall
not apply from dwellings or residential lots owned by: (1) the owner
or operator of the livestock use; or (2) affected property owners
providing a written notarized letter waiving such setback. A waiver
of the setback by the current owner shall be binding upon future
owners. The Township may require that such waiver be recorded
with the deed.
(k) For any new or expanded operation regulated under
the State Nutrient Management Act, the applicant shall provide
evidence to the Township that the Nutrient Management Plan and
other requirements of the Act and accompanying regulations are
being complied with.
XXXII-152
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) New or expanded manure storage facilities or
structures or concentrated feeding areas used for the keeping of
livestock or poultry shall:
1) not be located within the Identified Floodplain
Area;
2) not be located within 100 feet of a perennial
stream, river, Watercourse, spring, lake, pond or reservoir;
3) comply with all State, County and local
requirements, including all P ADEP wellhead protection
provisions;
4) Not be located within 100 feet of an active
public drinking well or an active intake for a public water
supply.
(m) New or expanded manure storage and composting
facilities shall not be located within 200 feet of a property-line. The
outer perimeter of the land area onto which waste is applied from a
lagoon from a swine farm shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any
lot line.
(n) The following additional requirements shall apply to
an Intensive Agricultural use:
1) A site plan shall be submitted to the Township
showing the locations of all features regulated by this
Chapter. The applicant shall submit the plans to the County
Conservation District and the Berks County Cooperative
Extension for review. A soil conservation plan shall be
submitted to the Conservation District. A stormwater
management plan shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer, who shall provide a review to the Board and/ or
Zoning Officer. The applicant shall be responsible to pay for
the costs of such reviews;
2) A written plan shall be submitted, and
complied with, describing methods that will be use .
control odors, insects, rodents, health hazards, surface
pollution and groundwater pollution, including me
avoid and contain accidental spills. Such plan
XXXII-153
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
complied with, as a condition of any Township approval.
Solid and liquid wastes will be disposed of in a manner that
minimizes insect, odor and rodent nuisances. The best
available management practices shall be used to minimize
odor nuisances, however, an applicant shall not be required
to completely eliminate all odors at property lines. Such plan
shall describe methods that will be used to properly dispose
of dead animals;
3) The applicant shall show compliance with
applicable State and Federal environmental regulations;
4) When special exception approval is required,
the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board that:
a. The location of the facility is based upon
a consideration of prevailing wind patterns.
b. A 50 feet wide area of substantial new
and/ or preserved trees and shrubs shall be provided
abutting or across a street from any lot line of an
existing dwelling. This landscaping shall only be
required if all of the following conditions exist: a) the
dwelling existed at the time of adoption of this Section,
b) the dwelling is within 250 feet of the intensive
agriculture operations and c) the intensive agriculture
buildings are visible from the dwelling. The
landscaping plan shall be subject to approval as part of
the special exception, and shall be designed to
substantially filter views between homes and the
agricultural operations. A solid continuous evergreen
screen is not required. A mix of species shall be used,
and straight rows shall be avoided.
c. The driveway, driveway entrance and
adjacent roads will be suitable to accommodate the
amounts and sizes of truck traffic that will be
generated by the use. The Board may require that the
driveway be improved as necessary to control dust. A
turnaround and maneuvering space shall be provided
so that trucks do not need to back out onto or obstruct
a public road.
XXXII-l 54
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
d. Sufficient water supplies are available to
serve the facility so as to not cause insufficient water
supplies for existing and prospective on-site water
users within the vicinity during dry periods, based
upon a study by a professional hydrologist. A test
well shall be used, and permission shall be sought to
examine the impact upon neighboring wells.
e. The Board shall have the authority to
establish a maximum average level of Animal
Equivalent Units per acre, as the Board deems
necessary to protect public health and safety, protect
water quality and moderate nuisances upon the
community.
5) The applicant shall provide a written
comparison of the proposed methods of controlling nuisances
and avoiding pollution to standard guidelines on such
matters published by the State Department of Agriculture,
P ADEP, Pennsylvania State University and industry
associations, including Penn State University's Manure
Management Manual and "Environmental Standards for
Production for Large Pork Producers. II
(5) Alternative Energy System, Principal.
(a) General Requirements for all principal alternative
energy systems (Solar and Wind).
1) Minimum Lot Area. Shall be located on a lot at
least two (2) acres in area.
2) Setback. Any structure associated with a
principal alternative energy system:
(a) shall comply with the setback and yard
requirements for principal structures for the zoning
district within which it is located, and
(b) shall be set back a minimum
hundred and twenty (120) feet from the lot line
existing principally residential use and the bo
of an RS, LDS, MDS, SS or U District.
XXXII-ISS
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
3) Two Principal Uses. Within the Planned
Industry /Business District (PIB), Extractive Indush"y Dish"ict
(E) and Fuel Storage District (FS) a principal alternative
energy system shall be permitted on the same lot as a
nonresidential use. Each use must comply with the specific
provisions listed for that use in this Chapter.
4) Fence. The site of the principal alternative
energy system shall be secured by a locked chain-link fence
and gate with a minimum height of eight (8) feet to limit
accessibility by the general public. The gate shall provide
automatic access to emergency persoID1el.
5) Noise. Principal alternative energy systems
shall comply with the noise control requirements of Section
511.
6) Uniform Construction Code. To the extent
applicable, the principal alternative energy system shall
comply with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code,
Act 45 of 1999 as amended, and the regulations adopted by
the Department of Labor and Industry.
7) Design Safety Certification. The design of the
principal alternative energy system shall conform to
applicable industry standards, including those of the
American National Standards Institute. The Applicant shall
submit certificates of design compliance obtained by the
equipment manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories,
or other similar certifying organization.
8) Electrical Components. All electrical
components of the principal alternative energy system shall
conform to relevant and applicable local, state and national
codes, and relevant and applicable international standards.
9) Power Lines. On-site transmission and power
lines for principal alternative energy systems shall, to the
maximum extent practicable, be placed underground.
10) Signage. Signage on principal alternative
energy systems (other than warning signs) shall be limited to
XXXII-156
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
a single sign located at the main entrance to the facility. Such
sign shall have a total area of no greater than twelve (12)
square feet and shall display only the name of the facility and
the contact phone number. No advertising signs shall be
permitted. All signage shall comply with the provisions of
Part 6 of this Chapter.
11) Warnings. A clearly visible warning sign
concerning voltage must be placed on the protective fence
and/ or at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and
substations. Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags,
reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy
wires located outside of the fenced area and along the guy
wires up to a height of ten feet from the ground.
12) Climb Prevention/Locks. Towers within a
principal alternative energy system shall not be climbable up
to fifteen (15) feet above ground surface. All access doors to
buildings and electrical equipment shall be locked or fenced,
as appropriate, to prevent entry by non-authorized persons.
13) Signal Interference. The principal alternative
energy system shall not cause any disruption or loss of radio,
telephone, television or similar signals.
14) Access. Access drives and driveways shall be
designed in accordance with the requirements of §704.
15) Lighting. Light and glare which is perceptible
beyond the property line shall be minimized in accordance
with §513 of this Chapter.
16) Easements. No alternative energy system shall
be constructed, erected, relocated to or placed within an
existing easement or right-of-way without the written
permission of the person, party or entity to which the
easement or right-of-way benefits.
17) Drainage. No alternative energy system shall
alter, divert or obstruct the flow of stormwater r\lnoff
without the applicant first obtaining the specific ap
such alterations from the Township.
XXXII-I 57
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
18) Parking. A mnumum of one (1) off-street
parking space shall be provided within the fenced area.
19) Liability Insurance. There shall be maintained a
current general liability policy covering bodily injury and
property damage with limits of at least $1 million per
occurrence and $1 million in the aggregate. Certificates shall
be made available to the Township upon request.
20) Abandonment and Removal. If a principal
alternative energy system remains unused for a period of
twelve (12) consecutive months, the owner or operator shall
dismantle and remove the principal alternative energy
system within six (6) months of the expiration of the twelve
(12) month period. A notation describing this requirement
shall appear on the land development plans for the facility.
21) Utility Company Notification. No principal
solar energy system shall be installed until evidence has been
given that the utility company has been informed of the
customer's intent to install an interconnected customerowned
generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
22) Land Development Requirements. Recording
of a land development plan shall be required for any
principal alternative energy system. Such plans shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Township of Spring
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and shall
comply with the following additional provisions:
(a) A narrative describing the proposed
principal alternative energy system, including an
overview of the project; the project location; the
approximate generating capacity of the alternative
energy system; the approximate number,
representative types and height or range of heights of
facilities to be constructed, including their generating
capacity, dimensions and respective manufacturers,
and a description of ancillary facilities.
(b) A site plan showing the planned location
of each facility, property lines, setback lines, access
XXXII-ISS
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
road and turnout locations, substation(s), electrical
cabling from the principal alternative energy system to
the substation(s), ancillary equipment, buildings, and
structures, including permanent meteorological
towers, associated transmission lines, and layout of all
structures within the geographical boundaries of any
applicable setback.
(c) Documents related to abandonment and
removal, including a schedule.
(d) Other relevant studies, reports,
certifications and approvals as may be reasonably
requested by the Township to ensure compliance with
this Chapter.
23) Building Permit Applications. Building permit
applications for principal alternative energy systems shall be
accompanied by line drawings of the electrical components,
as supplied by the manufacturer, in sufficient detail to allow
for a determination that the manner of installation conforms
to the National Electrical Code.
24) Maintenance. The principal alternative energy
system must be properly maintained and be kept free from
all hazards, including but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose
fastenings, being in an unsafe condition or detrimental to
public health, safety or general welfare.
25) Contact Information. The owner and/ or
operator shall maintain a phone number and identify a
person responsible for the public to contact with inquiries
and complaints throughout the life of the project and provide
this number and name to the Township. The owner and/or
operator shall make reasonable efforts to respond to the
public's inquiries and complaints.
(b) Additional Requirements for principal solar energy
systems
1) Glare. All principal solar energy systems
be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or gla I
not project onto nearby properties, sh"uctures or ro· .
XXXII-159
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
The applicant has the burden of proving that any glare
produced does not have adverse impact on neighboring or
adjacent uses either through siting or mitigation.
2) Development on Adjoining Properties. The
application for any permit for an principal solar energy
system shall include an acknowledgement that the issuing of
said permit shall not and does not create in the property
owner, its, his, her or their successors and assigns in title or,
create in the property itself: (a) the right to remain free of
shadows and/ or obstructions to solar energy caused by
development of adjoining or other property or the growth of
any trees or vegetation on such property; or (b) the right to
prohibit the development on or growth of any trees or
vegetation on such property. Such application shall be
signed by the property owner.
3) Height - All principal solar energy systems shall
comply with the building height restrictions for principal
structures of the underlying zoning district.
4) Impervious Coverage. The surface area of the
arrays of a ground mounted principal solar energy system,
regardless of the mounted angle of any solar panels, shall be
considered impervious and calculated in the lot coverage of
the lot on which the system is located.
5) Screening. Any ground mounted principal
solar energy system located on a property which directly
abuts any existing residential use shall provide buffer yards
and planting screens in accordance with the provisions of
Section 405(I). Such planting screen shall comply with the
requirements for a screen of high intensity.
6) Access Corridors. Access corridors between
solar arrays shall be sufficiently wide and of adequate
consh"uction to allow access for emergency management
vehicles.
7) Roof Mounted Systems. For roof mounted
systems, the applicant shall provide evidence in the form of
plans certified by a licensed professional engineer registered
XXXII-160
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the roof IS
capable of holding the load imposed on the structure.
(c)
Systems
Additional Requirements for Principal Wind Energy
1) Setback. In addition to complying with the
setback requirements under Section 324(B) (5) (a)(2), the
foundation and base of any wind energy tower shall be set
back from a property line or right-of-way line a distance
equal to not less than 1.25 times the wind energy system
height.
2) Visual Appearance. Wind Turbines shall be a
non-obtrusive color such as white, off-white or gray. Wind
Turbines shall not be artificially lighted, except to the extent
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other
applicable authority that regulates air safety.
3) Shadow Flicker. The owner shall make
reasonable efforts to minimize shadow flicker to any
occupied building on an adjoining property.
4) Building Permit Applications. Building permit
applications for principal wind energy systems shall be
accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine
structure and stamped engineered drawings of the tower,
base, footings and/ or foundation as provided by the
manufacturer.
5) Height. Principal wind energy towers shall
comply with all Federal Aviation Administration,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation and
applicable airport zoning regulations, including those
pertaining to height.
(6) Ambulatory Surgical Center
(a) An ambulatory surgical center shall be located on
abutting and having direct vehicular access onto an arter·
collector street as defined in this Chapter.
XXXII-161
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) Sewer and Water. All buildings within an ambulatory
surgical center shall be provided with centralized sewer and water
serVIces.
(c) An ambulatory surgical center may include various
accessory uses that are customarily incidental to and in direct
support of the primary health care mission of the ambulatory
surgical center. Such accessory uses shall be located within the
same building as the ambulatory surgical center and could include
the following facilities, which shall be integrated with the hospital
facilities:
Medical and administrative offices.
Medical laboratory.
Interior service and convenience uses.
(d) Services provided shall be those that do not require
overnight stay; however, overnight accommodations may be
provided for patients when unanticipated medical circumstances
would require that the patient remain overnight.
(e) Only the accessory uses listed above or those
associated with a commercial district shall be permitted.
(f) Parking. Where an ambulatory surgical center
contains any of the accessory uses listed above (regardless of
whether each use is listed in Table 7.1 or is an unlisted use), the
number of parking spaces required shall be the sum of the parking
requirements for each separate principal and accessory use.
(g) The facility shall comply with all applicable Federal,
State, County and local regulations and shall be licensed as required
by the State.
(h) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall comply with the requirements of §513 and §703(F).
(7) Amusement Establishments.
(a)
building.
All activities shall take place within a wholly-enclosed
XXXII-162
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) The applicant shall furnish evidence as to how the use
will be controlled so as not to constitute a nuisance due to noise or
loitering outside the establishment.
(c) Buildings shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet
from any exterior lot line bordering an existing nonresidential use
and one hundred (100) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an
existing residential use.
(d) Unless located within the Penn Avenue Commercial
(PAC) District, the lot or property line of any such establishment
shall be no closer than three hundred feet (300') to the lot or
property line of any place of worship, school, playground or other
recreation area, nursery school or day care center, nursery or public
library. Within the Penn Avenue Commercial (PAC) District such
minimum setback shall be reduced one hundred (100) feet.
(e) Amusement machines shall not be operated or played
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(f) The use shall comply with the requirements for
Recreation, Non-municipal Indoor listed in this Section.
(g) All buildings shall be adequately sound proofed so
that sounds generated with the buildings cannot be perceived at the
lot lines.
(8) Animal Hospital.
(a) A minimum lot size of at least one (1) acre shall be
required for those animal hospitals treating small animals (e.g.,
dogs, cats, birds, exotic animals). A minimum lot size of at least
three (3) acres shall be required for those animal hospitals treating
large animals (e.g., cattle, horses, etc.).
(b) All buildings in which animals are housed or provided
care shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all lot lines.
Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds outside
the building will be minimized and not result in a nuisance.
(c) Except when located within the PMU District,
animal runs may be provided for small animals so long a,
barrier at least four (4) feet in height is provided betwe {;~
XXXII-163
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
and a double evergreen screen at least six (6) feet in height is
provided around the runs. No animal runs shall be permitted
within the PMU District. No animal shall be permitted to use the
outdoor runs from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(d) An animal hospital shall not include animal shelters or
kennels.
(e) Animals may be kept overnight on a limited basis,
usually for a single night as a follow-up to specific treatment that
requires such a stay. Animals that are kept overnight must remain
inside the building and may be taken outside for a limited time only
by office staff.
(9) Apartments, Garden. See "Garden Apartments" and "Single-
Family Attached Dwellings" in this Section.
(10) Apartments on the Upper Levels of Buildings
(a) Apartments on the upper level of a building which
contains a nonresidential use shall be permitted only within the
Penn Avenue Mixed Use (PMU) District, the Penn Avenue
Commercial (PAC) District or the Plam1ed Office/Business (POB)
District.
(b) Such apartment shall be permitted only where the
ground or first floor is used solely for a permitted nonresidential
use.
(c) The total floor area utilized for apartments shall not
exceed fifty (50%) percent of the total floor area of the building.
(11) Auditorium.
(a) A twenty (20) foot buffer yard shall separate an offstreet
parking area from an adjoining lot line.
(b) Lighting which is perceptible beyond the property line
shall be minimized in accordance with §513 of this Chapter.
(c) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
XXXII-164
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
nonresidential use or from any existing street right-of-way.
(e) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
residential use.
(12) Automobile Auctions and Storage Yards. Shall comply with
the standards for automobile, motorcycle, boat, recreational vehicle, trailer
or farm equipment sales in this Section.
(13) Automobile, Motorcycle, Boat, Recreational Vehicle, Trailer
or Farm Equipment Sales.
(a) New or used automobile, motorcycle, boat,
recreational vehicle, trailer sales, farm equipment and other similar
activities are subject to the following conditions:
1) Such uses shall meet all of the minimum lot
size, yards and building coverage and height requirements of
the district.
2) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided
on the same lot as the building or activity served. All parking
areas shall be designed in accordance with the requirements
of §703.
3) Access drives and driveways shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of §704.
4) Means of ingress and egress to any public
street, other than a property access street, shall not be located
closer than fifty (50) feet from an intersecting street.
5) No vehicles or items for sale, rent or display
shall be placed within the existing road right-of-way or the
improvement setback required by this Chapter.
6) Any repair facilities associated with auto
motorcycle, boat, recreational vehicle, trailer
equipment sales shall comply with the prov,o
automobile repair station in this Section.
XXXII-165
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(14) Automobile Repair Station.
(a) All repair and paint work shall be performed within
an enclosed building.
(b) All provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, vibration, light or electrical interference to adjacent lots.
(c) Outdoor storage of automobiles and other vehicles
shall not exceed three (3) times the indoor repair area, shall only be
back of the front building setback line and shall be no closer than
twenty (20) feet from side and rear lot lines.
(d) Outdoor storage of automobile parts and junk shall be
prohibited.
(e) Yard areas adjacent to any residential lot shall be
suitable screened.
(f) Except when located within the Penn Avenue
Commercial (PAC) District, main or accessory buildings shall not be
located closer than fifty (50) feet to any residential district or the lot
line of any existing principally residential use.
(g) No more than five (5) vehicles in nondriveable
condition shall be stored within view of a public street or adjacent
lot.
(h) Any vehicle on the premises longer than seven (7)
days shall be deemed a stored vehicle. No vehicle shall be stored in
excess of forty-five (45) days.
(i) No recreational vehicle that is under repair at a repair
station shall be utilized for temporary dwelling purposes during the
time that it is stored at the repair station.
(15) Automobile Service Station.
(a) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel
pumps shall be performed within a building.
XXXII-166
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) Fuel pumps shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from
the existing and any required future street right-of-way or fifty (50)
feet from the street center line, whichever is greater.
(c) All automobile parts and dismantled vehicles are to be
located within an enclosed building.
(d) Full body paint spraying or body and fender work
shall not be permitted.
(e) Automobile service stations may also include the sale
of a limited selection of food and common household items as a
clearly accessory use, provided that the total parking requirements
of Part 7 are complied with.
(f) Outside storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles
at service stations is limited to a maximum seven (7) day period of
time for each such vehicle.
(g) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(16) Automobile Wrecking or Junkyard.
(a) All automobile wrecking establishments or junkyards
shall be enclosed with a fence a minimum of six (6) feet in height
with gates. Gates shall be securely locked except during business
hours when an adult attendant is on the premises. This required
fence shall be nonopaque.
(b) No materials shall be piled higher than the height of
the surrounding fence nor closer than ten (10) feet to said fence.
(c) No area used for the storage of junk, automobiles or
automobile parts shall be located within the required front, side or
rear yard.
(d) A twenty-five (25) foot buffer yard as describ
§405(I) shall completely surround all areas used for the st
junk automobiles or automobile parts. No junk, auto
automobile parts shall be stored within this buffer yard.
XXXII-167
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(e) Burning or melting of any junk, rubbish or refuse is
prohibited.
(f) All junk, automobiles or automobile parts shall be
stored and arranged so as to permit access by firefighting
equipment and to prevent accumulation of stagnant water. Junk or
scrapped automobiles shall not be piled to a height of more than six
(6) feet from the ground.
(g) All gasoline, oil and other fluids shall be drained from
any junked items or scrapped automobiles. Gasoline in an amount
not exceeding ten (10) gallons may be stored aboveground in
approved containers. All other gasoline which is kept on the
premises shall be stored underground and shall be approved by the
Township Department of Public Safety.
(h) No garbage or organic or biodegradable waste shall be
permitted to be stored on any automobile wrecking establishment or
junkyard.
(17) Bed and Breakfast.
(a) The owner of a bed and breakfast establishment shall
be the primary occupant of the establishment.
(b) The operator of a bed and breakfast establishment may
be a family member who is not the owner.
(c) No more than five (5) bed and breakfast units shall be
permitted in any bed and breakfast establishment.
(d) In no case shall meals be served to persons not staying
in a bed and breakfast unit.
(e) Bed and breakfast units shall be located within the
principal building of the bed and breakfast establishment.
(f) All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing zoning
district for single-family dwellings shall apply.
(18) Beverage Distributor.
XXXII-168
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(c) Buildings shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet
from any exterior lot line bordering an existing nonresidential use or
from any existing street right-of-way.
(d) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing residential
use.
(e) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(f) Any sale of alcoholic beverages shall comply with all
applicable State and local regulations and shall be licensed as
required by the State.
(19) Boarding House.
(a) Shall have a maximum of five (5) rental units.
(b) Shall house a maximum of ten (10) persons.
(c) Shall have a minimum lot size of twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet.
(d) At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bath tub
or shower properly connected to an approved water and sewer
system in good working condition shall be supplied for each four
boarders wherever such facilities are shared. All such facilities shall
be located no more than one story removed from any of the persons
sharing such facilities. Such facilities shall be separate and in
addition to facilities used by a resident operator.
(e) The following minimum areas shall be provided J6~
rooms used for sleeping accommodation: Ii'
Persons per Room
1
XXXII-169
Square Feet
90
"/2. c'
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
2
3
4
140
190
240
(f) Every boarding unit shall have safe, unobstructed
means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level.
This shall include at least one window, which is able to be opened
and of sufficient dimensions to allow its use as a means of egress in
each boarding unit.
(g) No sign advertising the availability of a room shall be
displayed so as to be visible from outside the dwelling.
(h) No cooking equipment shall be used in a room that is
used for sleeping accommodation.
(20) Body Art Establishment.
(a) The use shall not occupy one side of a semidetached
structure where the other side contains a residential use.
(b) When located within the PMU District, shall not
operate earlier than 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, nor later than
10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
(21) Camp or Campground.
(a) The use shall comply with the requirements for
Recreation, Nonpublic Outdoor listed in this Section.
(b) A maximum of one permanent dwelling shall occupy
the lot on a year-round basis. No other structure shall be occupied
on the lot for more than 6 months in any calendar year.
(c) The only commercial uses within a campground shall
be a store for sales of routine items to campers, recreational facilities
for campers, maintenance or storage buildings, and other uses that
meet the requirements of the applicable zoning district.
(d) A maximum average of ten (10) recreational vehicle
sites or 15 tent camping sites shall be allowed per acre.
XXXII-170
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(e) A buffer yard which complies with the standards of
§405(I) shall be provided around the entire lot. As an alternative, an
applicant may demonstrate that an area having a width of fifty
(50) feet and consisting of natural vegetation shall be maintained so
that a complete year-round visual screen shall be provided around
the entire lot.
(f) Any structure, outdoor activity area, recreational
vehicle site or tent camping site shall be located a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet from any exterior property line or street right-ofway
line.
(g) All facilities shall be provided with centralized sewer
and water services or shall be provided with on-lot services which
have adequate capacity to serve the facilities and shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with all applicable state and local
regulations.
(h) Recreational vehicles shall not be stored on the
property for a period exceeding one hundred and eighty (180) days
within a calendar year.
(22) Carwash.
(a) Automatic, semi-automatic, and self-service carwashes
are limited to the services of cleaning and waxing vehicles. Such
activities shall be performed only within enclosed buildings, with
the exception of hand drying and finishing operations.
(b) The lot shall be graded such that process water shall
not run off across the lot, onto any adjacent lot, or onto a public
street.
(c) A grease trap shall be provided within the sewer
hook-up designed in accordance with the requirements of the
plumbing inspector.
(d) Automobile storage and waiting spaces shall be
provided at the rate of not less than five (5) spaces for each bay i)f-l'
self-service carwash and not less than ten (10) spaces for "la~
vehicle which can be accommodated within an autom
semi-automatic carwash. All vehicle storage and waiting a
be designed and located so as not to intrude into any re
XXXII-I 71
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
area. Buildings shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any
residential district or any existing residential use.
(e) Where a carwash adjoins a residential property or a
residential district, the hours of operation shall not be earlier than
7:00 a.m., prevailing time, nor later than 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
(f) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Sh"eet Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(23) Casino or Gaming Establishment
(a) The site proposed for
establishment shall be under single
management control.
a caSIno or
ownership or
gaming
unified
(b) The site proposed for a casino or gammg
establishment shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres in area.
(c) A casino or gaming establishment shall be permitted
only within the Plam"led Highway Interchange District when the
Board of Supervisors has granted conditional use approval.
(d) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(e) May contain restaurants, lodging facilities, recreation
facilities, gift shops, personal service facilities and similar type uses,
exclusively for the guests. These uses may be located within
separate buildings or combinations of these uses could be located
within a single building. When located within separate buildings,
these uses are exempt from the requirements of §402(B) regarding
two or more principal buildings on a lot.
(f) A buffer yard complying with the standards of §405(I)
shall be provided wherever the lot directly abuts any existing
residential use.
(g) Lighting which is perceptible beyond the property line
shall be minimized in accordance with §513 of this Chapter.
XXXII-172
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(h) A casino or gaming establishment shall include a
standard restaurant, which shall comply with the regulations for
such restaurants within this Section. A casino or gaming
establishment shall not contain a fast food restaurant or drivethrough
service.
(i) Any lodging facilities, hotel or motel shall comply
with the specific provisions for that use listed in this Chapter.
G) Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in
accordance with Part 7 of this Chapter for each component activity
area of the establishment (i.e., gaming area, hotel or motel,
restaurant, banquet, nightclub, retail, etc.).
(k) A traffic impact study in accordance with the
provisions of Section 409 shall be submitted.
(24) Cemetery.
(a) Shall be on a lot at least two (2) acres in area.
(b) May include mausoleums, chapels, and storage
facilities for maintenance and related equipment.
(c) A buffer yard and planting screen in accordance with
the requirements of Section 405.1 shall be provided when a cemetery
abuts an existing residential use or a residential district.
(25) Civic or Social, Association.
(a) Such indoor uses or activities shall comply with the
requirements for Recreation, Non-Municipal Indoor listed in this
Section.
(b) Such outdoor uses or activities shall comply with the
requirements for Recreation, Non-Municipal Outdoor listed in this
Section.
(26) College or University. l\
(a) Any dormitory shall be located a minimulof:'~e
hundred fifty (150) feet from any lot line of an existing 9t~-ellil~~;~' r
boundary of a residential district. : ~,',,) '~ 1~,
,,1.:/~r' ~
XXXII-173
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) Any dormitory shall have a maximum capacity of one
(1) student per five hundred (500) square feet of lot area and shall be
restricted to full-time students of the college or university and any
faculty advisors.
(c) Only a college or university recognized as such by the
Pennsylvania Department of Education and which has received any
required license or registration applicable to such college or
university from such department shall be permitted hereunder.
(d) The use shall be permitted within the PMU and PAC
Districts only when it does not include any dormitories or on-site
living facilities.
(27) Combination of Permitted Uses
(a) The uses permitted under this category shall not
include a residential use.
(b) Within the PMU and PAC Districts, permitted
nonresidential uses may occupy one or both sides of a semidetached
structure. (See semidetached cormnercial building).
(c) If any of the proposed uses are permitted by either
Special Exception or Condition, approval of the combined uses must
follow the same approval procedures required for the specific use.
(d) Unless a multiple-use building is permitted within the
Zoning District, each principal use shall be located within a separate
building complying with all provisions of this Chapter, including
the provisions of §402(B) regarding two or more principal buildings
on a lot.
(e) Each use must comply with the specific provisions
listed for that use in this Chapter.
(f) Off-street parking requirements of Part 7 shall be met;
including the requirement that the number of off-street parking
spaces provided shall be the sum of the parking requirements for
each separate use, except where the Township has approved a
parking reduction or lower number of parking spaces in a shared
parking facility.
XXXII-174
--,
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(28) Communications Antennae and Associated Communications
Equipment Buildings.
(a) Building mounted communications antennae shall not
be located on any single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or
multifamily dwelling.
(b) Building mounted communication antennae shall be
permitted to exceed the height limitations of the applicable zoning
district by no more than twenty (20) feet.
(c) Omnidirectional or whip communications antennae
shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and seven (7) inches in
diameter.
(d) Directional or panel communications antennae shall
not exceed five (5) feet in height and three (3) feet in width.
(e) Any applicant proposing communications antennae to
be mounted on a building or other structure shall submit evidence
from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer certifying that
the proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of
the building or other structure, considering wind and other loads
associated with the antenna location.
(f) Any applicant proposing communications antennae to
be mounted on a building or other structure shall submit detailed
construction and elevation drawings indicating how the antennae
will be mounted on the structure for review by the Code
Enforcement Officer for compliance with the Township of Spring's
Building Code and other applicable law.
(g) Any applicant proposing communications antennae to
be mounted on a building or other structure shall submit evidence
of agreements and/ or easements necessary to provide access to the
building or structure on which the antennae are to be mounted so
that installation and maintenance of the antennae and
communications equipment building can be accomplished.
(h) Communications antennae shall comply w· th' '
applicable standards established by the Federal Communica· \
XXXII-175
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Commission governing human exposure to elech'omagnetic
radiation.
(i) Communications antennae shall not cause radio
frequency interference with other communications facilities located
in the Township of Spring.
G) All applications shall include a sworn Affidavit from a
licensed Radio Frequency Engineer that the proposed placement of
a Communications Antenna and Associated Communications
Equipment Building, will not interfere with the public safety,
communications, and the usual and customary transmission or
reception of radio, television or other communication services
enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. If
measurable interference does result from the installation and use of
any of the foregoing, the operation of the facility shall cease until the
problem is corrected. If the problem is not correctable, the facility
shall be dismantled and removed from the site.
(k) A communications equipment building shall be
subject to the height and setback requirements of the applicable
zoning district for an accessory structure.
(1) The owner or operator of communications antennae
shall be licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to
operate such antennae.
(m) Communications antennae shall be built, constructed
and erected according to the then-prevailing national standards.
(n) A communications antenna necessary for and clearly
used for emergency communications by a police department, fire
company, emergency medical service, and other similar public
safety organizations is exempt from the requirements of this Section.
(29) Communication Towers and Associated Communications
Equipment Buildings.
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission to operate a
communications tower, if applicable, and communications
antennae.
XXXII-176
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
communications tower and communications antennae proposed to
be mounted thereon comply with all applicable standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission governing
human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
(c) Communications towers shall not cause radio
frequency interference with other communications facilities located
in the Township of Spring.
(d) All applications shall include a sworn Affidavit from a
licensed Radio Frequency Engineer that the proposed placement of
a Communications Tower and Associated Communications
Equipment Building will not interfere with the public safety,
communications, and the usual and customary transmission or
reception of radio, television or other communication services
enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. If
measurable interference does result from the installation and use of
any of the foregoing, the operation of the facility shall cease until the
problem is corrected. If the problem is not correctable, the facility
shall be dismantled and removed from the site.
(e) Communications towers shall comply with all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration, Commonwealth
Bureau of Aviation and applicable airport zoning regulations.
(f) Communications Antennas, Communications
Equipment Buildings, Communications Towers, etc. shall be
co-located where technically possible, i.e., where there is no
substantial impairment to the quality of service. All facility owners
and operators shall cooperate ~ith other existing communications
providers in co-locating Communications Antennas,
Communications Equipment Buildings, Communications Towers,
etc. in the Township, unless there are substantial electronic,
mechanical, structural or regulatory factors which prevent the
sharing of facilities.
(g) Any applicant proposing construction of a new
communications tower shall demonstrate that a good faith effort '3.s
been made to obtain permission to mount the communic
antennae on an existing building, structure or commu
tower. A good faith effort shall require that all owners of p
suitable structures within a one-quarter (1/4) mile ra '
XXXU-177
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
proposed communications tower site be contacted and that one (1)
or more of the following reasons for not selecting such structure
apply:
1) The proposed antennae and related equipment
would exceed the structural capacity of the existing structure
and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable
cost.
2) The proposed antermae and related equipment
would cause radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing structure and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
3) Such existing structures do not have adequate
location, space, access or height to accommodate the
proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
4) Addition of the proposed antennae and related
equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation from
such structure exceeding applicable standards established by
the Federal Communications Commission governing human
exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
5) A commercially reasonable agreement could
not be reached with the owners of such structures.
(h) Access shall be provided to the communications tower
and cormnunications equipment building by means of a public
street or easement to a public street. The easement shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be improved to a
width of at least ten (10) feet with a dust-free, all weather surface for
its entire length.
(i) A communications tower may be located on a lot
occupied by other principal structures and may occupy a leased
parcel meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning
district, however, in no case will the size of the leased parcel be
required to be larger than one (1) acre.
XXXII-178
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
G) Recording of a plat of subdivision or land
development shall be required for a lease parcel on which a
communications tower is proposed to be constructed.
(k) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
height of the communications tower or antennae is the minimum
height necessary to perform its function.
(1) The foundation and base of any communications
tower or antennae shall be set back from a property line (not lease
line) at least one hundred (100) feet.
(m) The foundation and base or any communications
tower or antennae shall be set back a minimum of one thousand
(1,000) feet from any existing dwelling on an adjoining property and
from the district boundary line of any district where such tower or
antennae are not permitted uses.
(n) The base of communications tower or antennae shall
be landscaped to screen the foundation and base and
communications equipment building from abutting properties.
(0) The communications equipment building shall comply
with the required yards and height requirements of the applicable
zoning district for an accessory structure.
(p) The applicant shall submit certification from a
Pennsylvania registered professional engineer that a proposed
communications tower or antennae will be designed and
constructed in accordance with the current "Structural Standards for
Steel Antenna Towers and Antem"la Supporting Structures,"
published by the Electrical Industrial Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association and applicable
requirements of the Township's Building Code. The application
shall include an engineering study demonstrating that in the event
of a collapse of the tower, no part will fall beyond a one hundred
(100) foot radius.
(q) The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications (FCC) license; the name, address and emergency
telephone number for the operator of the communications towe~r:1r
antenna and a certificate of insurance evidencing general lial/"
coverage in the minimum amount of one million ($1,000,000)
XXXII-179
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars per occurrence
covering the communications tower or antenna.
(r) All guy wires associated with guyed communications
towers and antennae shall be clearly marked to be visible at all times
and shall be located within a locked fenced enclosure.
(s) The site of the communications tower or antenna shall
be secured by a locked fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet
to limit accessibility by the general public.
(t) Signs or lights shall be mounted on a communications
tower and antenna as may be required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) or any other governmental agency, including
the Township of Spring Board.
(u) Communications towers and antennae and associated
communications equipment buildings shall be protected and
maintained in accordance with the requirements of the Township's
Building Code.
(v) If a communications tower or antenna remains unused
for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, the owner or
operator shall dismantle and remove the communications tower
within six (6) months of the expiration of the twelve (12) month
period. Further, the owner or operator of the facility shall post
security in a form acceptable to the Township in a sufficient amount
to cover the facility removal and site cleanup prior to the issuance of
any permits to construct or use said facility. The security shall be
utilized by the Township in the event that the owner or operator of
the facility fails to remove the facility within six (6) months of the
aforesaid notice by the Township to remove the facility. Exemption:
a commercial communications tower or antenna necessary for and
clearly used for emergency communications by a police department,
fire company, emergency medical service and other similar public
safety organizations is exempt from the requirements of this Section.
(w) A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be
provided within the fenced area.
XXXII-I 80
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(x) Communications towers shall be designed and
constructed to accommodate the future addition of a minimum of
two (2) additional antennas.
(y) Communications towers and communications
buildings shall be designed and constructed to accommodate the
future addition of municipal communications facilities. At the time
of plan submittal the applicant shall demonstrate compliance with
this requirement and shall describe any necessary steps for future
addition of municipal communications facilities.
(z) A commercial communications tower necessary for
and clearly used for emergency communications by a polke
department, fire company, emergency medical service, and other
similar public safety organizations is exempt from the requirements
of this Section.
(30) Community Center. When not owned by the municipality,
shall comply with the requirements for membership clubs and CIVIC or
social organizations.
(31) Conference Center.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Shall have a lot area of at least ten (10) acres.
(c) May contain restaurants, lodging facilities, recreation
facilities, gift shops, personal service facilities and similar type uses,
exclusively for the guests. These uses may be located within
separate buildings or combinations of these uses could be located
within a single building. When located within separate buildings,
these uses are exempt from the requirements of §402(B) regarding
two or more principal buildings on a lot.
(d) A buffer yard complying with the standards of §405(I)
shall be provided wherever the lot directly abuts any existing
residential use.
(e) Lighting which is perceptible beyond the
shall be minimized in accordance with §513 of this Chapter.
XXXII-I81
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(f) Any restaurant that is associated with a conference
center shall comply with the following regulations:
1) A conference center may contain a standard
restaurant, but not a fast food restaurant. No drive-through
service is permitted.
2) Any waste dumpster shall be screened from
view of adjacent streets, dwellings or residential districts, and
shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet
from the boundary of any residential lot and from any
dwelling or residential district
3) Shall provide landscaping and an all-season
groundcover on all areas not covered by buildings,
sh"uctures, parking areas or access drives.
4) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking
areas shall be clearly marked.
(g) Any lodging facilities, hotel or motel shall comply
with the specific provisions for that use listed in this Chapter.
(32) Construction Company.
(a) A construction company facility that consists only of
offices, and includes no outdoor storage of construction equipment
or materials, and includes no outdoor construction activities, shall
be permitted wherever offices are permitted.
(b) Any outdoor area utilized for the storage of
construction equipment or materials, or where construction
activities take place, shall be secured by a locked fence with a
minimum height of eight (8) feet to limit accessibility by the general
public.
(c) Any outdoor area utilized for the storage of
construction equipment or materials, or where construction
activities take place, which directly abuts any existing residential
use shall provide buffer yards and planting screens in accordance
with the provisions of Section 405(1). Such planting screen shall
comply with the requirements for a screen of high intensity.
XXXII-182
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d) The use shall comply with the noise control
requirements of Section 511.
(e) Light and glare which is perceptible beyond the
property line shall be minimized in accordance with §513 of this
Chapter.
(f) Any area utilized for outdoor construction activities or
the outdoor storage of materials or construction equipment shall be
setback a minimum of one hundred (100') feet from any lot line of
an existing dwelling and from the boundary of a residential district.
(33) Convalescent or Nursing Home.
(a) Such use shall only include uses licensed or approved
by an appropriate State agency as a nursing home or personal care
center and shall clearly primarily involve care of persons who are
aged or physically handicapped or who suffer from mental
retardation.
(b) Sewer and Water. Each facility shall be served by a
public sewer and centralized water system.
(c) All structures shall be located a mlmmum of
seventy-five (75) feet from the property lines of the parcel.
(d) No more than 20% of the total area of the parcel shall
be covered by buildings, unless more stringent requirements are
specified, for the Zoning District within which the facility is located.
(e) No more than 40 % of the total area of the parcel shall
have impervious surface unless more stringent requirements are
specified, for the Zoning District within which the facility is located.
(f) The horizontal distance between groups of buildings
shall be at least:
1) Two (2) times the average height of the two (2)
groups of buildings for front or rear walls facing front or rear
walls.
2) One and one-half (1-1/2) times
height for front or rear walls facing sidewalls.
XXXII-183
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
3) Equal to the height of the highest building for
sidewalls facing sidewalls.
(g) No less than 30 % of the total area of the parcel shall be
permanently set aside for noncommercial common open space
purposes, such as parks, recreation or conservation of natural
features. The common open space areas shall be suitable for the
designated purpose and contain no structure or parking facility
except as related to and incidental to open space uses.
(h) Number of Spaces. Off-street parking, shall be
provided on the premises in accordance with the provisions of
Part 7.
(i) Requirements for off-street parking areas shall be as
follows:
1) All access drives and parking areas shall be at
least fifteen (15) feet from any building on the lot and from
exterior lot lines.
2) All parking areas shall be designed 111
accordance with requirements of §703.
3) Access drives and driveways shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of §704.
4) All parking areas that include twenty (20) or
more spaces shall be separated from view of any public street
and directly abutting single-family detached residence by a
buffer yard as described in §405(I), but with a width of ten
(10) feet. A planting plan specifying type, size and location of
existing and proposed planting material shall be submitted
with the application for approval.
5) No more than fifteen (15) contiguous spaces
shall be permitted in any continuous row without
interruption by landscaping.
6) No more than sixty (60) parking spaces shall be
accommodated in any single parking area.
XXXII-184
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
7) No more than two (2) interconnected parking
areas shall be permitted without having direct access to a
public street or a private street meeting Township street
standards.
8) The total length of any single or combined
parking area shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet. The
length shall be measured from the center line of the public or
private street providing access to the furthest point of the
parking area.
G) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets and not to
cause any annoyance to building occupants or surrounding
property owners or residents.
(k) Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be
visually screened on three (3) sides and contained in airtight,
vermin-proof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
(1) A system of paved walkways a minimum of five (5)
feet in width shall be provided for access between buildings and
common parking areas, open space areas and other community
facilities.
(m) Such use shall have a twenty (20) foot buffer yard
around the perimeter.
(34) Convenience Store.
(a) The use shall be located on a lot abutting a collector or
arterial street.
(b) The lot shall have a mInimUm area of one (1) acre,
although such lot may include other permitted uses.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that any outdoor lighting will be placed such
that it will not create a significant nuisance to existing and futuli
dwellings.
XXXII-I 85
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d) Convenience stores outside of the PMU District may
include fuel pumps, only upon special exception approval by the
Board. Convenience stores within the PMU District may not include
fuel pumps.
(e) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel
pumps shall be performed within a building.
(f) Fuel pumps shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from
any existing and required future street right-of-way or fifty (50) feet
from the street centerline, whichever is greater.
(g) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(h) If a convenience store serves prepared food that is to
be consumed on site, it shall comply with the provisions for a fast
food restaurant included in this Chapter.
(35) Day Care Center. See "Nursery School or Day Care Center."
(36) Drive-In (Outdoor) Theater.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Shall have a lot area of at least ten (10) acres.
(c) A buffer yard which complies with the standards of
§405(I) shall be provided around the entire lot.
(d) Shall provide a driveway at least three hundred (300)
feet in length between the point where admission tickets are sold
and the street right-of-way lines.
(e) The parking/viewing area and all structures within a
drive-in (outdoor) theater shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from all property lines and ultimate street right of way lines.
(f) A drive-in (outdoor) theater may include a concession
stand as an accessory use.
XXXU-186
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(g) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas
shall be clearly marked.
(h) The drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(37) Fast Food Restaurant, Fast Food Restaurant with Drivethrough
Service, Food Stand.
(a) Unless located within the Penn Avenue Overlay
District, any waste dumpster shall be screened from view of
adjacent streets, dwellings or residential districts, and shall be
located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
boundary of any residential lot and from any residential district and
one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any nomesidentiallot.
(b) Within the Penn Avenue Overlay District, wherever
the above dumpster setbacks cannot be met due to lot size or
configuration, the Zoning Officer may accept a reduced setback. In
such cases the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that the
proposed location is the optimal location on the site, and is properly
screened from adjoining properties.
(c) Shall not include the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(d) Shall provide landscaping
groundcover on all areas not covered by
parking areas or access drives.
and an all-season
buildings, structures,
(e) May provide an outdoor menu board if drive-through
service is provided from within the building to customers in their
vehicles. Such menu board shall not be considered a sign as long as
its predominant use is clearly for listing food items and their costs
and it is legible only in close proximity to the drive-through area.
(f) Shall provide a buffer yard, complete with a visual
planting screen, in accordance with §405(I) when adjacent to
residential properties.
(g) Off-street parking shall be provided in accord
with the provisions of Part 7. Required off-street parking sha'
into account any outdoor dining area.
XXXII-187
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(h) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(i) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas
shall be clearly marked.
G) Shall comply with all applicable local, state, and
federal requirements. Where such requirements conflict, the more
resh-ictive requirement shall be met.
(k) May include outdoor dining areas, subject to the
provIsIOns listed for such areas under the standard restaurant
regulations.
(38) Financial Establishment. Any drive-through facilities shall
comply with the Drive-Through Off-Street Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(39) Fire Station. Shall be located on a lot abutting an arterial or
collector street as defined by the official street classification map.
(40) Forestry. See "Timber Harvesting."
(41) Fuel Oil Company.
(a) Shall meet the applicable outdoor storage control
provisions of §509.
(b) Shall be in accordance with applicable Federal, State
and local fire protection standards.
(c) Where such use includes above-ground, large
containers for the bulk storage of petroleum products and
petroleum-based liquids, it shall comply with the applicable
provisions listed in this Section for a fuel storage tank farm.
(42) Fuel Storage Tank Farm or Fuel Products Terminal.
(a) Shall meet the applicable outdoor storage control
provisions of §509.
XXXII-ISS
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) Shan be in accordance with applicable Federal, State
and local fire protection standards.
(c) All tanks must be equipped with overfill protection
devices. These devices must alert the transfer operator that the tank
is 90% full or automatically shut off flow to the tank when the tank
is no more than 95% full. All tanks must be equipped with an
impervious spill containment basin.
(d) Piping on pressure systems shall be equipped with
leak detection devices that will promptly notify the operator of a
problem in the system in one of the following manners:
1) Give an audible and visible warning through
the tank alarm panel.
2) Completely stop the flow of the material to the
dispenser.
(e) Secondary containment shall be provided around and
under all above ground stationary tanks and shall consist of native
soils, clays, bentonites, or artificially constructed material equivalent
to sixty (60) mil high density polyethylene or greater, and having an
impermeability of at least 10-6 centimeters per second. Secondary
containment must be constructed and maintained to meet
impermeability requirements for the operational life of the tank(s).
Secondary containment must be capable of containing 110% of the
volume of the largest tank.
(f) Propane tanks shall be exempt from these standards.
(43) Garden Apartments or Single-Family Attached Dwellings
(Townhouses) .
(a) Uses. Permitted principle uses include dwelling units
permitted in the district. Permitted accessory uses include a rental
office, recreational facilities, off-street parking, indoor vending
machines and laundry or laundromat facilities. These accessory
uses shall be intended only for the use of the residents of the
Ii
development. ,i"
(b) Sewer and Water. Each dwelling unit shall be
by a public sewer and centralized water system. .
XXXII-189
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) All garden apartment or townhouse developments
shall conform to all of the requirements as herein established:
Minimum tract size:
Minimum lot width at building line:
Minimum side yard:
Minimum rear yard:
Minimum front yard:
Distance between buildings:
Parking area setback from lot line or
street ultimate right-of-way
Maximum dwelling units per gross
acre
Garden
Apartment
5 acres
300 feet
75 feet
75 feet
75 feet
See §324(B)
(43) (d) (4)
30 feet
12
Minimum usable open space (not 15 % of the
including driveway areas) devoted tractiv
solely to recreational use and activities:
Maximum height: 2% Stories or
35 feetv
Maximum building coverage: 50%
Maximum impervious coverage: 70%
Single-Family
Attached
Dwellings
3 acres
22 feeti
30 feetii
30 feet
30 feet
See §324(B)
(43) (d) (4)
30 feetiii
10
10% of the
tractiv
2% Stories or
35 feetv
50%
70%
NOTE: i Minimum width of a townhouse dwelling unit is twenty-two (22)
feet per unit.
ii Applies to end building only.
iii Applies only to parking lots and joint parking areas, not to separate
parking areas for individual townhouses.
XXXII-l 90
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
IV Usable open space shall not include front, side and/ or rear yards of
an individual townhouse or garden apartment.
v Whichever is less.
NOTE: See §327(C) of this Chapter for special standards relating to storage sheds
and other accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(d) Notwithstanding the prOVIsIOns of the above
requirements, the following shall also apply:
1) No more than six (6) townhouse dwelling units
shall be attached.
2) The developer should vary architectural
treatments within apartment projects, individual apartments
and between dwelling units in a townhouse development.
Variations may include those of exterior elevation, building
setbacks, provision of balconies, architectural details, pitch of
roof, exterior materials or use of color. Variety and flexibility
in design layout and arrangement of buildings, parking areas,
services, recreation areas, common open space and planting
that fully considers the particular physical characteristics of
the site and natural amenities is highly desired.
3) A system for pedestrian circulation throughout
the development shall be provided. Paved walkways, having
a minimum width of four (4) feet, shall be provided for access
between buildings and common parking areas, open space
and recreation areas and other community facilities.
4) The horizontal distance between grou ps of
townhouses or garden apartments shall be at least:
i) Two (2) times the average height of the
two (2) groups of townhouses and garden apartments
for front or rear walls facing front or rear walls.
ii) One and one-half (1 1/2) times the
average height for front or rear walls facing side walls.
/'
iii) Equal to the height of the hig It)
building for side walls facing side walls.
XXXU-191
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
5) The minimum width of any side yard abutting a
street, driveway or parking area should not be less than thirty
(30) feet.
6) Parking may be provided on the lot, as carports,
as an integral part of the townhouse or a joint parking facility
for a group of townhouses with such deed restrictions as are
necessary to determine ownership and maintenance of
common parking facilities and methods of assigning charges
for maintaining snow removal and repairs.
7) Usable open space devoted to recreational use
as herein required shall be designed for use by tenants or
owners of the development and shall be improved and
equipped by the developer in accordance with plans
submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission.
8) Garden apartment buildings shall not exceed
one hundred sixty (160) feet in length.
9) In the event a development is designed to
contain more than one (1) permitted use, the submitted plan
shall indicate an area designed for each such use and shall
designate all requirements of this Chapter for each area.
(e) Number of Spaces. Off-street parking, whether garage
or muot, shall be provided on the premises at the rate of two (2)
spaces for each dwelling unit.
(f) Requirements for off-street parking areas shall be as
follows:
1) All access drives and parking areas shall be at
least fifteen (15) feet from any building on the lot and from
exterior lot lines.
2) All parking areas shall be designed 111
accordance with requirements of §703.
3) Access drives and driveways shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of §704.
XXXII-192
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
4) All parking areas that include twenty (20) or
more spaces shall be separated from view of any public street
and directly abutting single-family detached residence by a
buffer yard as described in §405(I), but with a width of ten
(10) feet. A planting plan specifying type, size and location of
existing and proposed planting material shall be submitted
with the application for approval.
5) No more than fifteen (15) contiguous spaces
shall be permitted in any continuous row without
interruption by landscaping.
6) No more than sixty (60) parking spaces shall be
accommodated in any single parking area.
7) No more than two (2) interconnected parking
areas shall be permitted without having direct access to a
public street or a private sh"eet meeting Township street
standards.
8) The total length of any single or combined
parking area shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet. The
length shall be measured from the center line of the public or
private street providing access to the furthest point of the
parking area.
9) In the case of townhouses, no more than fifty
percent (50%) of the required front yard shall be used for
parking.
(g) The developer shall install a storm runoff and
drainage system in accordance with acceptable engineering
practices so as to adequately drain the project site, to adequately
dispose of all runoff and drainage away from the project site, at a
rate no greater than existed prior to development. Plans for such
drainage system shall be submitted and shall be subject to approval
by the Township Engineer of the Township.
(h) All provisions of existing Township ordinances and
subdivision and land development ordinances regarding
drainage shall be complied with.
XXXII-193
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(i) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public sh"eets and not to
cause any annoyance to building occupants or surrounding
property owners or residents. All lighting shall comply with the
provisions of §513.
G) Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be
visually screened on three (3) sides and contained in airtight,
vermin-proof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
(k) Each multiple dwelling unit shall be provided with a
minimum of two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet of lockable storage
area in an enclosed room which is not part of the dwelling unit.
(1) No area for such facilities shall exceed more than onehalf
(1/2) the floor area of any single floor.
(m) Swimming Pool.
1) No structure shall be permitted without a
filtering system utilizing chlorinated water.
2) No sh"ucture shall be permitted unless a
permanent continuous fence which is four (4) feet minimum
in height surrounds the facilities.
3) No structure shall be within fifty (50) feet of any
property line or easement.
4) No structure shall be constructed between the
building setback line and the street line.
5) No structure shall be permitted unless
surrounded by a paved surface extending a minimum of five
(5) feet from the water line.
6) Lighting shall not create a glare on any
surrounding properties.
7) No persons other than residents and their
guests shall be permitted to use the facility.
XXXII-194
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
8) One (1) parking space for each three (3)
dwelling units shall be provided in addition to the residential
requirements.
(n) Outdoor Recreation.
1) Such facilities shall be limited to tennis courts,
which are completely surrounded by a fence ten (10) feet in
height, barbecue or other cookout facilities constructed of
permanent material, yards which are completely landscaped,
garden areas for tenant use, playlots, provided that facilities
located in this area are surrounded by fencing at least four (4)
feet in height, with benches for adults; facilities for such
games as shuffleboard or basketball, provided that a paved
surface is provided and that such facilities are located at least
fifty (50) feet from any building.
2) No outdoor recreational facilities, except yards
and garden areas shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any
lot line.
3) No outdoor facilities, except yards, shall be
located between the building setback line and the street line.
(0) No outdoor clotheslines shall be located in any
required side yard, rear yard or between the building setback line
and the street line with permanent metal poles for support.
(p) No activities shall be permitted which create a public
nuisance and/ or interfere with the use of adjacent land.
(q) No structure or building shall be permitted specifically
designed for pets.
(r) Garden apartment and townhouse developments shall
be deemed to be a subdivision governed by the provisions and
procedures of the Township's Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) and the procedures established in said
ordinance for approval shall be followed.
(44) Golf Course, Chip and Putt Course.
XXXII-195
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) The use shall comply with the requirements for
Recreation, Nonpublic Outdoor listed in this Section.
(b) A golf course or chip and putt course may include a
standard restaurant, food stand or membership clubhouse as a
clearly accessory use.
(c) Any golf course or chip and putt course shall have a
minimum lot area of ten (10) acres and a maximum impervious
coverage of ten percent (10%).
(d) No fairway or green shall be located closer than fifty
(50) feet to the property line of an existing dwelling or to the existing
right-of-way line of any public street. The design of the course shall
be such that no participant is encouraged to drive a golf ball over
any adjoining property, building, parking lot, street, access drive or
driveway.
(e) Golf courses and chip and putt courses may include
the following accessory uses, provided such uses are located so as to
provide incidental service to the golf course employees and users:
1) Snack bar.
2) Locker and rest rooms,
3) Pro shop and administrative offices,
4) Golf cart and maintenance equipment storage
and service facilities,
5) Driving range and miniature golf course.
6) Picnic pavilions.
(f) The following uses are permitted within a golf course
when a special exception is granted by the Board. The appropriate
requirements for such uses listed under this section shall apply.:
1) Banquet facilities.
2) Restaurant.
3) Tavern.
(g) The design of the course shall mInImIZe cart path
crossing of streets, access drives and driveways. The design shall
both discourage random crossings and require use of the cart path
crossings of streets, access drives and driveways. Easily identifiable
XXXII-196
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
cart paths, with adequate sight distance at all street crossings, shall
be provided for such crossings.
(h) All outdoor storage of maintenance equipment and/ or
golf carts shall be setback at least one hundred (100) feet and shall
be screened from adjoining residential properties and streets.
(45) Greenhouse/Nursery (Retail).
(a) Such use may not include sale of items not primarily
grown on the premises.
(b) No off-road vehicles used for such work shall be
parked within the required minimum front yard.
(46) Group Home.
(a) There shall be no more than six (6) residents,
except where the Board has granted a special exception
permitting a modification to the total number of residents in
accordance with the provisions of Section 805(B)(5) of this
Chapter.
(b) There shall be twenty-four (24) hour resident
supervision by people qualified by training and experience in
the field for which the group home is intended.
(c) The use shall be licensed under the applicable
State program and shall comply with all applicable State
rules and regulations.
(d) Any medical or counseling services provided
shall be done so only for residents of the group home.
(e) The lot upon which a group home is located
shall be at least three hundred (300) feet from the lot upon
which another group home is located; (such distance shall be
measured in a horizontal straight line from the nearest point
on one (1) lot to the nearest point on the other lot.
(f) Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Part 7.
(g) There shall be no alteration to the outside of
XXXII-I97
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
structure that would alter the single-family character of the
dwelling, be inconsistent with the basic architecture of the
dwelling, or become incompatible with surrounding
dwellings.
(h) No sign for the group home shall be displayed.
(i) No more than two (2) live-in supervisors shall
reside in a group home.
G) The applicant shall provide documentation that
the residents of the group home shall receive the physical
safety and emotional support that may be required, In
accordance with prevailing governmental regulations.
(k) Immediate contact with a supervisor or
manager of the facility shall be available to the Township,
twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
(1) An emergency management plan must be
developed and submitted to the Township Fire Marshal for
review and approval.
(m) All group homes shall be subject to an annual
inspection by the Township Codes Department and the
Township Fire Marshal.
(n) The applicant shall provide the Township with
copies of all applicable state and/ or federal licenses and
approvals./I
(47) Gun Club/Outdoor Target Range.
(a) These provisions shall apply to gun clubs, outdoor
target ranges, archery ranges, sport or skeet shooting areas.
(b) Shall have a lot area of at least ten (10) acres.
(c) All outdoor target ranges shall have a barrier behind
the target area which is of sufficient height and thickness to
adequately provide for the public safety. Such barrier shall prevent
the ball, bullet or arrow from traveling more than 15 yards beyond
the target.
XXXII-198
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d) The use shall comply with all applicable Federal, State
and local regulations.
(e) No such use shall be located within five hundred (500)
feet of any property boundary line.
(f) Such use shall not operate between one (1) hour before
dusk and 8:00 a.m.
(48) Heavy Industrial Use
(a) Shall be in accordance with applicable Federal, State and
local fire protection standards.
(b) The minimum size of a lot containing such use shall be
three (3) acres.
(c) Any new or expanded structure associated with a
heavy industrial use shall be located a minimum of:
1) two hundred (200) feet from any lot line of an
existing dwelling and from the boundary of a residential
district;
2)
lot line.
one hundred (100) feet from any other exterior
(d) Modification to Setbacks. As a special exception, the
Board may reduce the above setback requirement for heavy
industrial uses if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board
that such reduction is necessary to allow a reasonable use of a
building regulated by this Section.
(e) New or expanded heavy industrial operations shall:
1) not be located within the Identified
Floodplain Area;
2) not be located within 100 feet of a perem1ial
stream, river, watercourse, spring, lake, pond or reservoir;
3) comply with all State, County and local
requirements, including all P ADEP wellhead protection
prOVISIOns;
XXXII-199
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
4) Not be located within 100 feet of an active
public drinking well or an active intake for a public water
supply.
(f) Any outdoor area utilized for the storage of equipment or
materials, or where industrial activities take place, shall be secured by a
locked fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet to limit accessibility
by the general public. The gate shall provide automatic access to
emergency personnel.
(g) Heavy industrial uses shall comply with the nOIse
control requirements of Section 5U.
(h) Anyon-site transmission and power lines for heavy
industrial uses shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be placed
underground.
(i) Heavy industrial uses shall not cause any disruption
or loss of radio, telephone, television or similar signals.
G) Light and glare which is perceptible beyond the
property line shall be minimized in accordance with §513 of this
Chapter.
(k) Any component of the heavy indush<ial use for which
there are specific additional requirements within this section shall
also comply with those additional requirements.
(1) Any heavy industrial use located on a property which
directly abuts any existing residential use, or residential district,
shall provide buffer yards and planting screens in accordance with
the provisions of Section 405(I). Such planting screen shall comply
with the requirements for a screen of high intensity.
(m) All heavy industrial uses shall be provided with
centralized sewer and water services.
(n) All heavy industrial uses shall meet the applicable
outdoor storage control provisions of §509. No outdoor storage of
trash, garbage, refuse, junk, explosive or flammable materials,
hazardous substances, animals, animal carcasses or skins or similar
items shall be permitted.
XXXII-200
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(0) Where such use includes above-ground, large
containers for the bulk storage of peh"oleum products and
petroleum-based liquids, it shall comply with the applicable
provisions listed in this Section for a petroleum tank farm.
(p) Truck parking and loading shall meet the minimum
standards of this Part and in unique situations shall be provided
according to maximum standards of the industry for the specific
activity to be conducted.
(q) Truck or rail access and operations shall not conflict
with the convenience and safety of automobile h"affic and parking.
(r) A heavy industrial use may include various accessory
uses that are customarily incidental to and in direct support of the
principal use. Such accessory uses could include the following
facilities:
1) Business offices.
2) Staff cafeteria or lunch room.
3) Lockers and restrooms.
4) Interior service and convenience uses.
5) Warehouse and storage structures.
6) Any other incidental use that is
customarily accessory to a heavy industrial use.
(s) Any person who proposes a heavy industrial use shall
submit land development plans to the Planning Commission and
the governing body complying with the provisions of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII)
and including the following information:
1) A map of the lot indicating the
placement of structures and the locations of areas
which are to be utilized in the operation, prepared by a
licensed surveyor or engineer.
2) A description of the types of operations
which will be conducted and the procedures which
will be utilized.
XXXII-201
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
3) A complete compliance history for any
and all similar facilities owned and/ or operated by the
applicant.
4) Any and all information provided to
state or federal agencies regarding the proposed site
and/ or facility.
5) A sketch showing the landscape plan
indicating screening provision.
(49) Heliport.
(a) Such use shall be located a minimum of five hundred
(500) feet from an existing dwelling or a residential zoning district
other than land that will (i) be retained in ownership by the owner
of the heliport, or (ii) will be permanently deed resh<icted against
residential use.
(b) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Board that the usual approaches, takeoff and flight patterns to and
from the heliport and the maximum number of flights to and from
such heliport will not create a significant noise or safety hazard for
current or future residents.
(c) The Board may place reasonable conditions, to ensure
compatibility with neighboring uses, on the maximum permitted
weights of helicopters, number of flights per week, operating hours
and other operations, other than matters preempted by the State and
Federal government.
(d) A heliport, or similar facilities for the transport of
patients, is a permitted accessory use at a hospital or medical center,
and does not require special exception approval under such
circumstances.
(50) Holiday Tree Sales.
(a) Holiday Tree Sales may include the sale of other
similar evergreen or live items such as greens and wreaths, or
accessories such as bows, tree bags and tree stands, but shall not
include the sale of miscellaneous retail merchandise.
XXXII-202
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) There shall be one (1) holiday tree sales event per year
per lot.
(c) Only one (1) holiday tree sales event may take place on
a lot at any given time.
(d) Holiday Tree Sales events must obtain a Temporary
Sales Permit. Permit will be valid between the dates of
November 15 and December 31.
(e) All holiday trees, temporary structures, signage, and
accessories to the holiday tree sale must be removed from the
property by December 31.
(f) No more than ten (10) percent of the required parking
area for the existing uses on the lot may be used for the holiday tree
sales area.
(g) Holiday Tree Sales hours of operation shall be limited
to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(h) Holiday Tree Sales areas are limited to designated
parking areas on the lot. In the event that the lot contains no
existing parking facilities, a designated area containing a minimum
of six (6) off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of Part 7 of this Chapter.
(i) Holiday Tree Sales shall not disrupt the daily
operations of the principal business located on the lot.
G) No holiday tree sales shall be located within any
designated clear sight triangle.
(k) No holiday tree sales shall adversely impact the
health, safety, and welfare of the Township.
(1) Signage must comply with the proVIsIons of this
Chapter. No signage may be displayed until a Temporary Sales
Permit is obtained.
(m) All holiday tree sales shall comply
building, fire, and electrical codes of the Township.
XXXII-203
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(51) Hospital or Medical Center.
(a) A hospital or medical center shall have a minimum
tract size of ten (10) acres. Each lot within a hospital or medical
center development shall comply with the minimum lot area and
width requirements of the zoning district within which it is located.
(b) A hospital or medical center shall be located on a lot
abutting and having direct vehicular access onto an arterial or
collector street as defined in this Chapter.
(c) A minimum of two (2) access drives complying with
the width requirements of §704 shall be provided from such arterial
or collector street. However, the hospital or medical center shall
make the maximum use possible of interior streets or access drives,
as opposed to numerous driveways entering onto existing public
streets.
(d) No hospital in a residential district may involve
primarily the treatment of the criminally insane.
(e) A hospital or medical center may include various
accessory uses that are customarily incidental to and in direct
support of the primary health care mission of the hospital or
medical center. Such accessory uses could include the following
facilities, which shall be integrated with the hospital facilities:
1) Medical and administrative offices.
2) Medical laboratory or blood donor station.
3) Patient hostel.
4) Hospital staff dormitory.
5) Ambulance service.
6) Methadone clinics and drug rehabilitation
facilities.
7) Pharmacy.
8) Gift shop.
9) Teaching facilities.
10) Research facilities.
11) Interior service and convenience uses.
12) Heliport, or similar facilities for accommodating
aerial transport of patients.
XXXII-204
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(f) The principal and accessory uses comprIsmg the
hospital or medical center may be located in a single building or
may consist of several buildings located on one (1) or more lots. In
the case of multiple buildings on a single lot, the provisions of
§402(B) regarding two or more principal buildings on a lot shall not
apply.
(g) Regardless of the number of buildings on a lot, all
front, rear and side yard building setbacks for the zoning district
within which it is located shall apply.
(h) The hospital or medical center shall be in single
ownership and shall consist of harmonious groupings of buildings,
service and parking areas, circulation and open space.
(i) Only the accessory uses listed above or those
associated with a commercial district shall be permitted.
G) Off-Street Parking Setback. Parking shall be permitted
in the areas required for front, side and rear yard setbacks up to a
point of twenty-five (25) feet from any front, side or rear lot line of
the hospital or medical center. This setback shall not be applied
along internal lot lines of the hospital or medical center for common
parking areas serving buildings on multiple lots. All parking areas
shall be suitably paved with permanent hard-surface coverings.
(k) Parking. Where a hospital or medical center contains
any of the accessory uses listed above (regardless of whether each
use is listed in Table 7.1 or is an unlisted use), the number of
parking spaces required shall be the sum of the parking
requirements for each separate principal and accessory use.
(1) Sewer and Water. All buildings within a hospital or
medical center shall be provided with centralized sewer and water
serVIces.
(m) The facility shall comply with all applicable Federal,
State, County and local regulations and shall be licensed as required
by the State.
(n) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parkin
shall comply with the requirements of §513 and §703(F).
XXXII-205
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(0) Any patient hostel or hospital staff dormitory shall
comply with the following requirements:
1) Permitted accessory uses include off-street
parking, indoor vending machines and laundry facilities.
These accessory uses shall be intended only for use by the
residents of the patient hostel or the hospital staff dormitory.
2) Any hospital staff dormitory shall be located a
minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any lot line of
an existing dwelling or boundary of a residential district.
3) Any hospital staff dormitory shall have a
maximum capacity of one (1) resident per five hundred (500)
square feet of lot area and shall be restricted to hospital staff
melubers.
(52) Hotel/Motel:
(a) A minimum lot area of 1 acre shall be required.
(b) A restaurant may be permitted as an accessory use to a
hotel or motel. In such cases, the appropriate requirements listed
under Section 324(B) for this use shall apply.
(53) Indoor Sports Facility.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b)
building.
All activities shall take place within a wholly-enclosed
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the
combination of elements comprising the non-municipal indoor
recreation.
(d) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
residential use.
(54) Kennel.
XXXII-206
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) All kennels shall provide the mInImUm area for
kennels required by State regulations.
(b) All buildings in which animals are housed and all runs
shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from all lot lines.
(c) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that
sounds generated within the buildings cannot be perceived at the lot
lines.
(d) Outdoor runs may be provided so long as a double
evergreen screen at least six (6) feet in height is provided around the
runs. No animal shall be permitted to use the outdoor runs from
8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(e) A kennel shall serve a maximum of fifty (50) animals
and shall not include breeding of animals.
(55) Laundry /Laundromat.
(a) Centralized sewage disposal facilities and centralized
water supply facilities shall be required.
(b) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(56) Light Industrial Use
(a) Shall be in accordance with applicable Federal, State <;lnd
local fire protection standards.
(b) Any new or expanded structure associated with a light
industrial use shall be located a minimum of:
1) one hundred (100) feet from any lot line of an
existing dwelling and from the boundary of a residential
district;
2) fifty (50) feet from any other exterior lot line.
(c) Modification to Setbacks. As a special exceptioJi
Board may reduce the above setback requirement for light in~I:'~;,
< "/ ~-t' -
XXXII-207
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
uses if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board that such
reduction is necessary to allow a reasonable use of a building
regulated by this Section.
(d) Light industrial uses shall comply with the nOIse
control requirements of Section 511.
(e) Light and glare which is perceptible beyond the
property line shall be minimized in accordance with §513 of this
Chapter.
(f) Any component of the light industrial use for which
there are specific additional requirements within this section shall
also comply with those additional requirements.
(g) Any light industrial use located on a property which
directly abuts any existing residential use, or residential district,
shall provide buffer yards and planting screens in accordance with
the provisions of Section 405(I). Such planting screen shall comply
with the requirements for a screen of high intensity.
(h) All light industrial uses shall meet the applicable
outdoor storage control provisions of §509. No outdoor storage of
trash, garbage, refuse, junk, explosive or flammable materials,
hazardous substances, animals, animal carcasses or skins or similar
items shall be permitted.
(57) Lumber Yard. Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial or
collector street (as defined by the official street classification map).
(58) Medical Office or Medical Clinic
(a) Any use conforming to the definition of a medical
office or medical clinic shall comply with the minimum lot area and
width requirements of the zoning dish"ict within which it is located.
(b) Services provided shall be those that do not require
overnight stay.
(c) The use may include administrative offices, waiting
rooms, treatment rooms, analysis and testing rooms, pharmacies
and dispensaries directly associated with the use.
XXXII-208
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d) The facility shall comply with all applicable Federat
State, County and local regulations and shall be licensed as required
by the State.
(e) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas
shall comply with the requirements of §513 and §703(F).
(59) Membership Club and Civic or Social Organizations.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Within dish-icts where outdoor membership clubs,
civic or social organizations are not permitted uses, all activities
shall take place within a wholly-enclosed building.
(c) Such indoor uses or activities shall comply with the
requirements for Recreation, Non-Municipal Indoor listed in this
Section.
(d) Such outdoor uses or activities shall comply with the
requirements for Recreation, Non-Municipal Outdoor listed in this
Section.
(e) Any associated restaurant or tavern uses shall
comply with the provisions for those uses included in this
Section.
(f) The use shall be permitted within the RHA and
PBR Districts only when it does not include any restaurant or
tavern facilities.
(g) If such use is owned by the Township, it shall be
permitted wherever a Township-owned use is permitted.
(60) Mineral Extraction.
(a) Sandpits, gravelpits, removal of topsoil and the
excavation, extraction or removal of any natural resource from the
land or ground for any purpose, are permitted subject to/ the
following conditions.
XXXII-209
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) Any person who desires to operate a use described
above shall submit land development plans to the Planning
Corrunission and the governing body complying with the provisions
of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(Chapter XXVII) and including the following information:
1) A map of the lot indicating the open area which
is to be used and the setback distance, prepared by a licensed
surveyor or engineer.
2) A description of the specific types of material
the applicant proposes to extract from the site, the types of
operations which will be conducted and the procedures
which will be utilized.
3) A statement of qualifications to operate a
quarry, mining or excavation facility.
4) A complete compliance history for any and all
similar facilities owned and/ or operated by the applicant.
5) Any and all information provided to the
P ADEP or the U.s. EPA regarding the proposed site and/ or
facility.
6) A sketch showing the landscape plan indicating
screening provision.
7) Preliminary specifications and architectural
drawings for all structures and appurtenances to be located
on the site.
8) A photograph of the open area to be used.
9) A site plan for rehabilitation, showing both
existing and proposed final contours, shall be submitted and
approved by the governing body. After any such operations,
the site shall be made reusable for a use permitted in the
Zoning District. Where topsoil is removed, sufficient arable
soil shall be set aside for retention on the premises and shall
be respread over the premises after the operation is
terminated. Except where lakes are created and retained, the
area shall be brought to final grade by a layer of earth
XXXII-210
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(capable of supporting vegetation) of at least two (2) feet or to
original thickness, whichever is less. Fill shall be a suitable
material approved by the governing body.
(c) All plans shall be submitted to and approved by the
Berks County Conservation District.
(d) The proposed operations shall comply with the
following provisions:
1) The operations shall not adversely affect soil
fertility, drainage and lateral support of abutting land or
other properties, nor shall it contribute to soil erosion.
2) Quarry, mining, excavation and/ or mineral
extraction operations shall not be permitted within any
wetlands or within one hundred (100') feet of any body of
surface water.
3) No quarrying, mining or excavation operations,
including drilling and blasting, shall occur on Sunday and
shall not be conducted between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
during the remainder of the week.
4) For any open excavation that would have a
depth greater than ten (10) feet and any slopes greater than
thirty percent (30%), a substantial fence shall be provided and
approved by the Zoning Officer as adequate. Such a fence
shall include gates at appropriate locations for emergency
access.
5) Grading, backfilling and replacement of all
overburden material shall be done in a manner that will
restore the site to the same or more suitable condition and
usable grade as existed on the site prior to the mineral
extraction operations.
6) The sidewalls of any quarrying, mmmg or
excavation operation that are not completely backfilled shall
have a slope no greater than one (1) foot of vertical
for each two (2) feet of horizontal distance.
XXXII-2II
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
7) Dust and debris from the operation shall not be
permitted to accumulate within any public right-of-way.
8) All operations shall be separated from any
abutting residential uses by a buffer yard as described in
§405.
9) All operations shall be set back a minimum of
fifty (50) feet from all exterior lot lines and one hundred (100)
feet from an existing residential use.
10) All operations shall be reasonably screened
from view of public expressway, arterial or collector streets.
11) Any portion of an access road that is located
within one hundred (100) feet of the lot line of a residential
use or a primarily residential district shall be provided with a
dustless surface.
12) Access roads shall connect to collector or
arterial roads while making every reasonable effort to avoid
travel by heavy trucks through residential areas.
13) At all stages of operations, proper drainage
shall be provided to prevent the collection and stagnation of
water and to prevent harmful effects upon surrounding
properties.
(61) Miniature Golf Course (Outdoor)
(a) The proposed use shall not adversely affect the
adjoining properties.
(b) All area and bulk regulations of the applicable
zoning district shall apply.
(c) The use shall not operate between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(d) A miniature golf course may include a standard
restaurant, food stand or membership clubhouse as a clearly
accessory use.
XXXII-212
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(e) The applicant shall furnish evidence as to how
the use will be controlled so as not to constitute a nuisance
due to noise or loitering outside the establishment.
(f) Buildings shall be located a minimum of fifty
(50) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
nonresidential use or from any existing street right-of-way.
(g) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an
existing residential use.
(62) Mobile Home Park.
(a) Such use shall have a minimum tract size of twenty
(20) acres and a maximum overall density of no more than five (5)
mobile homes per acre.
(b) Such use shall have centralized sewer and water.
(c) Such use shall have a twenty (20) foot buffer yard
around the perimeter of the site, as described in §405(I).
(d) All applicable provisions of the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) shall be met.
(63) Mobile / Manufactured Home.
(a) Shall be constructed in accordance with the Safety and
Construction Standards of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
(b) Shall have a site graded to provide a level, stable and
well-drained area.
(c) Shall have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms
removed.
(d) Shall be placed on a permanent
described by the following:
foundation as
\
/1 \
/ \
/, \
/ j\,-'
. .1) The founda~ion system shall ~onsist of }t~,,~~q~~1>
mch dIameter concrete pIers, concrete footmg perp'~~' ',', ve;
1//:;,:;,.77 '
/ f;~:
XXXII-213
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
to the main longitudinal frame or equivalent and shall be
installed from ground level to below the frost line (thirty-six
(36) inch minimum). This foundation system shall be placed
on eight (8) feet centers along each of the two (2) main
longitudinal frames for each section of the home with no
more than three (3) feet overhang at each end of the section.
2) One-half (1/2) inch diameter by twelve (12)
inch long eyebolts shall be cast in place at each corner and at
two (2) midpoints in the concrete piers, concrete footing or
equivalent. Concrete blocks shall be used to support the
home on the foundation system and wood shims may be
used for final leveling. The concrete support blocks shall not
be wider than the support foundation.
3) The mobile/manufactured home shall be
securely anchored or tied down with cable and thin buckles
or equivalent connecting the frame to the case in place
eyebolts on at least four (4) corners and two (2) midpoints.
The tiedown shall also be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations furnished with each home.
4) Homes shall not be placed more than four (4)
feet above the supporting ground area.
(e) Shall be enclosed from the bottom of the home to the
ground or stand using industry-approved skirting material
compatible with the home.
(f) The Board may require such additional fencing,
earthen berming and screening as is reasonable.
(64) Multiple Use Building
(a) Unless otherwise permitted in this Chapter, uses
permitted under this category shall be only those that are either
permitted by right or by condition with the Zoning District where
this Chapter permits a multiple-use building.
(b) The minimum lot area and width for a multiple-use
building shall comply with the minimum requirements for a nonresidential
building within that Zoning District. In the event that a
larger lot area or width is required under §324(B) for any of the
XXXII-214
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
specific uses within a multiple-use building, the greater requirement
shall apply. In addition, five thousand (5,000) square feet of
additional lot area shall be provided for each specific use beyond the
first use.
(c) If any of the proposed uses are permitted by
Condition, approval of the combined uses must follow the same
approval procedure required for the specific use.
(d) Each use must comply with the specific provision for
that use list in this Chapter.
(e) In addition to the uses permitted by right, by special
exception or by condition, a multiple use building within the Penn
Avenue Mixed Use Dish'ict, the Penn Avenue Commercial District
or the Planned Office/Business District may include residential
dwelling units on the upper levels of buildings, but only where the
total floor area of such dwellings does not exceed fifty (50%)
percent of the gross floor area of the total building.
(f) Except for within the Penn Avenue Mixed Use District,
the Penn Avenue Commercial District or the Planned
Office/Business District, where a residential use is proposed within
a multiple use building, only one dwelling unit shall be permitted
per building.
(g) Each separate use within a multiple use building shall
be required to apply for separate zoning and occupancy permits,
through the appropriate required processes.
(h) Off-street parking requirements of Part 7 shall be met;
including the requirement that the number of parking spaces
required shall be the sum of the parking requirements for each
separate use, except where the Township has approved a parking
reduction or a lower number of parking spaces in a shared parking
facility.
(65) Nursery School or Day Care Center.
(a) The nursery school or day care center shall be locat~d
and operated in a manner that reduces or eliminates potef~
hazards to the children being cared for at the facility. It shall J
XXXII-2IS
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
responsibility of the owner to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Township, full compliance with this provision.
(b) No outdoor activity area shall be closer than thirty (30)
feet to any lot line.
(c) There shall be a minimum of thirty (30) square feet of
floor space and two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet of air space per
child in the indoor activity area, exclusive of offices, sanitary
facilities, storage spaces and other auxiliary rooms.
(d) There shall be a minimum of sixty-five (65) square feet
of space per child in the outdoor activity area, which area shall be
free of hazards and properly fenced.
(e) Off-Street Parking Spaces. Parking shall comply with
the requirements of Part 7 of this Chapter.
(f) The use shall comply with any applicable County,
State and Federal regulations.
(g) There shall be a one (1) acre minimum lot size.
(h) There shall be an adequate drop-off area with a
minimum of two (2) spaces and located so that vehicles transporting
children shall not back up onto a public street.
(66) Off-Street Parking not Located on the Same Lot as the
Permitted Use.
(a) These provisions shall apply to parking lots that
provide off-street parking for a single use, or for common
parking lots that provide off-street parking for more than
one building, property or use.
(b) Within the Urban District, this use shall be
permitted only in the area between the boundary of the PMU
District and Noble Street. This shall include the area which is
located to the west of Cecil Avenue and to the south of a
westerly extension of the Noble Street centerline.
(c) A lot containing such a parking lot shall be
XXXII-216
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
exempt from the minimum lot area and width requirements
for the district within which it is located, unless it contains
any building other than an attendant's shelter.
(d) If used to comply with off-street parking
requirements for a permitted principal use on a different lot,
shall be located within 300 feet of building containing the
principal use being served.
(e) Shall comply with the applicable provisions of
Part 7 Off-Street Parking and Loading of this Chapter.
(67) Off-Track Betting Parlor
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
nomesidential use or from any existing street right-of-way.
(c) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing
residential use.
(d) New off-track better parlors shall not be located within
one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of a property upon
which an existing off-track better parlor is located.
(e) No more than one off-track better parlor shall be
located within a single building.
(f) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed use
shall not be detrimental to the use of adjoining properties.
(g) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of Part 7.
(h) All off-track betting parlors shall comply wit?,\ all
applicable federal and state regulations, including Penns~~ ia
Horse and/ or Harness Racing Commission's Rules and Reg;t;!l~ ~
pertaining to Nonprimary Locations, as defined therein. IA
/«.,' ~
/.''i'c> ,/"': ',' '. 4::-:- / /,y";:.
;: U;:..J:
XXXII-217 i~' ~;:;;::,:
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(68) Open Air Retail
(a) An open air retail facility shall be permitted only
within the Planned Business and Residential (PBR) District.
(b) A minimum lot area of at least one (1) acre shall be
required for an open air retail facility.
(c) An open air retail facility may be located inside or
outside of a building, or may be a combination of the two.
(d) Each vendor shall be provided with a minimum
area of four hundred (400) square feet to allow for the display of
items for sale and to provide a parking space for the vendor's
vehicle without disturbing adjacent vendors. The vendor spaces
shall be improved to a mud-free condition.
(e) The vendor spaces shall not be permitted within the
front, side or rear yards as defined for the district in which the open
air retail facility is located.
(f) Outdoor stands shall be portable, shall be maintained
in good condition and shall be removed during days when items are
not being offered for sale.
(g)
Part 7.
Parking shall be in accordance with the provisions of
(h) When an open air retail facility is located on a parking
lot servicing another permitted use, the vendor spaces and
associated parking spaces shall not reduce the number of parking
spaces required for the other use below the minimum required by
this Chapter.
(69) Open Air Retail Sales of Agricultural Products.
(a) An open air retail sales of agricultural products may
take place inside or outside of a building, or may be a combination
of the two.
(b) A minimum lot area of at least one (1) acre shall be
required for open air retail sales of agricultural products.
XXXII-218
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) The building or area where products are displayed or
sold shall be at least fifty (50) feet from an intersection and shall be
at least twenty (20) feet from the cartway.
(d) Parking shall be provided In compliance with the
provisions of Part 7.
(e) When the open air retail sales of agricultural products
operation, or a portion thereof, takes place within a building, it shall
comply with all requirements listed for a retail store.
(70) Open Space Development.
requirements of Section 901 (Appendix A).
Shall comply with the
(71) Personal Service. If the use includes a laundromat or a
laundry and dry cleaning shop it shall be provided with centralized
sewage disposal facilities and centralized water supply facilities.
(72) Pet Grooming Establishment. Such use shall not include
overnight boarding of animals, veterinary services or animal obedience
training.
(73) Picnic Grove. See "Recreation, Non-municipal Outdoor."
(74) Planned Business Development. Shall comply with the
provisions for such use listed under §316.
(75) Planned Residential Development (PRD)
(a) All applicable provisions of the Township PRD
Ordinance (Chapter XXI) shall be met.
(b) All requirements of this Chapter and Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) that are not specifically
waived or replaced by the PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI) shall apply.
(c) The Township PRD Ordinance (Chapter XXI), as
amended, shall be considered as part of this Chapter.
(76) Prisons or Penitentiaries
XXXII-219
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) The use shall comply with applicable federat state and
local regulations and requirements, including fire protection standards.
(b) No such use shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the boundary of any residential district or the property
boundary line of any existing principally residential use, public or private
school, nursery school or day care center, place of worship, playground or
public recreation facility or another adult business use.
(c) A thirty (30) foot buffer yard shall be provided along
the side and rear lot lines in accordance with §405(I).
(77) Private Airport or Airstrip.
(a) The use shall comply with all applicable Federal and
State regulations and requirements.
(b) Areas used for landings, takeoffs and ground
circulation shall be located at least one thousand ( 1,000) feet away
from adjacent property lines.
(78) Public Utility Facility. If the use is not exempt from this
Chapter under the State Municipalities Plmming Code, the applicant shall
prove to the satisfaction of the Board that the use will be compatible with
any adjacent residential uses or adjacent residential district.
(79) Racetracks, Automobile or Horse, with related Wagering.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) Shall have a lot area of at least fifty (50) acres.
(c) Such use shall have centralized sewer and water.
(d) Such use shall be fully enclosed within a fence a
minimum of six (6) feet in height with gates. Gates shall be securely
locked except during an event.
(e) The lot on which an automobile or horse racetrack is
located shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the boundary
of a lot on which an existing dwelling, a school, a nursery school or
XXXII-220
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
day care center, a playground or public recreation facility, a place of
worship, or another automobile or horse racetrack is located and
from the boundary of a residential district.
(f) Shall provide for efficient functioning of the proposed
use amid its surroundings without creating undue adverse impacts.
(g) Shall meet all of the performance standards of
Part 5. The applicant shall submit appropriate information
demonstrating how compliance will be ensured.
(h) The use shall be completely surrounded by a sixty (60)
foot wide buffer yard, complete with planting screen, in accordance
with the provisions of §405.
(i) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors that access to the site shall not cause tra££jc
backup onto adjoining public streets during peak entrance and exit
periods. This shall require special attention to, and description of,
the on-site stacking volumes caused by ticket or parking booth
locations and the number, location, and times of traffic control
personnel posting.
G) The applicant shall describe methods of fire protection,
policing and security that demonstrate that adequate fire and police
protection is available to serve the proposed use. The applicant
shall also demonstrate that adequate fire protection and security
measures shall be employed on the site to ensure public safety
during and after conduct to the proposed use.
(k) All horse racetracks, with related wagering shall
comply with the applicable Pennsylvania Horse and/ or Harness
Racing Commission's Rules and Regulations.
(1) Any area where race vehicle engines will be run,
warmed up or tested shall be set back a minimum of one thousand
(1,000) feet from all lot lines of any existing dwelling.
(m) No outdoor storage of unlicensed vehicles, vehicle
parts, l~b:icants and fuel~, or other materia! or equipment us~<\ in
the servIcmg of motor vehIcles shall be permItted. /' {I
XXXII-221
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(80) Recreation, Non-municipal Indoor.
(a) The proposed used shall not adversely affect the
adjoining properties.
(b) Buildings shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet
from any exterior lot line bordering an existing nonresidential use or
from any existing street right-of-way.
(c) Buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing residential
use.
(d) Any component of the indoor non-municipal
recreation use for which there are specific additional requirements
within this section shall also comply with those additional
requirements.
(e) Such use located within the RHA or RC District shall
not have a gross floor area in excess of 40,000 square feet.
(f) Such use located within the RS, LDS, MDS, SS, U or
PMU District shall not have a gross floor area in excess of 20,000
square feet, unless it is proposed for re-use of an existing building.
(g) All such uses shall comply with all applicable
government regulations, specifically State fire safety regulations.
(h) The proposed use shall not include a restaurant unless
a restaurant is also a permitted use .. within that dish"ict. The
appropriate requirements for restaurants listed under this section
shall apply.
(i) Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the
combination of elements comprising the non-municipal indoor
recreation.
(81) Recreation, Non-Municipal Outdoor.
(a) The proposed use shall not adversely affect the
adjoining properties.
(b) No lot area shall be less than five (5) acres.
XXXII-222
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) All buildings shall be set back a mInImUm of one
hundred (100) feet from any exterior property line.
(d)
(10%).
(e)
(f)
Maximum building coverage shall be ten percent
Maximum paved area shall be fifteen percent (15%).
Minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet.
(g) All other area and bulk regulations of the applicable
zoning district shall apply.
(h) Any component of the outdoor non-municipal
recreation use for which there are specific additional requirements
within this section shall also comply with those additional
requirements.
(i) Any component of the use for which there are specific
additional requirements within this section shall also comply with
those additional requirements.
G) The proposed use shall not operate between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(k) All outdoor illumination shall comply with the
requirements of §513. No lighting shall be permitted that is brighter
than necessary for security purposes except during recreation
events.
(1) The proposed use shall not include a restaurant unless
a restaurant is also a permitted use within that district. The
appropriate requirements for restaurants listed under this section
shall apply.
(82) Recycling Facility. Shall comply with the regulations for light
industrial use.
(83) Restaurants, Standard.
(a) Shall not include any drive-through facilities.
XXXII-223
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) Shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal
requirements. Where such requirements conflict, the more
restrictive requirement shall be met.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of Part 7. Required off-street parking shall take
into account any outdoor dining area.
(d) May include the sale of alcoholic beverages; however,
the total sale of food shall exceed the total sale of alcoholic
beverages.
(e) Unless located within the Penn Avenue Overlay
District, any waste dumpster shall be screened from view of
adjacent streets, dwellings and residential districts and shall be
located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
boundary of any residential lot and from any residential district and
one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any nomesidentiallot.
(f) Within the Penn Avenue Overlay District, wherever
the above dumpster setbacks cannot be met due to lot size or
configuration, the Zoning Officer may accept a lesser setback. In
such cases the applicant shall be required to demonsh"ate that the
proposed location is the optimal location on the site, and is properly
screened from adjoining properties.
(g) Shall provide landscaping
groundcover on all areas not covered by
parking areas or access drives.
and an all-season
buildings, structures,
(h) Shall provide a visual planting screen, in accordance
with §405(I) when adjacent to residential properties.
(i) May include outdoor dining areas subject to the
following regulations:
1) No outdoor food storage, busing station, open
outdoor trash receptacle or permanent outdoor food
preparation shall be permitted.
2) The dining area shall not obstruct the use of any
egress door or aisle, access lane or standpipe.
XXXII-224
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
3) Outdoor dining is permitted between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. only.
4) Sound amplification systems are prohibited.
5) Alcoholic beverage service, properly licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, is permitted only in
conjunction with the service of food.
6) No service of food or beverages is permitted to
unseated patrons.
7) Where deemed necessary by the Township,
safety barriers, approved by the Township Codes/Zoning
Department and the Township Fire Marshal, shall be placed
around the perimeter of the outdoor dining area.
G) Within the Penn A venue Overlay District, outdoor
dining areas may encroach into public street right-of-way and/or
public sidewalk area, subject to the following regulations:
1) Outdoor dining areas shall provide not less
than five contiguous feet of sidewalk clear of obstructions to
allow unimpeded pedestrian traffic. Dining areas shall be
arranged to permit a smooth alignment of the pedestrian
sidewalk across several properties and shall not cause abrupt
turns or angles. At street corner intersections the outdoor
dining area shall comply with all ADA requirements and
shall not obstruct the clear sight distance for vehicles.
2) Any encroachment of an outdoor dining area
into a public street right-of-way requires a permit from the
Township, which shall include an indemnification. Where the
public street is a state road, approval from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation is required. Prior to placing
any furnishings, enclosures or other items associated with the
use upon any public sidewalk, the Township will inspect the
condition of the sidewalk to its conformance to Township
specifications.
3) All furnishings, planters, railings or enclos;1'~ s
associated with outdoor dining must be approv /: ;,
XXXII-225
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Township Codes Department and must be properly weighted
to prevent movement.
4) Furniture, planters, railings and fences must be
removed from the right-of-way and stored indoors when
outdoor dining is not in seasonal operation.
5) No carpet, rug, artificial turf, platforms or other
change in elevation from the surface of the sidewalk, of any
kind, shall be permitted.
6) The operator of an outdoor dining area and his
or her employees shall not be permitted to remove, destroy,
deface or otherwise alter any sign, notice, curb, storm inlet, or
other public device or improvement.
7) Except emergency repairs or other emergency
activities, the operator of such outdoor dining area shall be
required to cease the operation when notified by the
Township.
8) The licensee of the outdoor dining is
responsible for keeping the premises clean at all times,
including the public sidewalk and other furnishings of the
outdoor dining. At no time may trash or debris of any kind
be blown, swept or otherwise deposited onto the street or
sidewalk.
(84) Retail Store:
(a) If such use will be on a lot with its own driveway(s)
onto a collector or arterial street, the lot shall have a minimum area
of one (1) acre, although such lot may include other permitted uses.
(b) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that any outdoor lighting will be placed such
that it shall not create a glare on any surrounding properties and
shall not create a significant nuisance to existing and future
dwellings.
(c) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
XXXII-226
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d) Any retail store located within the Planned Office
Business District shall have a floor area greater than fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet only when it has direct vehicular access to an
arterial street and when conditional use approval for a retail store of
that size has been granted by the Board of Supervisors.
(e) Any retail store having a floor area greater than fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet shall comply with the following
guidelines:
1) Facades shall be articulated to reduce the
massive scale and the uniform, impersonal appearance and to
provide visual interest that will be consistent with the
community's character and scale. Developments with
facades over one hundred (100) feet in linear length shall
incorporate wall projections or recesses a minimum of three
(3) feet in depth and a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous
feet in length within each one hundred (100) feet of fac;ade
length and shall extend over twenty (20%) percent of the
fa<;ade. Stores shall use animating features such as arcades,
display windows, entry areas, or awnings along at least sixty
(60%) percent of the fac;ade.
2) When retail stores having floor areas greater
than 50,000 square feet are attached to smaller, separately
operated stores or similar uses, such as within a shopping
center, the street level fac;ade of such smaller stores or similar
uses shall be transparent between the height of three feet and
eight feet above the walkway grade for no less than sixty
(60%) percent of the building fac;ade of such buildings.
Windows shall be recessed and shall include visually
prominent sills, shutters, or other such forms of framing.
3) Buildings should have architectural features
and patterns that provide visual interest at the scale of the
pedestrian, reduce massive effects, and recognize local
character. Building facades shall include a repeating pattern
that shall include one or more of the following elements: (1)
color change, (2) texture change, (3) material module change,
or (4) expression of architectural or structural bay through,a
change in plane of no less than 12 inches in width, such a
offset, reveal or projecting rib. At least one of these ele
XXXII-227
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at
intervals of no more than thirty (30) feet, either horizontally
or vertically.
4) Variations in roof lines should be used to add
interest to, and reduce the massive scale of large buildings.
Roof lines shall be varied with a change in height every 100
linear feet in the building length. Parapets, mansard roofs,
hip roofs, or dormers shall be used to conceal flat roofs and
roof top equipment from public view.
5) Exterior building materials and colors should be
aesthetically pleasing and compatible with materials and
colors used in adjoining neighborhoods. Predominant
exterior building materials shall be high quality materials and
shall include, without limitation: (1) brick, (2) wood, (3)
sandstone or other native stone, (4) tinted, texture, concrete
masomy units, and/ or (5) stucco. Fa<;ade colors shall be low
reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. The use of
high intensity colors, metallic colors, black or fluorescent
colors is prohibited. Building trim and accent areas may
feature brighter colors, including primary colors, but neon
tubing shall not be an acceptable feature for building trim or
accent areas.
6) Entryway design elements and variations
should give orientation and aesthetically pleasing character
to the building. Each building shall have clearly defined,
highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than three
of the following: canopies or porticos, overhangs,
recesses/ projections, arcades, raised corniced parapets over
the door, peaked roof forms, arches, outdoor patios, display
windows, architectural details such as tile work and
moldings integrated into the building structure and design,
or integral planters or wing walls that incorporate
landscaped areas and/ or places for sitting.
(85) Retirement Community:
(a) The principal use within the retirement community
shall be living units for the elderly, including Single-Family
Detached Dwellings, Single-Family Attached Dwellings
(townhouses) or Garden Apartments. In addition, common facilities
XXXU-228
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
required to support the needs of persons living within the
community, including the elderly and disabled persons regardless
of age, shall be provided. Such common facilities may include the
following:
1) Dining facilities including kitchens and
accessory facilities for residents and their guests.
2) Social rooms, chapels, meeting rooms and
overnight guest rooms for guests of residents.
3) Health care facilities, including, but not limited
to, clinic, rehabilitation services, nursing care, convalescent
care, intermediate care, extended care, personal care,
laboratory and such other similar facilities required to
provide the health care needs of the residents of the
community.
4) Administrative offices used in the management
of the community and health care facilities.
5) Activity, craft and hobby shops, recreation
facilities, gift shops, personal service facilities and similar
type uses, exclusively for the residents and their guests.
6) Accessory buildings and uses customarily
incidental to the above uses.
(b) All retirement communities shall comply with the
following requirements:
1) The minimum tract Size shall be twenty (20)
acres.
2) The minimum building setback from all street
rights-of-way and tract boundaries shall be fifty (50) feet.
3) The minimum lot width at the minimum
building setback line shall be three hundred (300) feet.
4) Distances between buildings shall
accordance with Section 324(B) (43) (d) (4).
XXXII-229
\ .
\In
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
5) The minimum setback for parking areas and
access drives from lot lines or ultimate street rights-of-way
shall be thirty (30) feet.
6) The maximum dwelling units per gross acre
shall not exceed ten (10).
7) The minimum usable open space (not including
driveway areas) devoted solely to recreational uses and
activities shall be 30% of the tract.
8) The maximum building height shall not exceed
2-1/2 stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less.
9) The maximum building coverage shall not
exceed 30%.
10) The maximum impervious coverage shall not
exceed 50 %.
NOTE: i Minimum width of a townhouse dwelling unit is
twenty-two (22) feet per unit.
II Applies to end building only.
iii Applies only to parking lots and joint parking
areas, not to separate parking areas for individual
townhouses.
IV Usable open space shall not include front, side
and/ or rear yards of an individual townhouse or
garden apartment.
v Whichever is less.
NOTE: See §327(C) of this Chapter for special standards
relating to storage sheds and other accessory uses, buildings
and structures.
(c) Notwithstanding the prOVIsIOns of the above
requirements, the following shall also apply:
1) No more than six (6) townhouse dwelling units
shall be attached.
2) The developer should vary architectural
treatments within apartment projects, individual apartments
XXXII-23 0
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
and between dwelling units in a townhouse development.
Variations may include those of exterior elevation, building
setbacks, provision of balconies, architectural details, pitch of
roof, exterior materials or use of color. Variety and flexibility
in design layout and arrangement of buildings, parking areas,
services, recreation areas, common open space and planting
that fully considers the particular physical characteristics of
the site and natural amenities is highly desired.
3) A system for pedestrian circulation throughout
the development shall be provided. Paved walkways, having
a minimum width of four (4) feet, shall be provided for access
between buildings and common parking areas, open space
and recreation areas and other community facilities. Such
paved walkways shall comply with all relevant ADA
requirements.
(d) Usable open space devoted to recreational use as
herein required shall be designed for use by tenants or owners of the
development and shall be improved and equipped by the developer
in accordance with plans submitted to and approved by the
Planning Commission.
(e) Garden apartment buildings shall not exceed one
hundred sixty (160) feet in length.
(f) In the event a development is designed to contain
more than one (1) permitted use, the submitted plan shall indicate
an area designed for each such use and shall designate all
requirements of this Chapter for each area.
(g) Each retirement community shall be built as a single
entity and shall be retained in single ownership. Fee simple sale of
lots shall be prohibited. All common facilities to provide for the
needs of the residents of the community shall remain in a single
ownership.
(h) Requirements for off-street parking areas shall be as
follows:
1) The mInImUm number of parking
provided shall be in accordance with the prov
Section 701.
XXXII-231
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
2) All access drives and parking areas shall be at
least fifteen (15) feet from any building on the lot and from
exterior lot lines.
3) All parking areas shall be designed In
accordance with requirements of §703.
4) Access drives and driveways shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements of §704.
5) All parking areas that include twenty (20) or
more spaces shall be separated from view of any public street
and directly abutting single-family detached residence by a
buffer yard as described in §405(I), but with a width of ten
(10) feet. A planting plan specifying type, size and location of
existing and proposed planting material shall be submitted
with the application for approval.
6) No more than fifteen (15) contiguous spaces
shall be permitted in any continuous row without
interruption by landscaping.
7) No more than sixty (60) parking spaces shall be
accommodated in any single parking area.
8) No more than two (2) interconnected parking
areas shall be permitted without having direct access to a
public street or a private street meeting Township sh'eet
standards.
9) The total length of any single or combined
parking area shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet. The
length shall be measured from the center line of the public or
private street providing access to the furthest point of the
parking area.
10) In the case of townhouses, no more than fifty
percent (50%) of the required front yard shall be used for
parking.
11) Parking may be provided on the lot, as carports,
as an integral part of the townhouse or a joint parking facility
XXXII-232
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
for a group of townhouses with such deed restrictions as are
necessary to determine ownership and maintenance of
common parking facilities and methods of assigning charges
for maintaining snow removal and repairs.
(i) The developer shall install a storm runoff and
drainage system in accordance with acceptable engineering
practices so as to adequately drain the project site, to adequately
dispose of all runoff and drainage away from the project site, at a
rate no greater than existed prior to development. Plans for such
drainage system shall be submitted and shall be subject to approval
by the Township Engineer.
G) All provisions of existing Township ordinances and
subdivision and land development ordinances regarding storm
drainage shall be complied with.
(k) Exterior lighting shall be provided for all buildings,
accessways and parking areas and shall be so arranged as not to
reflect toward public streets and not to cause any annoyance to
building occupants or surrounding property owners or residents.
All lighting shall comply with the provisions of §513.
(1) Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be
visually screened on three (3) sides and contained in airtight,
vermin-proof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
(m) Each multiple dwelling unit shall be provided with a
minimum of two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet of lockable storage
area in an enclosed room which is not part of the. dwelling unit.
(n) No area for such facilities shall exceed more than onehalf
(1/2) the floor area of any single floor.
(0) Swimming Pool.
1) No structure shall be permitted without a
filtering system utilizing chlorinated water.
XXXII-233
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
2) No structure shall be permitted unless a
permanent continuous fence complying with all requirements
of the applicable building code surrounds the facilities.
3) No structure shall be within fifty (50) feet of any
property line or easement.
4) No structure shall be constructed between the
building setback line and the street line.
5) No structure shall be permitted unless
surrounded by a paved surface extending a minimum of five
(5) feet from the water line.
6) Lighting shall not create a glare on any
surrounding properties.
7) No persons other than residents and their
guests shall be permitted to use the facility.
8) One (1) parking space for each three (3)
dwelling units shall be provided in addition to the residential
requirements.
(p) Outdoor Recreation.
1) Such facilities shall be limited to tennis courts,
which are completely surrounded by a fence ten (10) feet in
height, barbecue or other cookout facilities constructed of
permanent material, yards which are completely landscaped,
garden areas for tenant use, playlots, provided that facilities
located in this area are surrounded by fencing at least four (4)
feet in height, with benches for adults; facilities for such
games as shuffleboard or basketball, provided that a paved
surface is provided and that such facilities are located at least
fifty (50) feet from any building.
2) All outdoor recreational facilities, except yards
and garden areas shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet
of any lot line.
3) No outdoor facilities, except yards, shall be
located between the building setback line and the street line.
XXXII-234
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(q) No outdoor clotheslines shall be located in any
required side yard, rear yard or between the building setback line
and the street line with permanent metal poles for support.
(r) No activities shall be permitted which create a public
nuisance and! or interfere with the use of adjacent land.
(s) No structure or building shall be permitted specifically
designed for pets.
(t) A Retirement community shall be deemed to be a
subdivision governed by the provisions and procedures of the
Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(Chapter XXVII) and the procedures established in said ordinance
for approval shall be followed.
(86) Sale of Mulch and Landscape Materials.
(a) Sale of mulch and landscape materials may take place
inside or outside of a building, or may be a combination of the two.
(b) The building or area where products are displayed or
sold shall be at least fifty (50) feet from an intersection and shall be
at least twenty (20) feet from the cartway.
(c) When the sale of mulch and landscape materials, or a
portion thereot takes place within a building, it shall comply with
all requirements listed for a retail store.
(87) Schoot Public, Private or Vocational.
(a) Shall be located along a collector or arterial street.
(b) The use may include accessory uses such as offices,
daycare facilities, cafeterias, recreation and entertainment facilities,
or other uses that are customarily incidental to a school. All such
uses shall be primarily utilized by the students enrolled in the
school.
(c) Any Student "drop-off" and "pick-up" areas shal
arranged so that:
XXXII-235
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
1) students do not need to cross traffic lanes on or
adjacent to the site, and
2) vehicles transporting students shall not back up
onto a public street.
(d) No vocational school shall be allowed in a primarily
residential district.
(88) Self-Storage Facility.
(a) Structures containing storage units shall be limited to
one story and shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height.
(b) Each individual storage unit shall abut a paved access
drive.
(c) Access drives shall be at least fifteen feet (15') wide.
(d) No storage outside of individual units shall be
permitted, except for approved vehicle storage areas.
(e) No storage of unlicensed vehicles shall be permitted.
(f) Self-storage facilities hours of operation will be limited
to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(g) A security fence at least six feet (6') high shall
surround a self-storage facility, and access through such fence shall
be by way of an automatic gate, security guard, or similar means. A
buffer yard including a planting screen shall be provided when a
self-storage facility abuts an existing residential use or a residential
district and shall be in accordance with the standards for such, as
contained in this Chapter. Lighting shall be in accordance with the
provisions of §513.
(h) The use of individual storage units shall be restricted
to household goods and business equipment, supplies, and records.
No storage of perishable items or hazardous, explosive, or highly
flammable materials, or materials that emit noxious odors shall be
permitted. Storage units shall not be used as areas for rehearsals by
musical groups.
XXXII-236
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
_--I
(i) A self-storage facility may include an office/ residence
for an on-site manager/ care taker as part of the principal use. This
building shall not be used solely as a residence, but must serve, in
part, as an office for the self-storage facility. The building shall be
occupied as a dwelling by only manager/ care taker and his family.
G) The individual structures comprising a self-storage
facility are exempt from the requirements of §402(B) regarding two
or more principal buildings on a lot.
(89) Semidetached Commercial Building.
(a) Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited
from being established as a principal use, accessory use or home
occupation on one side of a semidetached commercial building
when a residential use exists on the other side:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
harvesting.
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
Ambulatory surgical center.
Animal hospital.
Beverage distributor.
College, excluding those with dormitories.
Combination of uses permitted by right.
Food stand.
Forestry, including, but not limited to, timber
Funeral home.
Health club.
Holiday tree sales.
Indoor civic or social organization
Indoor membership club or lodge.
Multiple use building.
Nursery school or day care center.
Pet grooming establishment.
Recreation, non-municipal indoor.
Recreation, municipal.
Restaurant, fast food.
Restaurant, standard.
Retail greenhouse/ nursery.
Tavern.
Temporary retail sales.
Any use requiring special exception approv
(b) All activities shall be performed within the bui
XXXII-237
,
\
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) Each use must comply with the specific provIsIOns
listed for that use in this Chapter.
(d) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Township that any outdoor lighting will be placed such that it will
not create a significant nuisance to existing and future dwellings.
(e) The use shall comply with the noise standards of
Section 511.
(f) Operating hours. A nonresidential use located on one
side of a semidetached commercial building where a residential use
exists on the other side shall not operate earlier than 7:00 a.m.,
prevailing time, nor later than 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
(g) Waste container location. The applicant shall be
required to demonstrate that any proposed waste container location
is the optimal location on the site, and is properly screened from
adjoining properties.
(90) Shopping Centers.
(a) Shopping centers shall be in single ownership or under
a guaranteed unified management control. Shopping centers shall
consist of harmonious selection of uses and groupings of buildings,
service and parking areas, circulation and open space and shall be
subject to the following provisions
(b) Permitted Principal Uses:
1) Stores for the sale of goods at retail or the
performance of customary services clearly incidental to retail
sales.
2) Personal service establishments.
3) Offices.
4) Financial establishment
5) Vocational schools.
XXXII-238
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
6) Restaurants, or similar places serving food
and/ or beverages.
7) Medical offices.
8) Art or photography studio.
9) Health club.
10) Recreation, non-municipi:11 indoor.
11) Pet grooming establishment.
12) Parking areas for transient motor vehicles, but
not for the storage of new or used motor vehicles for lease or
sale.
(c) Permitted Accessory Uses. Located on the same lot
with the permitted principal use.
1) Only the accessory uses associated with a
commercial district shall be permitted provided they are
limited to the same lot as the principal uses.
(d) Uses Permitted Only by Special Exception:
1) Gasoline service stations.
2) Drive-in establishments.
3) New or used automobile or trailer sales and
repair.
4) Amusement establishments.
5) Convenience stores.
6) Motion picture theater; however, shall not
include an adult mini-motion picture theater or an
theater.
7) Off-track betting parlors.
XXXII-239
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
8) Taverns.
(e) Area and Bulk Regulations:
1) Lot Size. The area for development shall be a
minimum of three (3) acres.
2) The maximum size of a shopping center within
a Planned Business Development within the PHI District
shall be ten (10) acres.
3) Building Coverage. Twenty-five (2S%) percent
maXlmUlll.
4) Maximum Building Height. Unless a greater
height is permitted in the district within which it is located, a
shopping center shall have a maximum building height of
two (2) stories or thirty-five (3S) feet, whichever is less.
S) Front Yard. Sixty (60) feet minimum.
6) Side Yards. Forty (40) feet minimum each side.
7) Rear Yard. Forty (40) feet minimum.
(f) Off-Street Parking Setback. Parking shall be permitted
in the areas required for front, side and rear yard setbacks up to a
point of twenty-five (2S) feet from any front, side or rear lot line of
the shopping center. All parking areas shall be suitably paved with
permanent hard-surface coverings.
(g) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of Part 7 of
this Chapter.
(h) Buildings of a shopping center shall be located a
minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the lot line of any existing
principally residential use and from the boundary of any residential
district.
(i) Shopping centers located within the Planned Office
Business District shall not contain any retail stores having floor
areas greater than fifty thousand (SO,OOO) square feet, unless there is
XXXII-240
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
direct vehicular access to an arterial street and the Board of
Supervisors has granted conditional use approval for a store of that
SIze.
G) Shopping centers containing retail stores or other uses
with buildings having floor areas greater than fifty thousand
(50,000) sq. ft. shall comply with the provisions for such buildings
listed under the regulations for retail stores in this section.
(k) Access and Traffic Controls. All means of ingress or
egress from the shopping center to any public street or State
highway shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any
other intersecting street or streets and shall be designed to conduct
traffic in a safe manner. The developer shall be responsible for the
purchase and erection of additional acceleration or deceleration
lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or by the Township. The applicant shall prove to the
satisfaction of the governing body that the shopping center will
include the most reasonable coordinated system of traffic access that
is possible and that left-hand turns onto arterial streets will be
minimized and carefully conh<olled.
(1) Interior Circulation. Interior accessways shall be
designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or
leaving the site. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Township's
satisfaction that the layout of the shopping center, as well as the
interior traffic circulation patterns, shall be such that internal traffic
congestion, vehicle conflicts and vehicle operator confusion shall be
avoided. All routes of internal traffic circulation shall be clearly
marked with appropriate signage to properly direct traffic
throughout the shopping center and to exits. Areas provided for
loading or unloading of trucks and/ or other vehicles or for servicing
of shops for rubbish collection or other services shall be adequate in
size and shall be so arranged that they may be used without
blocking or interfering with interior circulation and parking
facilities. The layout of the parking lots and interior circulation shall
be such that customers shall not be required to walk across streets,
interior accessways or drives to travel between the parked vehicles
and the uses on the site.
(m) Lighting. Lighting for buildings, signs,
and parking areas shall be so arranged as not to reflect
public streets or cause any annoyance to surrounding
XXXII-241
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
owners or residents. Lighting shall comply with the provisions of
§513.
(n) Shopping Cart Storage. Establishments furnishing
shopping cars or mobile baskets shall provide definite areas on the
site for the storage of said carts. Storage areas shall be dearly
marked and designated for the storage of shopping carts and/ or
mobile baskets.
(0) Screening and Buffer Yard. All lot lines abutting
residential districts (in Spring or an adjoining municipality) shall be
screened by a buffer yard as described in §405(I).
(p) Storage of Trash or Rubbish. Storage areas for trash
and rubbish shall be completely screened and all organic rubbish
shall be contained in airtight, vermin-proof containers. No such
storage area shall be permitted within any required buffer yard.
(q) Signs. Signs shall conform to Part 6 of this Chapter.
(r) Entrance Signs.
1) In addition to the signs permitted under Part 6
of this Chapter, a shopping center shall be permitted to have
entrance signs listing the businesses located within the
shopping center, in accordance with the following:
i) Shopping centers with an approved land
area greater than 10.0 acres shall be permitted a
freestanding entrance sign up to a maximum height of
35 feet, and 160 square feet of sign area.
ii) Shopping centers with an approved land
area of 10.0 acres or less shall be permitted a
freestanding entrance sign up to a maximum height of
25 feet, and 100 square feet sign area.
iii) A shopping center may have one (1)
freestanding enh"ance sign per street frontage greater
than 300 feet in width that contains an approved
primary access drive for two way traffic.
XXXII-242
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
J
(s) Subdivision Process. A proposed shopping center
shall be deemed to be a subdivision governed by the provisions of
the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(Chapter XXVII).
(t) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of Part 7. Where
restaurants or other similar uses requiring a greater intensity of
parking spaces are proposed, the shopping center layout shall be
such that the number of off-street parking spaces provided
immediately adjacent to the restaurant or similar use shall comply
with the individual requirements for that use as set forth in Table
7.1. This requirement will not cause an increase to the total number
of off-street parking spaces required within the shopping center as a
whole.
(u) Overnight Parking. The use shall not include
overnight parking of vehicles by patrons, employees, vendors or
others except for such time periods as customers, employees or
vendors are actually doing business at or in one of the stores or
other facilities.
(v) Individual uses within a shopping center, such as
retail stores, offices, restaurants, service stations, automobile sales
and convenience stores, shall also comply with the provisions listed
for that individual use within this Section.
(w) All activities, with the exception of parking and
loading facilities, shall be performed within a building.
(x) Tenant List. Prior to January 1st of each year, the
owner of a shopping center shall provide the Township with a list of
the tenants within the shopping center complete with up to date
contact information.
(91) Single-Family Detached Dwelling.
(a) Such use located within the RHA District and not
within an open space development, shall:
1) Be a use permitted by right only where it i
located on a parent tract of less than 20 acres in area and
XXXII-243
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
more than four (4) dwelling units are proposed on the parent
tract.
2) Be a conditional use where it is located on a
parent tract equal to or greater than 20 acres in area, or where
more than four (4) dwelling units are proposed on the parent
tract.
(b) Such use located within the RC or PHT District, and
not within an open space development, shall:
1) Be a use permitted by right only where it is
located on a parent tract of less than 10 acres in area and no
more than four (4) dwelling units are proposed on the parent
tract.
2) Be a conditional use where it is located on a
parent tract equal to or greater than 10 acres in area, or where
more than four (4) dwelling units are proposed on the parent
tract.
(c) Such use located within the RS District shall:
1) Result in no more than four (4) dwelling units
on a parent tract unless they are located within an open space
development.
2) Where not located within an open space
development, be a use permitted by right only where it is
located on a parent tract of less than 10 acres in area.
3) Where not located within an open space
development, be a conditional use where it is located on a
parent tract equal to or greater than 10 acres.
(d) Such use located within the POB District shall:
1) Be within a development with a minimum tract
size of one (1) acre, but such tract may include lots with the
minimum permitted lot area.
2) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of
the governing body that any residential use will be laid out
XXXII-244
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
and located such that it will be compatible with the uses and
traffic patterns of any existing or future adjacent business
development within the POB District.
(92) Single-family Detached Dwelling In Combination With a
Commercial Activity:
(a) In addition to the minimum lot area requirements
of the Zoning District within which the use is located, an additional
5,000 sq. ft. is required.
(b) Each principal use shall be located within a separate
building complying with all provisions of this Chapter including the
provisions of §402(B) regarding two or more principal buildings on
a lot.
(c) The uses permitted under this category shall be only a
single-family detached dwelling and a commercial use permitted by
right or by condition within the Zoning District where this Chapter
permits a single-family detached dwelling in combination with a
commercial activity.
(d) If the proposed commercial activity is permitted by
Condition, approval of the combined uses must follow the same
approval procedure specified for the specific use.
(e) Each use must comply with the specific provision for
that use list in this Chapter.
(f) Off-street parking requirements of Part 7 shall be met;
including the requirement that the number of parking spaces
required shall be the sum of the parking requirements for each
separate use, except where the Township has approved a parking
reduction or a lower number of parking spaces in a shared parking
facility.
(93) Single-Family to Multi-Family Conversion. Shall comply
with all applicable requirements for multi-family dwellings (single-family
attached dwellings or garden apartments).
(94) Slaughtering, Processing, Rendering, and Packaging of Foo.
Products and Their By-Products
XXXII-245
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial or collector street
(as defined by the official street classification map);
(b) All aspects of the slaughtering, processing, rendering,
and packaging operation, excepting the unloading and holding of
live animals, shall be conducted within a completely-enclosed
building;
(c) All live animals held outside shall be within secure
holding pens or runways, sufficiently large to adequately
accommodate all animals, and not located within the front yard;
(d) The applicant shall furnish a working plan for the
recovery of escaped animals which minimizes the potential for
animals to enter traffic or cross property lines, and which shall be
continuously implemented;
(e) All animal wastes shall be regularly cleaned up and
properly disposed ot so as not to be objectionable at the site's
property line;
(f) The unloading of live animals from trucks into holding
pens and their movement into the plant shall be continuously
supervised by a qualified operator, whose responsibility it shall also
be to immediately identify and appropriately dispatch any
obviously ill or injured animals;
(g) The unloading of live animals and their movement
into the plant shall be conducted in an orderly and calm manner so
as to minimize noise levels;
(h) The loading and unloading of trucks shall be restricted
to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
(i) No exterior animal holding pens and/ or areas devoted
to loading/ unloading of animals shall be located within two
hundred feet (200') of any property line nor five hundred feet (500')
of any adjoining residential property or residential district;
G) All animal holding pens and/ or areas used for the
loading/ unloading of animals shall be screened from all adjoining
properties and shall include a minimum fifty foot (50') wide
landscape strip;
XXXII-246
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(k) The applicant shall furnish written evidence that P A
DEP-approved systems for wastewater disposal and water supply
will be utilized;
(1) Wastewater shall be kept completely covered at all
times to reduce the potential for release of odors. In no event shall
wastewater be disposed of in a storm sewer, to the ground, or in any
other manner inconsistent with P A DEP regulations;
(m) All unusable animal by-products shall be stored
indoors in leak- and vector-proof containers. In the case of
slaughtering or processing operations which do not do their own
rendering, the applicant shall provide evidence of a written contract
with a rendering operation for the daily disposal of such waste
products. In no case shall any waste products remain on the site for
more than twenty-four (24) hours;
(n) The applicant must demonstrate written compliance
with, and continue to comply with, all applicable local, State and
Federal standards and regulations;
(95) Solid Waste Disposal Area or Facility
(a) All solid waste disposal areas or facilities shall be fully
permitted by the P ADEP, the u.S. EPA, and such other Federal or
State Agencies as required under applicable enabling statutes.
(b) All proposed solid waste disposal areas or facilities
shall submit the following information for the site:
1) A description of the specific types of waste the
applicant proposes to accept for storage, treatment,
processing or disposal at the site.
2) A description of the specific technology and
procedures the applicant proposes to treat, process and
dispose of at the facility.
3) Preliminary specifications and
drawings of the proposed facility.
4) An approved site or land development
XXXII-247
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
5) A statement of qualifications to operate a waste
disposal facility.
6) A complete compliance history for any and all
facilities owned and/ or operated by the Applicant, any
parent, subsidiary or cooperative owner/operator of waste
treatment, processing or disposal facilities, as per P ADEP
Form HW-C, Compliance History and Instructions.
7) Any and all information supplied to the P ADEP
or the u.s. EPA regarding the proposed site and/ or facility.
8) The names and addresses of any person,
corporation or partnership having any financial interest in
the construction, permitting, operation or closure of such
facility.
9) All insurance policies, closure accounts and/ or
documents relating to self-insurance for the subject
application.
10) A proposed siting agreement specifying the
terms, conditions and provisions under which the facility
shall be constructed, maintained and operated, including but
not limited to the following terms, conditions and provisions:
i) Facility Construction and Maintenance
Procedures.
ii) Operating procedures and practices, the
design of the facility and its associated activities.
iii) Monitoring procedures, practices and
standards necessary to assure and continue to
demonstrate that the facility will be operated safely.
iv) Provisions to prevent migration of waste
from the site onto adjoining properties and streets.
v)
comfort,
Provision to assure
convenience and social
XXXU-248
health, safety,
and economic
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
security of the residents and businesses In the
Township.
vi) Provision to assure the continuing
economic viability of the project.
vii) Provision to assure the protection of
environmental and natural resources.
viii) Provision to provide landowners,
residents, occupants, businesses and industries for
adverse economic impacts demonstrably attributable
to the facility.
ix) Provision to compensate the Township,
the County and/ or other agencies for the review costs
incurred due to the applicant's proposal.
x) Provision to provide site access to any
and all Township, County, State, Federal employees
and/ or their consultants regarding review of the
proposal or the site.
(96) Stable or Riding Academy, Commercial.
(a) This includes the keeping of horses or similar animals
for use by other than a single household.
(b) The use shall be conducted on a lot no smaller than
five (5) acres in size.
(c) The use shall not operate between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(d) New barns, training areas, animal shelters, stables,
feed yards or manure storage areas shall not be located closer than
five hundred (500) feet from all dwellings except the dwelling of
the owner or lessee, or from all residential lots. Manure storage
areas shall comply with the applicable provisions listed under
General Agriculture in the Section.
(e) New barns, training areas, animal shelters, st
feed yards or manure storage areas and additions to existin
XXXII-249
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from all
exterior property lines.
(f) Outdoor illumination shall comply with the
provisions of Section 513.
(g) All outdoor training, show, riding, boarding, and
pasture areas shall be enclosed by a fence with a minimum height
of four (4) feet.
(97) Stadium
(a) The use shall comply with the requirements for
Recreation, Nonpublic Outdoor listed in this Section.
(b) Any booths, structures or activities related to the
collection of admission and/ or parking fees shall located and/ or
preformed so that backups of vehicles onto public streets shall be
prevented.
(c) All outdoor illumination shall comply with the
requirements of §513. No lighting shall be permitted that is
brighter than necessary for security purposes except during
recreation events.
(98) Swimming Club (outdoor).
(a) All outdoor pools shall be entirely enclosed with a
good quality chain-link or equivalent fence of not less than six (6)
feet in height.
(b) Outdoor facilities shall meet the same
requirements as are listed for Recreation, Non-Municipal Outdoor
under Section 324(B), with the exception of the minimum lot area,
which shall be three (3) acres.
(c) All buildings shall be set back a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet from any exterior property line.
(99) Tavern or Nightclub
(a) Shall comply with all applicable local, state or federal
requirements, particularly State fire safety regulations. Where such
XXXII-250
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
, :_.'-.
requirements conflict, the more restrictive requirement shall be
met.
(b) Unless located within the Penn Avenue Overlay
District, any waste dumpster shall be screened from view of
adjacent streets, dwellings and residential districts and shall be
located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
boundary of any residential lot and from any residential district
and one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any
nonresidential lot.
(c) Within the Penn Avenue Overlay District, wherever
the above dumpster setbacks cannot be met due to lot size or
configuration, the Zoning Officer may accept a lesser setback. In
such cases the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that the
proposed location is the optimal location on the site, and is
properly screened from adjoining properties.
(d) Shall provide landscaping
groundcover on all areas not covered by
parking areas or access drives.
and an all-season
buildings, structures,
(e) Shall provide a visual planting screen, in accordance
with §405(I) when adjacent to residential properties.
(f) The proposed used shall not adversely affect the
adjoining properties.
(g) Unless located within the Pem1 Avenue Overlay
District, buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100)
feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing nonresidential
use or from any existing street right-of-way. Within the Penn
Avenue Overlay District such minimum distance shall be fifty (50)
feet.
(h) Unless located within the Penn Avenue Overlay
District, buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty
(150) feet from any exterior lot line bordering an existing residential
use. Within the Penn Avenue Overlay District such minimum
distance shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
XXXII-251
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(i) Shall comply with the parking provIsIons of
Part 7. Required off-street parking shall take into account any
outdoor service area.
G) Shall comply with the Noise Control provisions of
§511 and the Nuisance provision of §502.
(k) Taverns may include outdoor seating areas, subject to
the provisions listed for outdoor dining areas under the standard
restaurant regulations. Such outdoor seating areas shall not
encroach into public street rights-of-way and/ or public sidewalk
areas.
(100) Taxi, Limousine Service or Bus Terminal.
(a) Shall be on a lot abutting an arterial or collector
street (as defined on the official street classification map).
(b) May include facilities for the maintenance and repair
of the vehicles utilized in the use.
(c) Bus terminals shall provide an area for the loading
and unloading of buses separate from required off-street parking
areas.
(e) Bus terminals may include ticket offices, luggage
checking facilities and similar facilities as accessory uses.
(101) Temporary Retail Sales
(a) There may be five (5) Temporary Retail Sales events
per year per lot.
(b) Only one (1) Temporary Retail Sales event may take
place on a lot at any given time.
(c) Temporary Retail Sales events must obtain a
Temporary Sales Permit. Permit will be valid for a maximum of ten
(10) consecutive days.
(d) No more than ten (10) percent of the required
parking area for the existing uses on the lot may be used for
Temporary Retail Sales.
XXXII-252
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(e) Temporary Retail Sales areas shall have a maximum
sales area of eight hundred (800) square feet with a maximum
width of twenty (20) feet and a maximum depth of forty (40) feet.
(f) Temporary Retail Sales hours of operation shall be
limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(g) Temporary Retail Sales areas are limited to
designated parking areas on the lot. In the event that the lot
contains no existing parking facilities, a designated area containing
a minimum of 6 off-street parking spaces shall be provided In
accordance with the requirements of Part 7 of this Chapter..
(h) Temporary Retail Sales shall not disrupt the daily
operations of the principal business located on the lot.
(i) No Temporary Retail Sales shall be located within
any designated clear sight triangle.
G) No Temporary Retail Sales shall adversely impact the
health, safety, and welfare of the Township.
(k) Signage must comply with the provISIOns of this
Chapter. No signage may be displayed until a Temporary Sales
Permit is obtained.
(1) All Temporary Retail Sales shall comply with the
applicable building, fire, and elech'ical codes of the Township.
(102) Tennis Clubs (outdoor).
(a) Outdoor facilities shall meet the same requirements as
are listed for Recreation, Non-municipal Outdoor under
Section 324(B), with the exception of the minimum lot area.
(b) No lot area for an outdoor tennis club shall be less
than three (3) acres.
XXXII-253
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(103) Timber Harvesting.
(a) These provisions shall apply when timber harvesting
or forestry is the principal use on a property , when it is a
secondary operation to another principal use and when it is
associated with a subdivision or land development of the property.
(b) Timber harvesting or forestry shall be performed only
in accordance with a Forest Management Plan or a Forest
Stewardship Plan prepared by a forester.
(c) The applicant shall submit the following plans and
reports to the Township at least sixty (60) days prior to the
scheduled start of the timber harvesting operations.
1) The Forest Management Plan or Forest
Stewardship Plan addressing ecological considerations,
forest health, soil and water resources, flora and fauna
resources, non-timber forest products, silviculture/timber
management, and infrastructure.
2) A Tree Inventory Report prepared by a
qualified horticulturist, forester, arborist, or landscape
architect addressing h-ee species and sizes, tree identification
numbers, diameter at breast height (DBH, typically 4.5 feet
from the ground), tree height, distance to drip line, direction
of low or unusual branching, tree condition, suitability for
preservation and maintenance recommendations.
3) An Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Plan (E&SPC Plan) utilizing Best Management Practices
(BMP' s) designed to prevent erosion and sedimentation
during and after the timber harvesting operations. Evidence
that the E&SPC Plan has been approved by the Berks
County Conservation District and/ or the P ADEP shall be
submitted prior to the start of the timber harvest.
(d) The Forest Management Plan or Forest
Stewardship Plan shall contain, at a minimum, proVISIOns
addressing the following:
XXXII-254
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
1) Design, construction, maintenance and
retirement of the access system, including haul roads, skid
roads, skid trails and landings;
2) Design, construction and maintenance of
surface water control features and structures such as
culverts, broad-based dips, filter strips, water bars and
BMP's. Compliance with all applicable State, County and
local provisions for erosion and sediment pollution control
must be demonstrated;
3) Design, construction and maintenance of
stream and wetland crossings, demonstrating compliance
with the provisions of §517 Wetland Buffers and §518
Riparian Buffers;
4) The general location of the proposed operation
in relation to Township and State roads, including any
points of access to those roads;
(e) The Forest Management Plan or Forest Stewardship
Plan shall be accompanied by a drawing containing , at a
minimum, the following information:
1) Site location and boundaries, including both
the boundary on which the timber harvest will take place,
and the boundaries of the proposed harvest area within that
property;
2) Significant topographical features, including
those related to potential enviromnental problems;
3) Location of all earth disturbance activities such
as roads, landings, and surface water control measures and
structures;
4) Locations of all crossmgs of waters of the
Commonwealth;
5) The general location of the proposed operati
to Township and State roads, including any points of ac
to those roads.
XXXII-255
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(f) Any State approval required as a result of the
proposed timbering operations, including, but not limited to,
stream or wetland encroachments, must be demonstrated prior to
the start of the timber harvest. Any permits required by State laws
and regulations shall be attached to and become part of the Forest
Management Plan or Forest Stewardship Plan.
(g) Routes using Township roads shall be approved by
the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall also set
the maximum gross weight permissible on Township roads.
(h) Pursuant to Title 75 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes, Chapter 49; and Title 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189,
the landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing
any damage to Township roads caused by traffic associated with
the timber harvesting operation, to the extent the damage is in
excess of that caused by normal h'affic, and may be required to
furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of such damages. No mud
or debris shall remain on public roads.
(i) Hours during which harvesting can occur are subject
to Board of Supervisors approval.
G) The Zoning Officer, or other party designated by the
Board of Supervisors, shall be the enforcement officer for this
Section. The Zoning Officer, or other designated party, may enter
upon the site of any timber harvesting operation before, during, or
after the operations, to confirm compliance with the Forest
Management Plan or Forest Stewardship Plan, and compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
(k) No more than thirty percent (30%) of the existing
forest land on any lot may be harvested in any calendar year.
(1) The use of diameter-based cutting methods are not
permitted unless fully justified by the forester preparing the Plan.
Diameter-based cutting methods include, but are not limited to:
Diameter Limit Cut and High Grading.
(m) Clear-cutting is only permitted when the Forestry
Bureau's reservation guidelines are followed and is fully justified
by the forester preparing the Plan as the timber harvest method
XXXII-256
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
necessary to improve a forest or stand that contains defective,
decayed, diseased or dying trees.
(n) All cutting, removal, skidding and transporting of
trees shall be planned and performed in such a manner as to
minimize the disturbance of other h"ees and vegetation.
(0) Roads, trails and landing/ staging areas shall be
constructed, maintained and abandoned in such a mam1er as to
prevent soil erosion and damage to Watercourses.
(p) Stream crossings shall be avoided, but where deemed
necessary, crossings shall be made at a right angle and shall
incorporate appropriate culverts or bridges. Skidding across a live
or intermittent stream is prohibited except by suitable bridges and
culverts.
(q) Buffer zones of fifty (50) feet, within which no timber
harvesting operations shall take place, shall be maintained along all
streets and abutting properties.
(r) Felling or skidding across property of others IS
prohibited without the express written consent of the owners of
such property. Felling or skidding across streets is prohibited.
(s) No tops or slash shall be left within fifty (50) feet of
any public street right-of-way or adjoining property, within
twenty-five (25) feet of any stream or historic or scenic trail; or
within ten (10) feet of any drainage ditch or Identified Floodplain
Area.
(t) During periods of abnormal forest fire danger, as
determined by the State Fire Marshal, the Township shall have the
right to order a suspension of all timber harvesting operations until
the danger subsides.
(u) Timber harvesting and tree removal shall comply
with all other applicable provisions of this Chapter, including, but
not limited to, wetland buffers and riparian buffers.
/\
/ \
(v) When timber harvesting and tree removal/I?
association with a subdivision or land development: IP~<
XXXII-257
42 l:/;1 I 1.1
l-I.
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
1) The reports and supplemental information
required by this Section shall be used to determine that most
appropriate layout of the development with consideration
given to trees to be preserved and the species, size and
location of replacement tree planting.
2) Timber harvesting shall not take place prior to
approval of the Final Plan of the subdivision or land
development.
3) The Erosion and Sediment pollution Control
Plan may be incorporated into the overall E&SPC Plan for
the development, provided that all requirements of this
Section are met.
4) Timber harvesting shall only be one of the
following methods: (a) improvement cutting, (b) salvage
cutting, (c) single tree selection method, or (d) other
methods, except diameter limit cut, high grading and clear
cutting, may be permitted by the Township when fully
justified by the forester preparing the plan.
5) Trees included in the Tree Inventory Report
within the area of proposed development i.e., within
proposed street right-of-way, sanitary sewer, water line,
storm sewer easements and initial building site locations
that were considered suitable for preservation with a
Suitability for Preservation rating of Excellent, Good or Fair
and were harvested or removed for development shall be
replaced with trees of the same species or an alternate
species approved by the Township Plam1ing Commission at
the rate of one-half inch replacement diameter per one inch
diameter of harvested or removed trees. Replacement trees
shall have a minimum diameter at breast height (dbh) of
2.5 inches.
6) Trees included in the Tree Inventory Report
that are outside of the proposed development area and
considered suitable for preservation with a Suitability for
Preservation rating of Excellent, Good or Fair and were
harvested shall be replaced in accordance with the Forest
Management Plan or Forest Stewardship Plan submitted as
part of the timber harvest.
XXXII-258
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
7) The replacement trees shall be in addition to
any required street trees, buffer screens, and landscaping
trees and shall be located within the development area.
8) The subdivision or land development plan
shall include a Tree Preservation Plan including any trees
scheduled for preservation and measures necessary to
ensure their preservation including but not limited to the
construction of retaining walls, no fill! cut zones, no
construction traffic or stockpile of material zones, and
maintenance recommendations from the Tree Inventory
Report.
9) Any deviation from the Tree Preservation Plan
resulting in impacts to or removal of h"ees designated for
preservation shall require the approval by the Board of
Supervisors with recommendations from the Plmming
Commission and Enviromnental Advisory Council.
(104) Townhouses. See "Garden Apartments and Single-Family
Attached Dwellings" in this Section.
(105) Treatment Center.
(a) A minimum of lot area of 2 acres shall be
required.
(b) There shall be no more than twelve (12)
residents, including any live-in supervisors.
(c) There shall be twenty-four (24) hour resident
supervision by people qualified by training and experience
in the field for which the treatment center is intended.
(d) The use shall be licensed under the applicable
State program and shall comply with all applicable State
rules and regulations.
(e) The applicant shall provide a written
description of all conditions (such as criminal parolees,
alcohol addiction) that will cause persons to occupy the use.
Any future additions to this list shall require additional ,
special exception approval.
XXXII-259
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(f) Any medical or counseling services provided
shall be done so only for residents of the treatment center.
(g) The lot upon which a treatment center is
located shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the lot
upon which a group home or another treatment center is
located; (such distance shall be measured in a horizontal
straight line from the nearest point on one (1) lot to the
nearest point on the other lot).
(h) Off-street parking shall be provided 111
accordance with the provisions of Part 7.
(i) The applicant shall provide sufficient
documentation to demonstrate that the use shall involve
adequate on-site supervision and security measures to
protect public safety.
G) The Board may place conditions upon the use
to protect public safety, such as conditions on the types of
residents and security measures.
(k) Immediate contact with a supervisor or
manager of the facility shall be available to the Township,
twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
(1) An emergency management plan must be
developed and submitted to the Township Emergency
Management Coordinator for review.
(m) All treatment centers shall be subject to an
annual inspection by the Township Codes Department."
(106) Vehicle Wash Preventative Maintenance Center
(a) Services performed at a vehicle wash preventative
maintenance center are limited to those services described under
the definition of such use.
(b) Sale of gasoline and other fuels shall not be permitted
at the facility.
(c) The lot shall be graded such that process water shall
not run off across the lot, onto any adjacent lot, or onto a public
street.
XXXII-260
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d) A grease trap shall be provided within the sewer
hook-up designed in accordance with the requirements of the
plumbing inspector.
(e) Automobile storage and waiting spaces shall be
provided at the rate of not less than five (5) spaces for each bay in a
self-service facility and not less than ten (10) spaces for each
vehicle which can be accommodated within an automatic or
semi-automatic facility. All vehicle storage and waiting areas shall
be designed and located so as not to intrude into any required yard
area. Buildings shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any
residential district or any existing residential use.
(f) Where a vehicle wash preventative maintenance
center adjoins a residential property or a residential district, the
hours of operation shall not be earlier than 7:00 a.m., prevailing
time, nor later than 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
(g) All automobile parts are to be located within an
enclosed building. No dismantled, inoperable or unlicensed
vehicles are permitted on the premises.
(h) Full body paint spraying or body and fender work
shall not be permitted.
(i) Vehicle wash preventative maintenance centers may
also include the sale of a limited selection of food and common
household items as a clearly accessory use, provided that the total
parking requirements of Part 7 are complied with.
G) All provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, vibration, light or electrical interference to adjacent
lots.
(k) Yard areas adjacent to any residential lot shall be
suitable screened.
(1) Any drive-through facilities shall comply with the
applicable portions of the Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking SF.
Regulations of Part 7 of this Chapter.
(107) Warehouse or Wholesale.
XXXII-261
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) Truck parking and loading shall meet the minimum
standards of this Part and in unique situations shall be provided
according to maximum standards of the industry for the specific
type of warehouse, wholesale or distribution activity to be
conducted.
(b) Truck or rail access and operations shall not conflict
with the convenience and safety of automobile traffic and parking.
(c) No storage of trash, garbage, refuse, explosive or
flammable materials, hazardous substances, animals, animal
carcasses or skins or similar items shall be permitted.
(d) A warehouse facility shall have a minimum lot size of
two (2) acres. A wholesale facility shall have a minimum lot size of
three (3) acres.
(108) Wildlife Sanctuary.
(a) The use shall be conducted on a lot at least ten (10)
acres in size.
(b) No animal which is dangerous or capable of causing
harm to persons or damage to property shall be permitted to roam
free.
(c) No wildlife sanctuary shall contain animals that do
not naturally inhabit the region within which the use is located.
(d) Every barn, animal shelter, stable, cage, feed yard or
manure storage area shall be at least three hundred (300) feet from
all lot lines, residential district boundaries and dwellings except the
dwelling of the owner or lessee.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 321 of Section 2)
XXXII-262
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 325. Special Exception Uses.
(A) Purpose. Before a zoning permit is granted for any use listed as a
special exception use in this Chapter, a site plan shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission and approved by the Board. This requirement is provided
because of the considerable impact that these uses tend to have on a community.
The application and review process shall follow the procedures included in
Part 8 of this Chapter.
(B) Site Plan and Traffic Impact Study Submittals.
(1) All applicants for a special exception use shall submit the
required number of sets of site plans, as specified in Part 8 of this Chapter,
for the proposed use to the Board as part of the application for a zoning
permit.
(2) All site plans shall contain the information required In
§409(C) and shall conform to the site design guidelines included In
§409(E).
(3) A special exception application that involves any of the
following uses shall include a complete traffic impact study complying
with the provisions of §409(D):
(a) Residential: 60 or more dwelling units.
(b) Commercial: 20,000 square feet or more of total floor
area.
(c) Office: 30,000 square feet or more of total floor area.
(d) Industrial: 60,000 square feet or more of total floor
area or any truck terminal.
(e) Institutional: 30,000 square feet or more of total floor
area.
(f) Any use or combination of uses that would generally
result in greater than 1,500 trips per day.
XXXU-263
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(g) Where the Township Engineer certifies that there is a
clear existing severe traffic problem within close proximity to the
proposed project which will likely be significantly worsened by the
proposed project.
(C) Standards. Each special exception use shall comply with general
standards listed in Part 8 and any specific standards listed for the proposed use
in §324.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 322 of Section 2)
Section 326. Conditional Uses.
(A) Purpose. Before a zoning permit is granted for any use listed as a
conditional use in this Chapter, a site plan shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and approved by the Township Supervisors. This requirement is
provided because of the considerable impact that these uses tend to have on a
community. The application and review process shall follow the procedures
included in Part 8 of this Chapter.
(B) Site Plan and Traffic Impact Study Submittals.
(1) All applicants for a conditional use shall submit the required
number of sets of site plans, as specified in Part 8 of this Chapter, for the
proposed use to the Board of Supervisors as part of the application for a
zoning permit.
(2) All site plans shall contain the information required In
§409(C) and shall conform to the guidelines included in §409(E).
(3) A conditional use application that involves any of the uses
listed under §325(B)(3) shall include a complete traffic impact study
complying with the provisions of §409(D).
(C) Standards. Each conditional use shall comply with all general
standards listed in Part 8 and any specific standards for the proposed use listed
in §324.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 323 of Section 2)
Section 327. Accessory Uses.
XXXII-264
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(A) In General. An accessory use on the same lot and customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted by right.
(B) Yard Requirements. Every accessory use shall comply with the
yard regulations for the district in which it is located, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this Chapter.
(C) Special Standards. Each accessory use shall comply with all of the
following standards listed for that use:
(1) Accessory Uses, Buildings or Structures.
(a) No detached accessory building or structure shall be
erected in any required front,side or rear yard, except a five (5) foot
setback shall be required within side or rear yards that directly abut
an alley. No detached accessory building or structure shall be
erected within five (5) feet of any other building or structure except
as noted in subsection (d) below.
(b) No nonresidential activities shall be permitted in any
residential dish"ict except those permitted by home occupation
regulations or other provisions of this Chapter.
(c) No agricultural use or individual gardens used for
home consumption shall occupy more than one-half (1/2) of the
mmlmum side or rear yard required in the applicable zoning
district.
(d) An accessory building used for storage of garden
equipment, bicycles, sleds or other equipment used by the
occupants of a dwelling shall be allowed to be constructed within
two (2) feet of the side and rear property lines. However, it shall be
located to the rear of the building used as a residence. Construction
of such accessory building will comply with the Uniform
Construction Code, maximum height shall be ten (10) feet, and
maximum size shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet with the
following exception: any accessory storage building as described in
this subsection which is over one hundred fifty (150) square feet
shall be located to the rear of the building used as a residence and
shall be located no closer to a lot line than the minimum side y~~
requirement for one side yard for the zoning district in whic /' jh '
accessory building is located. .. ,.
XXXU-265
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(e) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit
other uses not mentioned so long as they are clearly accessory to
the principal permitted use of the land and do not create a threat to
the public health, safety and/ or welfare of the community.
(f) Accessory buildings to residential uses (including
private vehicle garage).
1) No such accessory building shall be located
within a required front or side yard for an accessory use.
However, such accessory building may be located within a
required rear yard in which case the minimum side yard
requirement for one side yard for the zoning dish-ict in
which the accessory building is located shall determine the
minimum building setback.
2) The cumulative floor area of accessory
buildings shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the floor
area of the principal building, except where such
computation would result in a permitted floor area of less
than six hundred (600) square feet. In such case, a
cumulative floor area of accessory structures of six hundred
(600) square feet of floor area shall be permitted.
i) A property with a lot size of 2 acres or
greater shall be permitted a cumulative floor area of
accessory structures of 1,500 square feet provided the
structure meets all building setback requirements.
3) Accessory structures may be located as
follows, within the other requirements of this Chapter:
i) No accessory building to the principal
residential use shall have a height greater than fifteen
(15) feet.
ii) No accessory structure to a singlefamily
dwelling unit shall have a total floor are
greater than ten percent (10%) of the total land area of
the lot.
(2) Alternative Energy System, Accessory (Solar and Wind).
XXXII-266
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) General Requirements for all accessory alternative
energy systems
1) Power Generation. Accessory alternative
energy systems shall be intended to primarily reduce on-site
consumption of utility power. If the capacity of the system
is so that the main purpose is to supply electrical or thermal
power primarily for off-site use, it shall comply with all
requirements for a principal alternative energy system.
2) Power Lines. All electrical wiring leading from
an accessory alternative energy system shall be located
underground.
3) Setbacks. No accessory alternative energy
system shall be located within the required front yard.
4) Noise. Accessory alternative energy systems
shall comply with the noise control requirements of Section
512.
5) Uniform Construction Code. To the extent
applicable, the accessory alternative energy system shall
comply with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code,
Act 45 of 1999 as amended, and the regulations adopted by
the Department of Labor and Industry.
6) Design Safety Certification. The design of the
accessory alternative energy system shall conform to
applicable industry standards, including those of the
American National Standards Institute. The Applicant shall
submit certificates of design compliance obtained by the
equipment manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories,
or other similar certifying organization.
7) Electrical Components. All electrical
components of the accessory alternative energy system shall
conform to relevant and applicable local, state and national
codes, and relevant and applicable international standards.
8) Signage. Accessory alternative energy syst
shall contain no signage except for warning signs.
XXXII-267
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
9) Warnings. A clearly visible warning sign
concerning voltage must be placed at the base of all padmounted
transformers and substations. Visible, reflective,
colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or tape shall be
placed on the anchor points of guy wires and along the guy
wires up to a height of ten feet from the ground.
10) Climb Prevention/Locks. Towers that are part
of an accessory alternative energy system shall not be
climbable up to fifteen (15) feet above ground surface. All
access doors to buildings and electrical equipment shall be
locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by nonauthorized
persons.
11) Easements. No accessory alternative energy
system shall be constructed, erected, relocated to or placed
within an existing easement or right-of-way without the
written permission of the person, party or entity to which
the easement or right-of-way benefits.
12) Drainage. No accessory alternative energy
system shall alter, divert or obstruct the flow of stormwater
runoff without the applicant first obtaining the specific
approval for such alterations from the Township.
13) Utility Company Notification. No accessory
solar energy system shall be installed until evidence has
been given that the utility company has been informed of the
customer's intent to install an interconnected customerowned
generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
14) Maintenance. The accessory alternative energy
system must be properly maintained and be kept free from
all hazards, including but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose
fastenings, being in an unsafe condition or detrimental to
public health, safety or general welfare.
15) Building Permit Applications. Building permit
applications for accessory alternative energy systems shall
be accompanied by line drawings of the electrical
components, as supplied by the manufacturer, in sufficient
XXXII-268
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
detail to allow for a determination that the maImer of
installation conforms to the National Electrical Code.
(b) Additional Requirements for Accessory Solar Energy
Systems
1) Exemptions. Any accessory solar energy
system with an aggregate collection and/ or focusing area of
ten (10) square feet or less is exempt from this section.
2) Installer Certification. Installers must certify
they are listed as a certified installer on the P A Department
of Environmental Protection's (DEP) approved solar installer
list or that they meet the criteria to be a DEP approved
installer by meeting or exceeding one of the following
requirements:
i) Is certified by the North American
Board of Certified Energy Practitioners (NABCEP).
ii) Has completed an Interstate Renewable
Energy Council (IREC) Institute for Sustainable
Power Quality (ISPQ) accredited Photovoltaic (PV)
training program or a PV manufacturer's training
program and successfully installed a minimum of
tllTee PV systems.
3) Glare. All accessory solar energy systems shall
be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or glare
does not project onto nearby properties, structures or
roadways. The applicant has the burden of proving that any
glare produced does not have adverse impact on
neighboring or adjacent uses either through siting or
mitigation.
4) Development on Adjoining Properties. The
application for any permit for an accessory solar energy
system shall include an acknowledgement that the issuing of
said permit shall not and does not create in the property
owner, its, his, her or their successors and assigns in title ~r,
create in the property itself: (a) the right to remain fre of
shadows and/ or obstructions to solar energy caus \
, \" "';"
development of adjoining or other property or the .'~
Yi1
r/l
XXXII-269
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
any trees or vegetation on such property; or (b) the right to
prohibit the development on or growth of any trees or
vegetation on such property. Such application shall be
signed by the property owner.
5) Roof Mounted and Wall Mounted Accessory
Solar Energy Systems:
i) A roof mounted or wall mounted
accessory solar energy system may be located on a
principal or accessory building.
ii) The total height of a building with an
accessory solar energy system shall not exceed by
more than two (2) foot the maximum building height
specified for principal or accessory buildings within
the applicable zoning district.
iii) Wall mounted accessory solar energy
systems shall comply with the setbacks for principal
and accessory structures in the underlying zoning
dish"icts.
iv) Solar panels shall not extend beyond
any portion of the roof edge.
6) Ground Mounted Accessory Solar Energy
Systems:
i) Setbacks from Residential Uses or
Properties. Where a ground mounted accessory solar
energy system is located adjacent to a principally
residential use or an unimproved property located
within the RHA, Re, RS, LDS, MDS, SS or U districts,
the minimum yard setback(s) from the common
property line(s) shall be equivalent to the principal
structure setback in the zoning district within which
the energy system is located. A ground mounted
accessory solar energy system shall not be located in
the required front yard.
ii) Setbacks from Non-Residential Uses or
Properties. Where a ground mounted accessory solar
XXXII-270
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
energy system is located adjacent to a principally nonresidential
use or an unimproved property located
within the NC PHI, PHT, POB, PIB, EI or FS districts,
the minimum yard setback(s) from the common
property line(s) shall be ten (10) feet. A ground
mounted accessory solar energy system shall not be
located in the required front yard.
iii) Height. Freestanding ground mounted
accessory solar energy systems shall not exceed the
maximum accessory structure height 111 the
underlying zoning district.
iv) Impervious Coverage. The surface area
of the arrays of a ground mounted accessory solar
energy system, regardless of the mounted angle of
any solar panels, shall be considered impervious and
calculated in the lot coverage of the lot on which the
system is located.
v) Screening. Any ground mounted
accessory solar energy system located on a property
which directly abuts any existing residential use shall
provide buffer yards and planting screens in
accordance with the provisions of Section 405(1).
Such planting screen shall comply with the
requirements for a screen of high intensity.
vi) Drainage. No ground mounted
accessory solar energy system shall alter, divert or
obstruct the flow of stormwater runoff without the
applicant first obtaining the specific approval for such
alterations from the Township.
vii) Area Exemption. The surface area of a
ground mounted accessory solar energy system shall
be exempt from the prOVISIons of Section
327(C)(1)(£)(2) of this Chapter, which requires that the
cumulative area of accessory buildings not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of the e'lcipal
building.
XXXII-271
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) Additional Requirements for Accessory Wind
Energy Systems
1) An accessory wind energy system which
permits any vane, sailor rotor blade to pass within twenty
(20) feet of the ground shall be prohibited.
2) The foundation and base of any wind energy
tower shall be set back from a property line or right-of-way
line a distance equal to not less than 1.25 times the wind
energy system height.
3) Wind turbines shall be a non-obtrusive color
such as white, off-white or gray.
4) Wind turbines shall not be artificially lighted,
except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation
Adminish'ation or other applicable authority that regulates
air safety.
5) The owner shall make reasonable efforts to
mmnnize shadow flicker to any occupied building on an
adjoining property.
6) Accessory wind energy towers shall comply
with all Federal Aviation Administration, Commonwealth of
PelIDsylvania Bureau of Aviation and applicable airport
zoning regulations, including those pertaining to height.
7) Building permit applications for accessory
wind energy systems shall be accompanied by standard
drawings of the wind turbine structure and stamped
engineered drawings of the tower, base, footings and/or
foundation as provided by the manufacturer.
8) No illumination of the turbine or tower shall be
allowed unless required by the FAA.
(3) Farm Pond.
(a) The developer of any farm pond shall obtain all
required State and Federal permits.
XXXII-272
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) No farm pond shall be of such a size or character as to
create any dangerous, noxious or objectionable condition.
(4) Fences, Walls, Hedges and Gates.
(a) Unless otherwise stated, these uses shall be allowed
in all districts.
(b) Setback from Roads. A fence, structure, wall or
continuous hedge shall be located no closer than three (3) feet of the
existing right-of-way of a public road and shall have a maximum
height of four (4) feet along all public roads. In addition, the sight
distance requirements of §405(H) shall be satisfied.
(c) Fences.
1) Any fence located in the front yard of a use in a
residential district shall have a minimum of 50% of its
surface area as transparent and shall not exceed four (4) feet
in height.
2) Fences shall be located no closer than six (6)
inches to any side or rear lot line, unless otherwise agreed
upon in writing between two (2) adjoining property owners,
in which case the fence may be located closer than six (6)
inches including the location of the fence on the side or rear
lot line.
3) In a residential district, a fence located
anywhere except the front yard of a use may have a height
of up to six (6) feet and may be opaque.
4) In all other districts, fences may have a
maximum height of nine (9) feet.
5) A fence of up to ten (10) feet may be allowed in
a rear yard in any district for the sole purpose of enclosing a
court for tennis or similar sports. Such fence shall be located
no closer than five (5) feet to any property line or street
right-of-way.
XXXII-273
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d) Walls.
1) Any walls should be architecturally compatible
with the structure and the landscape.
2) Any wall Walls in the front yard of a use in a
district shall be a special exception where the proposed
height of the wall exceeds 4 feet..
3) Walls may be one (1) foot in height for every
one (1) feet they are set back from a property line, up to a
maximum height of six (6) feet.
(e) Hedges. Continuous hedges may have a maximum
height of three (3) feet in any front yard.
(f) Gates. All fences, walls or continuous hedges more
than three (3) feet in height shall be equipped with gates or other
suitable passageways at intervals of not more than two hundred
fifty (250) feet.
(5) Geothermal Energy System, Accessory.
(a) Closed loop accessory geothermal energy systems
shall be permitted in all zoning districts.
(b) No person shall install an open loop geothermal
system. It shall be permissible to operate an open loop geothermal
system provided that such unit was legally installed on the
property prior to the enactment of this Ordinance
(c) Geothermal energy systems shall conform to the
applicable indush-y standards including those of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI). Applicants shall submit
certificates of compliance demonstrating that the system has been
tested and approved by Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or other
approved independent testing agency.
(d) Setbacks.
1) Above-ground equipment shall comply with
the applicable setback requirements of the respective zoning
district.
XXXII-274
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
2) Equipment, piping and devices shall not be
located within any easement or right-of-way.
(e) Casing. All wells serving geothermal heating and/ or
cooling systems shall be equipped with watertight and durable
casing pipe. The casing shall be carried to a minimum depth of 20
feet and grouted in place. The sections of casing pipe shall be
joined in accordance with applicable industry standards and the
annular space between the well casing and earth formation shall be
completely filled with approved grout materials.
(f) Heat pumps. Heat pump (geothermal) installations
shall be designed and constructed to provide an effective
watertight seal with the well casing or water storage reservoir and
to prevent contamination from reaching the water chamber or
interior pump surfaces. Boreholes must be grouted from a
minimum depth of 20 feet below grade to the ground surface with
an approved grout.
(6) Heliport.
(a) The Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation within the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall find the landing
area safe and acceptable for licensing a heliport.
(b) The Federal Aviation Administration shall have
granted approval for the use of the air space.
(7) Holiday Tree Sales. When operated as an accessory use to a
principal use on the same lot, holiday tree sales shall comply with all
provisions listed for such use under §324.
(8) Home Occupation.
(a) In any residential district, all dwelling units with
direct access to a public street, except apartment units, may be used
for the practice of a home occupation, provided such occupation is
clearly incidental or secondary to the use of the property as a
residence, and further provided that such use of th~ dwell~g does
not change the character thereof or have any extenor evLde, ce of
such accessory use other than a small nameplate as pro :':. this
tt~
XXXII-275
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Chapter. The proprietor of the home occupation must be a legal
resident and occupant of the structure.
(b) Standards:
1) Home occupation shall be limited to the
involvement on the premises of not more than two (2)
persons at anyone (1) time whether paid or unpaid.
2) The number of off-street parking spaces shall
comply with the requirements for a home occupation listed
in Table 7.1, in addition to those required for the residence
units. All parking spaces shall be located outside of the
street right-of-way.
3) Unless otherwise permitted in this Section,
home occupations shall not occupy more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total floor area of the dwelling unit.
4) Home occupations shall be subject to the
following limitations:
i) No ermSSIOn of unpleasant gases or
other odorous matter shall be permitted.
ii) No emissions of noxious, toxic or
corrosive gases or fumes injurious to persons,
property or vegetation shall be permitted.
iii) No glare and heat from any home
occupation shall be permitted.
iv) No discharge is permitted into a
reservoir, sewage or storm disposal system, stream,
open body of water or into the ground, of any
materials in such a way or of such nature or
temperature as could contaminate any water supply,
or damage or be detrimental to any sewage system or
any sewage treatment process or otherwise could
cause the emission of dangerous objectionable
elements.
XXXII-276
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
v) No vibration perceptible beyond the
dwelling unit or building in which the home
occupation is conducted shall be permitted.
vi) No noise shall be audible beyond the
dwelling unit or building in which the home
occupation is conducted whichever shall be the
smaller, which exceeds the average intensity of street
traffic at the front lot line. Objectionable noises due to
intermittence, beat, frequency or shrillness shall be
muffled.
vii) No emISSIOn of any smoke shall be
permitted.
viii) Electric or electronic devices shall be
shielded in such a manner as not to interfere with
radio or television reception or transmission of any
kind.
ix) No storage of materials or products in
open areas shall be permitted.
x) No retail sales shall be permitted except
for home produced goods.
xi) Auto repair of any intensity shall only
be permitted by special exception approval.
xii) No material designed for use as an
explosive shall be reproduced or stored on the
premises.
(c) Additional standards for a day care center as a home
occupation. In addition to the general home occupation standards
listed above, a day care center operating as a home occupation shall
comply with the following specific standards.
1) The use shall comply with all local, State,
Federal and County requirements./,,::\
2) The use may occupy more than tW~,fi~~\f :ve
'Y(ii;:t;' , , Q, (25) percent of the total floor area of the dwellin "f:!J:" %
~,
XXXII-277
FlNAL (Revised 5-19-15)
3) The use shall serve no more than twelve (12)
children, including members of the family residing in the
dwelling.
4) With the exception of the outdoor activity area,
the operation of the day care center shall take place within
the dwelling and shall not be located within any accessory
structure.
5) There shall be a minimum of sixty (60) square
feet of space per child in the outdoor activity area, which
area shall be free of hazards and properly fenced with a
fence having a minimum height of four (4) feet. No outdoor
activity area shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any lot
line for any home occupation daycare serving more than 5
children.
6) The day care center shall be located and
operated in a manner that reduces or eliminates potential
hazards to the children being cared for at the facility. It shall
be the responsibility of the owner to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Building Code Official, full compliance
with this provision.
7) With the exception of minimum lot size, a day
care center operating as a home occupation that serves more
than five (5) children that are not members of the family
residing in the dwelling shall comply with all provisions
listed under §324 for a II nursery school or day care center" as
a principal use. This shall include provisions relating to
outdoor activity areas, indoor floor space and air space, offstreet
parking and any applicable County, State or Federal
regulations.
(9) Interior Service and Convenience Uses.
(a) Interior Service and Convenience Uses shall be
permitted as an accessory use, where specified, and only within a
building housing one of the following principal uses: office,
government office, financial establishment, hospitalj medical
center, medical office/ medical clinic, professional office, college or
university, other similar commercial uses, and any industrial use.
XXXII-278
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) All interior service and convenience uses shall not
occupy more than a total of ten percent (10%) of the total floor area
of the building in which they are located.
(c) Public entrances to interior service and convenience
uses shall be from the interior of the building.
(d) No public entrance to any interior service or
convenience use shall be located less than thirty (30) feet from an
exterior exit to the building that is used by the public for ingress
and egress.
(e) Exterior signage shall not be permitted for any service
and convenience use.
(f) An employee nursery/day care functioning as an
interior service and convenience use shall comply with all
provisions specified for a nursery/day care functioning as a
principal use.
(10) Keeping Animals or Fowl.
(a) See regulations on the following uses that are not
defined as "the Keeping of Animals or Fowl," "Kennels,"
"Agriculture, general," "Animal Husbandry" and "Stables" in §321
and the appropriate definitions in Part 2.
(b) The keeping of animals or fowl shall comply with the
performance standards of Part 5 and shall not result in a threat to
the public health or safety.
(c) A lot involving a single-family dwelling with a lot
size of less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or any
multifamily dwelling unit shall include the keeping of not more
than five (5) cats or dogs of more than six (6) months of age.
(d) The keeping of animals or fowl within the LDS, MDS,
SS, V, Ne, and PMU Districts shall not include the keeping of farm
animals.
(e) A residential property with a lot size
acre shall be permitted the keeping of chickens
XXXII-279
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
regardless of the zonmg district within which the property is
located. Such accessory use shall be in accordance with the
following:
1) There shall be no more than a total of 12
chickens.
2) Chickens shall be provided with an
appropriate housing structure of at least 4 square feet per
chicken located within the building setback requirements or
25 feet, whichever is greater. All structures shall be properly
maintained so as to not become a nuisance to adjacent
properties.
3) Outdoor pasture areas shall be properly
maintained with a vegetated and stable surface that is
enclosed by a 4 foot minimum high fence suitable to prevent
the escape of animals.
4) All animal waste shall be properly stored and
disposed of so as to not be objectionable at the site's
property lines.
5) The keeping of chickens as an accessory use
shall not involve the keeping of a rooster.
(11) Noncommercial Swimming Pool. A noncommercial
swimming pool designed to contain a water depth of twenty-four (24)
inches or more shall not be located, constructed or maintained on any lot
or land area except in conformity with the following requirements:
(a) Permit. A building permit shall be required to locate,
construct or maintain a noncommercial swimming pool.
(b) Location. Such pool shall be located in a rear or side
yard only. No above or inground pool shall be located within
fifteen (15) feet of a side or rear lot line, within ten (10) feet of any
overhead wires, over any onlot sewage disposal field or system or
five (5) feet from any other structure. A hot tub shall be required to
meet the full side and rear yard setback requirements of the
applicable zoning district. A hot tub may be located closer than 5
feet to any structure, and must conform to all adopted Building
Code requirements.
XXXII-280
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) Fence. Every inground noncommercial swimming
pool shall be entirely enclosed with a fence complying with all
provisions of the applicable building code. Where required by the
applicable building code, aboveground pools shall also be entirely
enclosed with an appropriate fence. Aboveground pools not
requiring a fence shall require a self-closing and self-latching gate
to any pool access platform.
(d) Water. If the water for such pool is supplied from a
private well, there shall be no cross-connection with the public
water supply system. If the water from such pool is supplied from
the public water supply system, the inlet shall be above the
overflow level of said pool.
(e) Drainage. The draining of all pools shall comply with
all applicable local and state regulations.
(12) No-Impact Home-Based Business. The business or
commercial activity comprising the no-impact home-based business must
satisfy the following requirements:
(a) The business activity shall be compatible with the
residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
(b) The business shall employ no employees other than
family members residing in the dwelling.
(c) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and
no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
(d) There shall be no outside appearance of a business
use, including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(e) The business activity may not use any equipment or
process which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or
electrical or electronic interference, including interference with
radio or television reception, which is detectable in the
neighborhood.
;\
(f) The business activity may not generateAnx, solid
waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, ",;~6 ~~~ not
normally associated with residential use in the neighb' 'g. ,,~\
,~ ~~
XXXII-281 s,
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(g) The business activity shall be conducted only within
the dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable
floor area.
(h) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
(i) Approval of such a use shall not supersede any deed
restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the use of land, nor
any master deed, by-law or other document applicable to a
common interest ownership community.
(13) Open Air Retail Sales of Agricultural Products, as an
accessory use.
(a) Shall be permitted solely as an accessory use to a
principal agricultural use.
(b) Any permanent structure shall be subject to all area,
bulk, and setback requirements of the zoning district within which
it is located.
(c) Temporary sh'uctures shall be dismantled at the end
of the growing season. Any structure in place for more than six (6)
months, whether consecutively or in aggregate, during any
calendar year shall be deemed a permanent structure and shall be
regulated as such.
(d) Temporary sh'uctures must be secure and
structurally sound so as not to create a hazard either to customers
or the general public.
(e) Temporary structures shall be set back at least twenty
(20) feet from the road right-of-way.
(f) Signs for temporary structures shall be In
conformance with the regulations Part 6 of this Chapter.
(g) Safe off-street parking shall be provided for
customers at temporary structures.
(h) Parking shall be provided In compliance with the
provisions of Part 7.
XXXII-282
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(14) Outdoor Wood-Fired Boilers
(a) No person shall install an outdoor wood-fired boiler
that is not a Phase 2 outdoor wood-fired boiler, except for any
cleaner burning outdoor wood-fired boiler that is recommended by
either the EPA or DEP. It shall be permissible to operate a Phase 1
outdoor wood-fired boiler provided that such unit was legally
installed on the property prior to the enactment of this Ordinance.
(b) All outdoor wood-fired boilers must meet applicable
regulations and recommendations of the EP A and DEP. All
outdoor wood-fired boilers shall meet emission certification
requirements unless expressly exempted otherwise. The Applicant
shall have the burden of proving that the outdoor wood-fired boiler
they desire to instalt operate and maintain meets all existing laws,
regulations and certifications.
(c) The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be located at least
one hundred fifty feet (150') from the nearest dwelling that is not
on the same property as the outdoor wood-fired boiler, and the
outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be located at least one hundred
(100) feet from the property line or street right-of-way.
(d) All outdoor wood-fired boilers must be certified not
to exceed EPA particulate matter emission standards. If the EPA or
other agency should promulgate stricter standards, the stricter
standards shall apply.
(e) To the extent applicable, the outdoor wood-fired
boiler shall comply with the Pem1sylvania Uniform Construction
Code, Act 45 of 1999 as amended, and the regulations adopted by
the Department of Labor and Industry.
(f) The design of the outdoor wood-fired boiler shall
conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the
American National Standards Institute. The Applicant shall submit
certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories, or other similar
certifying organization.
(g) No outdoor wood-fired boiler shall b
erected, relocated to or placed within an existi
XXXII-283
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
right-of-way without the written permission of the person, party or
entity to which the easement or right-of-way benefits.
(h) No outdoor wood-fired boiler shall alter, divert or
obstruct the flow of stormwater runoff without the applicant first
obtaining the specific approval for such alterations from the
Township.
(i) The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall have a
permanent chimney that extends at least fifteen (15) feet from roof
ridge of the furnace .
G) Outdoor wood-fired boilers may only burn fuels for
which the same were designed to burn and which are approved by
the manufacturer. None of the following fuels or materials may be
burned In any outdoor wood-fired boilers under any
circumstances:
1) Any material that does not meet the definition
of clean wood.
2) Furniture.
3) Garbage.
4) Tires.
5) Lawn clippings or yard waste.
6) Material containing plastic.
7) Material containing rubber.
8) Waste petroleum products.
9) Paints and paint thinners.
10) Chemicals.
11) Any hazardous waste.
12) Coal.
13) Glossy colored paper.
14) Construction and demolition debris.
15) Plywood.
16) Particleboard.
17) Salt water driftwood.
18) Manure.
19) Animal carcasses.
20) Asphalt products.
(k) No outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be altered or
modified such that the applicable certification emission tests would
be invalidated. Any antipollution device installed by the
XXXII-284
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
manufacturer, or required by this Part or otherwise, shall not be
disconnected or rendered inoperative. Operation of the outdoor
wood-fired boiler shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
written instructions. This shall include, if applicable, periodic
inspection and replacement of catalytic combustors.
(1) All outdoor wood-fired boilers shall be installed,
operated and maintained in strict conformance with the
manufacturer's instructions, the provisions of this Part, applicable
building codes, and all applicable local, State and Federal laws and
regulations. In the event of a conflict, this Part shall apply unless
the manufacturer's instructions or regulations are more strict, in
which case the manufacturer's instructions or regulations shall
apply. A copy of the manufacturer's installation and! or operating
instructions shall be filed with the Township Office, by the
Applicant, together with any subsequent amendments or
modifications.
(m) For all outdoor wood-fired boilers, the chimney must
be secured against high winds, and be consh'ucted, installed and
maintained in such a mam1er that it does not constitute a safety
hazard. All chimneys shall be constructed in accordance with all
rules and regulations of the Township and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and shall be constructed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
(15) Recreational Vehicle Storage. See applicable provision of the
Township of Spring Motor Vehicles and Traffic Chapter (Ord. 179,
adopted December 10, 1984, as amended) (Part 3 of Chapter XIX of the
Codification of Ordinances of the Township of Spring).
(16) Seasonal Roadside Produce Market. Roadside produce
markets for the sale of dairy, farm, greenhouse or nursery products are
permitted with the following resh'ictions:
(a) Size. The area where products are displayed or sold
shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet.
(b) Location. The stand shall be at least fifty;(50) feet
from an intersection and shall be at least thirty (30) fe /~r<=?m the
eX.Is.tm g n.g h t-o f -way lm' e. '',f\. \n ""
XXXII-285
,:,)\,,)\.
/j" "1\ (f~> 0=;\
,\'\
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) Removal in Off-Season. The stand shall be portable,
shall be maintained in good condition and shall be removed during
seasons when products are not being offered for sale, except as is
allowed below.
(d) A stand may remain in place through the year
without being removed if it would be located a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet from the existing right-of-way line.
(e) Parking. Parking for vehicles shall be provided
outside of the existing street right-of-way and in compliance with
the provisions of Part 7. Parking shall be provided for a minimum
of four (4) vehicles.
(f) A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all items offered
for sale shall have been produced on the property on which they
are offered for sale.
(17) Temporary Retail Sales. When operated as an accessory use
to a principal use on the same lot, temporary retail sales shall comply with
all provisions listed for such use under §324.
(18) Tennis Court or Similar Impervious Athletic Surfaces.
(a) An impervious athletic surface shall not be located in
front of the principal building.
(b) An impervious athletic surface shall not be located
over a drainage field of a sewage disposal system.
(c) No impervious athletic surface shall be located within
fifteen (15) feet of the lot line of an abutting single-family detached
dwelling.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 324 of Section 2)
XXXII-286
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Part 4
General Regulations
Section 401. Limit of One Principal Use. No more than one (1) principal use
shall be permitted on a lot, unless the provisions of the relevant zoning district permit a
combination of permitted uses or a multiple use building, or unless it is otherwise
permitted by this Chapter. See §402(B) and (C). (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Section 401 of Section 2)
Section 402. Principal Buildings.
(A) Street Frontage Required. Every principal building shall be built
upon a lot with frontage upon a public or private street improved to meet
Township standards or for which such improvements have been insured by the
posting of a performance guarantee pursuant to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII), excepting however, those principal
buildings specifically approved by the Board of Supervisors.
shall:
(B) Two or More on a Lot. Two (2) or more principal buildings on a lot
(1) When one or more of the principal buildings contain
residential uses, they shall conform to all requirements of this Chapter as
if each building were on a separate lot, including the minimum lot size.
(2) When none of the principal buildings contain residential
uses, the minimum lot area shall be the sum of the areas required for the
individual uses or buildings. Each principal building shall comply with
the applicable setbacks; however, the buildings are not required to be
located as if each building were on a separate lot.
(3) Conform to the standards, improvements and procedures
required for a land development by the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII).
(C) Multiple Occupancy.
(1) Occupancy of a principal commercial or industr·, t\building
by more than one (1) use of similar type is specifically allow ;;'\~c~vided
that all other requirements of this Chapter are satisfied. ;~~.~
(.~<A~~
'-\3~~\ u)
t',,\
XXXII-287 j FOUNmHLc.~t.!,\
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Occupancy of a principal building by more than one (1) use
of dissimilar type is only allowed where the provisions of the specific
Zoning District permit a multiple-use building and where all other
requirements of this Chapter are satisfied.
(3) Each separate use within a principal building shall be
required to apply for separate zoning and occupancy permits, through the
appropriate required processes.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 402 of Section 2)
Section 403. Maximum Height of Buildings. No building shall exceed the
maximum building height standard specified in the relevant district regulations of this
Chapter, except that such standard shall not apply to farm structures, silos, water
towers, communication towers, church· spires, belfries, chimneys or other
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for
human occupancy. Specific height regulations for principal alternative energy systems
are listed under Section 324(B)(5) and for accessory alternative energy systems are listed
under Section 327(C)(2). Notwithstanding the above, any structure or building located
within an Airport Zone as defined in Chapter XXXIII" Airport Zoning" shall conform to
the maximum height provisions of that Chapter. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Section 403 of Section 2)
Section 404. Buildings to Have Access. Every building hereafter erected or
moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or a private street approved by the
governing body and all buildings shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and
convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 404 of Section 2)
Yards.
Section 405. Special Lot and Yard Requirements/Sight Distances and Buffer
(A) In General. The lot or yard requirements for any new building or
use shall not include any part of a lot that is required by any other building or
use to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
(B) Corner Lots.
(1) Every lot at the corner of two (2) streets shall have, facing
each street, a yard equal to the front yard requirement. This shall not
apply to existing alleys.
XXXII-288
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Of the remaining yards on a corner lot, the Zoning Officer
shall determine which are rear and side yards. This determination shall
be based upon factors including the location and orientation of the
principal structure, the configuration of the lot and the location of
vehicular access to the lot.
(3) The minimum rear yard requirement for a corner lot shall be
five (5) feet less than the minimum rear yard requirement listed for the
district within which the corner lot is located.
(4) Where an existing lot of record is changed into a corner lot
as a the result of the subdivision or land development of an adjacent tract
of land, the front yard requirement shall apply only along the street upon
which the lot originally fronted.
(C) Yard Requirements of Subdivisions Located Within Two (2) or
More Residential Zoning Districts.
(1) When any subdivision of land is located within two (2) or
more residential zoning districts, as established by the official zoning map
of this Chapter, any subdivider thereof shall have the right to request from
the governing body permission to have the said subdivision, in its entirety
regulated as to side, rear and front yard requirements of anyone (1) of the
residential zoning districts within which the said subdivision is located.
(2) Any such request shall be submitted to the governing body
in writing. The acceptance or rejection of the said request by the
governing body, after receiving the written comments of the Planning
Commission of the Township concerning the said request, shall be
forwarded, in writing, to the subdivider.
(3) The governing body shall have the right to impose
reasonable conditions and safeguards in granting any such request as
deemed necessary by the governing body to implement this Chapter,
including any amendments thereto.
(D) Lot Area and Lot Width for Lots Not Served With Public Water
and/ or Sanitary Sewers. Where a lot is not served by a public water supply
and/ or sanitary sewerage system and the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) or other State or local
force required higher standard for lot area or lot width than this
more restricted regulations of such other ordinance or regulation shall
XXXII-289
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(E) Yard Exceptions.
(1) When an unimproved lot that is not a corner lot is situated
between two improved lots with front yard dimensions less than those
required for the district, the front yard required may be a depth equal to
the average of the two (2) adjoining lots.
(2) Where a principal structure, which is located on a through
lot abutting an arterial or collector street, fronts on a parallel street that is
not an arterial or collector and gains vehicular access from such street, the
yard abutting the arterial or collector street shall be considered a rear
yard. Such lot shall contain a 20-foot wide buffer yard, including planting
screen, in accordance with the provisions of §405(1). Where a lot exists at
the time of adoption of this Chapter and contains no such buffer yard, a
planting screen shall not be required, but any principal or accessory
structure shall be located as though such buffer yard existed.
(3) Two-family semidetached dwellings and single-family
attached dwellings shall have no side yard requirement along the
common lot lines upon which the vertical walls separating dwelling units
are located. All walls constructed along the common lot line shall be fire
walls unless they are located a minimum of four (4) feet from the common
lot line. All applicable building code provisions pertaining to common lot
lines shall apply.
(F) Projections Into Required Yards.
(1) The following projections shall be permitted into required
yards and shall not be considered in the determination of yard
requirements or building coverage.
(a) Terraces, patios, decks or porches, whether roofed or
not, but not otherwise enclosed by one or more doors, windows,
screens, walls and/or siding of any kind, size or dimension
provided that such terraces, patios, decks or porches shall not
project into the required side yard and/ or yards, nor shall the same
project more than five (5) feet into the required front yard and/ or
yards, nor shall the same project into the required rear yard more
than one-third (1/3) of the required rear yard. Unless otherwise
permitted under §405(F)(1)(b) below, no such projection shall be
permitted within four (4) feet of any required side lot lines. An atgrade
terrace, patio, or similar hardscape surface less than 12 inches
XXXII-290
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
to final grade shall only be required to meet the setbacks specified
in Section 327(C)(1)(f)(1) for accessory structures.
(b) In the case of a two-family semidetached dwelling or
a single-family attached dwelling, terraces, patios, decks or porches
may be located closer than four (4) feet to an internal side lot line
when the applicant has demonstrated to the Township's
satisfaction the right to encroach upon the adjoining property in
order to construct and maintain such terraces, patios, decks or
porches. Any agreements, easements or similar documents
granting such rights shall "run with the land" and be recorded in
the office of the Berks County Recorder of Deeds.
(c) Projected Architectural Features. Bay windows,
cornices, eaves, fireplaces, chimneys, windowsills or other
architectural features, provided that any single feature does not
exceed five (5) square feet in external area.
(d) Lampposts, walkways, driveways, retaining walls
and steps shall be permitted within any required yard.
(e) Uncovered stairs, landings, and handicap ramps,
provided such stairs, landings or ramps do not exceed three (3) feet
six (6) inches in height.
(f) Open balconies provided such balconies are not
supported on the ground and do not project more the five (5) feet
into any required yard nor closer than three (3) feet to any adjacent
lot lines.
(G) Exceptions to Minimum Lot Areas and Lot Widths.
(1) Nonconforming Lots. See §408.
(2) Irregularly Shaped Lots. In the case of irregularly shaped
lots, the minimum lot width specified in the district shall be measured at
the minimum required front yard, provided that in no case shall the lot
frontage measure at the street right-of-way line be less than fifty percent
(50%) of the minimum lot width (see Sketch A).
XXXII-291
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
X=AT LEAST
50% OF REQUIRED
LOT WIDTH
(H) Traffic Visibility Across Corners.
(1) Sightlines at Intersection of Streets.
(a) A hoiangular area as defined in §405(H)(1)(c) of this
Part shall be graded and shall be free of sight obstructions so that
vision between a height of from two (2) feet to ten (10) feet above
the centerline grades of the intersecting streets is not obscured.
(b) By means of deed restriction, lease reshoiction or plan
amendment (whichever method is applicable), vegetation shall not
be planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to obscure
vision between a height of from two (2) feet to ten (10) feet above
the centerline grades of the intersecting streets within the triangular
area defined in §405(H)(1)(c) of this Part.
(c) Such triangular area shall be bounded by the
intersecting street centerlines and a diagonal connecting two (2)
points, one which is at each end of the centerline of each shoeet:
1) one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
intersection of such street centerlines, if either street is an
arterial street;
2) one hundred (100) feet from the intersection of
such street centerlines if either street is a collector street;
3) seventy-five (75) feet from the intersection of
such street centerlines, if both streets are local streets.
XXXII-292
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
150' IF EllHER SlREET IS AN ARTERiAl SlREET
100' IF EllHER SlREET IS A COlLECTOR SlREET
75' IF BOlH SlREETS ARE LOCAl SlREETS
(2) Sightlines at Intersections of Driveways or Accessways with
Streets.
(a) A triangular area as defined in §405(H)(1)(c) of this
Part shall be graded and shall be free of sight obstructions so that
vision between a height of from two (2) feet to ten (10) feet above
the centerline grades of the intersecting driveway, accessway or
streets is not obscured.
(b) By means of deed restriction, lease restriction or plan
amendment (whichever method is applicable), vegetation shall not
be planted or allowed to grow in such a manner so as to obscure
vision between a height of from two (2) feet to ten (10) feet above
the centerline grades of the intersecting driveway, accessway or
streets within the triangular area defined in §405(H)(2)(c) of this
Part.
(c) Such triangular area shall be bounded by the
intersecting driveway, accessway or street centerlines and a
diagonal connecting two (2) points, one which is at each end of the
centerline of each driveway, accessway or street thirty (30) feet
from the intersection of such centerlines.
XXXII-293
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
I. 30'
(I) Buffer Yards. Any nonresidential use which directly abuts any
existing residential use shall provide buffer yards. Where specified elsewhere in
this Chapter, certain nonresidential uses which directly abut a residential district
shall also provide buffer yards. Such buffer yards shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) Size, Location.
(a) A twenty (20) foot buffer yard shall be required,
unless otherwise indicated in this Chapter.
(b) Where a buffer yard is required along a property or
lot line, it shall be measured from said property or lot line. Where a
buffer yard is required along a district boundary line, it shall be
measured from the district boundary line or from the street rightof-
way line (where a street serves as the district boundary line).
Buffer yards shall not be within an existing or future street right-ofway
and shall be in addition to that right-of-way.
(c) The buffer yard may include land within a required
front, side or rear yard, provided the larger yard requirement shall
apply in case of conflict.
(2) Characteristics.
(a) The buffer yard shall be a continuous, pervious,
landscaped area consisting of trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover.
(b) All buffer yards shall be free of structures (other than
fences serving as screens), manufacturing or processing activities,
sewage systems, parking areas or storage of materials.
XXXII-294
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) No driveways or streets shall be permitted In the
buffer yards except at points of ingress or egress.
(d) Maintenance. In all buffer yards, all areas not covered
by trees or bushes shall be maintained with an all-season
groundcover, such as grass. All grass shall be regularly mowed,
with a height not to exceed ten (10) inches. The buffer yard shall be
kept free of debris or rubbish.
(3) Planting Screen or Fence.
(a) Each buffer yard shall include a planting screen or a
fence extending the full length of the buffer yard to serve as a
barrier to visibility, airborne particles, glare and noise. Such
planting screen shall consist of trees, shrubs and/ or other plant
materials.
(b) Each planting screen shall be in accordance with the
following requirements:
1) The amount and type of plant material
required shall be determined by the intensity of the
proposed land use.
2) Plant materials used in the planting screen
shall be of such species and size as will produce, with three
(3) years, a year-round visual screen of at least eight (8) feet
in height.
3) The planting screen shall be permanently
maintained by the landowner and any plant material which
does not live shall be replaced within one (1) year.
4) The planting screen shall be so placed that at
maturity it will be at least three (3) feet from any street or
property line.
5) The planting screen shall be broken only at
points of vehicular or pedestrian access and shall c
with §405(H).
(c) In circumstances where it is impractical for a
screen to meet all the requirements of this Section or
XXXII-295
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
an undue hardship, the Board may modify the requirements or
approve acceptable alternatives which shall satisfy the spirit,
objectives and intent of the screen requirements.
(d) A fence, when erected as a screen, shall be not less
than eight (8) feet in height and shall be placed no closer than three
(3) feet from any street or property line. In all other respects such
fence shall comply with the provisions of §327.
(e) A planting screen or fence shall have openings or
breaks only at points of vehicular or pedestrian access.
(f) Planting Screens shall be of the following intensities
based upon the proposed land use:
Proposed Land Use
Recreational
Office/Institutional
Multifamily Residential
Commercial/ Indush"ial
Mobile Home Parks
Intensity of Planting
Screen Required*
Low
Medium
Medium
High
High
*Where it is determined by the Township that certain aspects of a
proposed use should be provided with a planting screen of greater
intensity than herein specified, such a screen shall be provided to
the extent necessary to screen the particular aspect from the
adjoining property.
(g) For every fifty (50) linear feet of buffer yard, the
following minimum quantities and types of plant materials shall be
required within the planting screen:
1) Low Intensity: one (1) canopy tree and two
ornamental trees. One (1) evergreen may be substituted for
one of the required ornamental trees.
2) Medium Intensity: one (1) canopy tree, two (2)
evergreen trees, and five (5) shrubs.
3) High Intensity: an average of one (1)
evergreen tree placed for each eight linear feet of buffer
XXXII-296
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
yard, with the trees staggered so that the trunk of each tree is
at least twelve (12) feet diagonally away from each other tree
trunk. In addition, an average of two (2) ornamental trees
and one (1) canopy tree shall be provided. Alternative
plantings that would create a complete, year round visual
screen may be permitted.
4) Planting screens may be combined with an
earthen berm. The majority of the plantings shall be placed
on the outside slope of the berm. Any planting placed at the
top of the berm must be demonstrated to receive adequate
moisture.
(h) The required plant materials shall be distributed over
the length and width of the buffer yard. Plantings may be arranged
symmetrically (formal) or asymmetrically (informal) and may be
grouped to form plant clusters. Informal groupings that reflect the
natural character of the area are encouraged.
(i) Where an applicant proposes that existing vegetation
serve as the required planting screen, the buffer yard shall be a
minimum of fifty (50) in width and, if high intensity planting
screens are required, the applicant must demonstrate that the
existing vegetation would create, and would be maintained as, a
complete, year-round visual screen.
G) A variety of plant species is required as follows:
Min. Number
of Tree Max. Percentage of Any
Number of Trees Species One Species
o to 5 1 100
6 to 15 2 60
16 to 30 3 40
31 to 50 4 30
51 and over 6 20
(k) Existing topographic conditions such as
embankments and berms may be incorporated into thereHuired
buffer yards. \ '~
'\0'~ \!,'. ,
~f 1:"
XXXII-297
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(4) Plans.
(a) Prior to the issuance of any zomng permit, the
applicant shall submit plans showing:
1) The location and arrangement of each buffer
yard.
2) The placement, species and SIze of all plant
materials.
3) The placement, size, materials and type of all
fences to be placed in such buffer yard.
4) The location and size of any proposed or
existing earthen berms to be utilized.
(b) Such plans shall be reviewed by the Zorling Officer to
ascertain that the plans are in conformance with the terms of this
Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 405 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 354, March 10,2008, Section 3)
Section 406. Establishnlent of Ultimate Right-of-Way Widths for Streets.
(A) Purpose. Minimum ultimate right-of-way widths are established
for sh'eets where the existing right-of-way is less than that indicated in §406(C)
for the particular class of street.
(B) Measurement.
(1) The ultimate right-of-way shall be measured from the center
line of the existing streets, with one-half (1/2) of the total width provided
on each side of the center line.
(2) All front yards and other appropriate yards shall be
measured from the ultimate right-of-way line, unless otherwise
specifically stated.
(3) The specific classification of each road is shown on the
official street classification map which is hereby incorporated into and
made a part of this Chapter.
XXXII-298
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(C) Minimum Widths. Minimum ultimate rights-of-way are as follows:
Street Classification
Expressway
Arterial Street
Collector Sh-eet
Local Street
Minimum Future Right-of-Way
120'
80'
60'
53'*
(Greater width may be required in
accordance with use intended)
*unless otherwise specified on the street classification map.
(D) Newly Created Streets. For any newly built street, the Township
Engineer shall designate the functional classification of the street. These
functions should then periodically be added to the official street classification
map. The Township Engineer shall base such classification on the function the
street is expected to serve in the long-term development of the Township.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 406 of Section 2)
Section 407. Frontage Development Along Arterial and Collector Streets. In
order to encourage the sound development of frontage along arterial and collector
streets (as defined on the official street classification map) and to minimize traffic
congestion and hazard, the following special provisions shall apply:
(A) Off-Street Parking and Loading. All area for off-street parking, offstreet
loading and unloading and the storage or movement of motor vehicles
shall comply with all requirements of Part 7.
(B) Access. Access drives, driveways and accessways shall be 111
accordance with the provisions of §704.
(C) Large Developments. In the case of any development intended to
involve more than five (5) commercial or industrial buildings or lots, or more
than ten (10) acres of commercial, industrial, garden apartment or townhouse
,f!;
uses, each principal building shall front upon a marginal access stree rvice
road, common parking lot or similar area and not directly upon a p
XXXII-299
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
unless the Board of Supervisors determines that strict compliance would not be
possible because of the peculiar characteristics of the site and the uses.
(D) Vehicular Access onto Arterial or Collector Streets. Direct
vehicular access from individual lots abutting arterial or collector streets shall be
strongly discouraged. Where possible, lots that abut arterial or collector streets
shall be configured as through lots, where vehicular access is obtained from a
parallel sh'eet that is not an arterial or collector. See the section of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) on "Restriction
of Access."
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 407 of Section 2)
Section 408. Nonconformities.
(A) Statement of Intent.
(1) Within the zarung districts established by this Chapter or
subsequent amendments thereto, there exists or will exist certain
nonconformities which, if lawful before this Chapter was passed or
amended, may be continued, subject to certain limitations, although such
nonconformities would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this Chapter or subsequent amendments thereto.
(2) To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Chapter shall be
deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of
any building or structure on which actual construction was lawfully
begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Chapter and on which actual building construction has been diligently
carried on.
(B) Nonconforming Lots of Record.
(1) Sh'uctures and customary accessory buildings may be
erected in any district on any lot of record at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this Chapter, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this Chapter. This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and
requirements, other than those applying to area or width, or both, shall
conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of
the Board.
XXXII-300
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) If two (2) or more lots, combination of lots and portion of
lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time
of passage or amendment of this Chapter, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements established for lot width and/ or area, the land
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of
this Chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a
manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and/ or area
requirements established by this Chapter, nor shall any division of any
parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the
requirements stated in this Chapter. This Section shall not apply for a
period of five (5) years to an approved subdivision or development plan,
whether preliminary or final.
(C) Nonconforming Uses of Land. Lawful uses of land, which at the
effective date of this Chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto
become nonconforming and where such use involves no individual structure or
building with a replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may
be continued by the present or any subsequent owner so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Extension. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was owned
or leased by the user at the effective date of adoption of such amendment
of this Chapter.
(2) Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been
discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, such use
shall not thereafter be reestablished unless a Certificate of Intention as per
§609 of State Act 247 of 1968 has been filed. Any future use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
(3) Changes or Moving of Use. A nonconforming use, if
changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed back to any
nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may, by special exception, be
changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board shall find
that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in the
zoning district than the existing nonconforming use.
(4) Additional Structures or Buildings. No additional str
or buildings not conforming to the requirements of this Chapt
erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
XXXII-301
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(D) Nonconforming Structures or Buildings. Structures or buildings
which at the effective date of this Chapter or subsequent amendments thereto
become nonconforming by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height,
yards, location on the lot or other requirements concerning the building or
structure, may be continued to be used so long as such structure or building
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Enlargement. No such nonconforming structure or building
may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity,
but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease it
nonconformity.
(2) Damage or Destruction. A nonconforming structure which
is destroyed or partially destroyed by fire, explosion or by any means to
an extent of seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the market value
thereof immediately prior to such damage or destruction shall not be
repaired or restored to a nonconforming status, but shall be reconstructed
and used only in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
(3) Moving of Structure or Building. No nonconforming
structure or building shall be, for any reason, moved for any distance
unless it shall thereafter conform to the zoning regulations for the district
in which it is located after it is moved.
(E) Nonconforming Uses of Structures or Buildings. Lawful uses of
structures or buildings which at the effective date of this Chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments thereto become nonconforming, may be continued by
the present or any subsequent owner so long as such use remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Extension. A nonconforming use may be extended
throughout any part of an existing structure or building or a new
extension may be constructed, provided that any structural alterations,
extensions or additions shall comply with all provisions of this Chapter
with respect to height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements for
the Zoning District in which the structure or building is located.
However, such extension of a nonconforming use shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the gross floor area occupied by said nonconforming use
at the time such nonconforming use became nonconforming.
(2) Change of Use. A nonconforming use of a structure or
building, if changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed
back to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use of a structure or
XXXII-302
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
building may, by special exception, be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the Board shall find that the proposed use is equally
appropriate or more appropriate in the zoning district than the existing
nonconforming use.
(3) Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use of a
structure or building or portion thereof has been discontinued or
abandoned for eighteen (18) consecutive months, such structure or
building or portion thereof shall not thereafter be reestablished unless a
Certificate of Intention as per §609 of State Act 247 of 1968 has been filed.
Any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
(4) Destruction. Removal or destruction of the structure or
building in which a nonconforming use is located shall eliminate the use
of the land upon which the structure or building was erected for a
nonconforming use. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is
defined as damage to an extent of seventy-five percent (75%) or more of
the market value of the structure or building immediately prior to such
damage or destruction. However, if construction begins within twelve
(12) months after destruction or partial destruction is begun, the same
nonconforming use may be reestablished. The Board may, by special
exception, authorize another equally appropriate or more appropriate use
to be reestablished.
(F) Unsafe or Unlawful Structures or Buildings. If a nonconforming
structure or building or portions thereof containing a nonconforming use
becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs or maintenance,
and is declared by the Board of Supervisors, upon the advice of the Township
codes enforcement staff or the Township Engineer, to be unsafe or unlawful by
reason of physical condition, such structure or building shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
(G) Permitted Special Exception Uses Not Nonconforming Uses. Any
use which is permitted as a special exception in a zoning district under the terms
of this Chapter (other than a change through Board action from one
nonconforming use to another nonconforming use) shall not be deemed a
nonconforming use in such Zoning District, but shall without further action be
considered a conforming use.
(H) Registration of Nonconforming Uses and Structures orf
};
To facilitate the administration of this Chapter, it shall be the duty Q .
Officer to prepare and maintain an accurate listing of all :<
XXXII-303
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
structures and buildings. Such a listing shall be a matter of public record and
shall constitute sufficient notice of the nonconforming status of said property and
the limitations therein expressed and implied to any transferee acquiring any
right to use or own such property.
(I) Certificate of Intention.
(1) A Certificate of Intention shall be required in all instances
where a nonconforming use of land or nonconforming use of a structure
or building, is discontinued if the owner or operator of such uses desires
to maintain such a nonconforming use
(2) The Zoning Officer shall maintain proper forms for the
registration of any Certificate of Intention. It shall be incumbent upon the
owner or applicant to file such a form with the Zoning Officer. The filing
of such form shall be considered a ministerial duty of the Zoning Officer,
who shall not refuse to accept the completed form.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall maintain a separate file for all
Certificates of Intention.
(4) Each Certificate of Intention shall be valid for tlu"ee (3) years.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 408 of Section 2)
Section 409. Site Plan Review.
(A) Scope.
(1) Before a zoning permit is issued for any use designated in
the regulations of a district in Part 3 as requiring site plan review, the
procedures of this Section shall be followed in order to more effectively
administer, enforce and implement the purposes, intent and requirements
of this Chapter.
(2) Any proposed development which constitutes a "land
development" (as defined in the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII)) shall not be required to
separately follow the procedures of this Section. The sketch or
preliminary plan shall, however, be submitted to the Zoning Officer to
determine compliance with this Chapter.
(B) Procedure.
XXXII-304
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) When the applicant applies to the Zoning Officer for a
zoning permit the applicant shall submit the required number of sets of
site plans (contact the Township Zoning Officer for the required number).
(a) No zoning permit shall be granted until after the
Planning Commission submits its recommendation to the Zoning
Officer or after forty-five (45) days of the date the site plans were
submitted.
(b) Site plan approval shall not relieve the applicant from
any other provIsIOns of this Chapter nor constitute a
recommendation for a variance or other relief that the applicant
may seek from the Board.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall forward two (2) copies of the site
plan to the Planning Commission within seven (7) days of the date of
official plan submission. The Zoning Officer shall retain one (1) copy of
the site plan for review.
(3) The Planning Commission shall make a written
recommendation to the Zoning Officer within forty-five (45) days of the
date the plan was submitted on whether the site plan indicates that a
zoning permit should be granted or denied. The written recommendation
shall include the underlying findings and reasons affecting the
recommendation. Failure to make a written recommendation within such
forty-five (45) days shall be considered a recommendation to issue such
zoning permit.
(4) The Zoning Officer shall review the site plan and the
Planning Commission's recommendations and issue or deny the zoning
permit within sixty (60) days after the site plan was officially submitted.
(a) The decision of the Zoning Officer shall be in writing
and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to
him at his last known address not later than the day following the
decision.
(b) The decision shall indicate the specific provisions of
this Chapter and other laws which have not been m and the
specific reasons therefore.
XXXII-305
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(C) Site Plan Requirements. The following information may be
required by the Zarling Officer or Planning Commission and shall be included on
the site plan:
(1) A statement describing the proposed use.
(2) Site Layout.
(a) A site layout showing the location, dimensions and
area of each lot, the location, dimensions and height of proposed
buildings, structures, streets and any existing buildings in relation
to property and street lines. If the application relates to property
which is scheduled to be developed in successive stages, such plans
shall show the relationship of the portion scheduled for initial
development to the proposed layout of the entire property.
(b) Scale of Plan. The site layout shall be drawn to a scale
of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet for sites less than fifty (50) acres,
one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet for sites of between fifty
(50) and ninety-nine (99) acres and one (1) inch equals two hundred
(200) feet for sites of one hundred (100) acres or greater.
(3) The location, dimensions (numbers shown) and
arrangements of all open spaces and yards, landscaping, fences and buffer
yards including methods and materials to be employed for screening.
(4) The location, size (numbers shown), arrangements and
capacity of all areas to be used for motor vehicle access, off-street parking,
off-street loading and unloading and provisions to be made for lighting
such areas.
(5) The dimensions (numbers shown), location and methods of
illumination for signs and exterior lighting.
(6) The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas
to be devoted to pedestrian use.
(7) Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of sewage
and industrial wastes and water supply.
(8) The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the proposed
density in terms of number of dwelling units per acre of land.
XXXII-306
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(9) A description of any proposed industrial or commercial
operations in sufficient detail to indicate effects of those operations in
producing noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards, traffic
congestion or other safety hazards.
(10) Description of methods to be employed in controlling any
excess noise, air pollution, smoke, fumes, water pollution, fire hazards or
other safety hazards.
(11) Site contours at:
(a) Two (2) foot intervals where slopes are five percent
(5 %) or less.
(b) Five (5) foot intervals where slopes are six percent
(6%) to fifteen percent (15%).
(c) Ten (10) foot intervals where slopes are over fifteen
percent (15%).
(Note: the Plam1ing Commission may require a smaller contour
interval to assure proper design or slope delineation.)
(12) All proposed site grading and drainage provisions and
proposals.
(13) A key map showing the entire project and its relation to
surrounding properties and existing building thereon.
(14) Zoning districts and requirements.
(15) Soil and slope delineations and Identified Floodplain Areas.
(16) Name of the person who prepared the site plan. (The
Zoning Officer or Planning Commission may require the site plant be
prepared by Pennsylvania State registered engineer or land surveyor.)
(17) Certification of ownership
signed by owner or developer.
XXXII-307
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(D) Traffic Impact Study. When a traffic impact study is required
under §325 or §326 as part of a special exception use or conditional use
application, it shall be submitted with the required site plan and shall comply
with the following requirements.
(1) The Traffic Impact Study shall be prepared by a qualified
professional traffic engineer with verified experience in preparing such
studies.
(2) The area for the traffic study shall be based on sound
engineering judgment and an understanding of existing traffic conditions
at the site as well as the area which is likely to be affected by the
development. The study limits shall be determined by the Township.
(3) The Traffic Impact Study shall contain the following:
(a) The study area boundary and identification of the
roadways included within the study area.
(b) A general site description, including:
i) Size and location of existing and proposed land
uses and dwelling types.
ii) Construction staging, and completion date of
the proposed development.
iii) Existing land uses, approved and recorded
subdivision and land developments and subdivisions and land
developments proposed but not yet approved and recorded in the
study area that are determined by the Township as having bearing
on the development's likely impact.
iv) Within the study area, the applicant must
describe existing roadways and intersections (geometries and
traffic signal control) as well as improvements contemplated by
govermnent agencies or private parties.
XXXII-308
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) Analysis of existing conditions, including:
i) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes.
Schematic diagrams depicting daily and peak hour(s) traffic
volumes shall be presented for roadways within the study area.
Turning movement and mainline volumes shall be presented for
the three peak hour conditions (a.m., p.m. and site generated) while
only mainline volumes are required to reflect daily traffic volumes.
The source and/ or method of computation for all traffic volumes
shall be included.
ii) Volume/Capacity Analyses at Critical Points
Utilizing techniques described in derivative Highway Capacity
Manual, latest edition or derivative nomographs, an assessment of
the relative balance between roadway volumes and capacity are to
be described. The analysis shall be performed for existing
conditions (roadway geometry and traffic signal control) for the
appropriate peak hours.
iii) Level of Service at Critical points. Based on the
results obtained in the previous section, levels of service (A
through F) shall be computed and presented for all movements.
Included in this section shall also be a description of typical
operating conditions at each level of service.
iv) A tabulation of accident locations during the
most recent three-year period shall be provided.
(d) Analysis of future conditions without the proposed
development. The future year(s) for which projections are made
will be speCified by the Township and will be dependent on the
timing of the proposed development. The following information
shall be included:
i) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes. This
section shall clearly indicate the method and assumptions used to
forecast future traffic volumes. The schematic diagrams depicting
future traffic volumes shall be similar to those described in
Section 409(D) (3)(c)(i) in terms of location and times (d . Y and
peak hours).
ii) Volume/Capacity Analyses
Locations. The ability of the existing roa
XXXII-309
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
accommodate future traffic (without site development) shall be
described in this section. If roadway improvements or
modifications are committed for implementation, the
volume/ capacity analysis shall be presented for these conditions.
In the case of existing signalized intersections, Traffic signal
timing shall be optimized to determine the best possible
levels of service that can be obtained utilizing existing
roadway geometry and traffic signal equipment.
iii) Levels of Service at Critical Points. Based on
the results obtained in the previous section, Levels of Service (A
through F) shall be determined.
(e) Trip Generation. The amount of traffic generated by
the development shall be presented in this section for daily and the
three peak hour conditions. The trip generation rates used in this
phase of the analysis shall be justified and documented to the
satisfaction of the Township. Trip Generation (latest edition)
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers shall be
used unless the Township approves other studies.
(f) Trip Distribution. The direction of approach for site
generated traffic shall be presented in this section for the
appropriate time periods. As with all technical analysis steps, the
basic method and assumptions used in this work shall be dearly
stated in order that the Township can replicate these results.
(g) Traffic Assignment. This section shall describe the
utilization of study area roadways by site generated traffic. The
proposed traffic volumes shall then be combined with anticipated
traffic volumes from Section 409(D)(3)(d) to describe mainline and
turning movement volumes for future conditions with the site
developed as the applicant proposes.
(h) Analysis of Future Conditions with Development.
This section shall describe the adequacy of the roadway system to
accommodate future traffic with development of the site.
Any unique characteristics of the site or within the study area
(e.g. weekend tourists, antique sales, or holiday shopping) affecting
traffic shall be considered. If staging of the proposed development
is anticipated, analysis for each stage of completion shall be made.
XXXII-310
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
The following information shall be included:
i) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes,
Mainline and turning movement volumes shall be presented for the
highway network in the study area as well as driveways and
internal circulation roadways for the appropriate time periods.
ii) Volume/Capacity Analysis at Critical Points.
Similar to Sections 409(D)(3)(c)(ii) and 409(D) (3)(d)(ii), a
volume/ capacity analysis shall be performed for the appropriate
peak hours for future conditions with the site developed as
proposed.
iii) Levels of Service at Critical Points. As a result
of the volume/ capacity analysis, the level of service on the study
area roadway system shall be computed and described in this
section for all movements.
(i) Recommended Improvements. In the event that the
analysis indicates a decrease in the level of service for all
movements will occur on study area roadways, a description of
proposed improvements to remedy deficiencies shall be included in
this section. These proposals would not include committed projects
by the Township and State which were described in
Section 409(D)(3)(b)(iii) and reflected in the analysis contained in
Sections 409(D)(3)(c) and 409(D)(3)(d).
i) Proposed Recommended Improvements. This
section shall describe the location, nature and extent of proposed
improvements to assure sufficient roadway capacity.
Accompanying this list of improvements shall be preliminary cost
estimates.
ii) Volume/Capacity / Analysis at Critical Points.
An iteration of the volume/ capacity analysis shall be described
which demonstrates the anticipated results of making these
improvements.
iii) Levels of Service at Critical Points
of the revised volume/ capacity analysis presented .
Sub-Section, levels of service for the
improvements shall be presented.
XXXII-311
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
G) Conclusion. The last section of the report shall be a
clear, concise description of the study findings.
(E) Site Design Guidelines. The following guidelines are divided into
eight (8) categories to assist the applicant in the preparation of site and building
plans and to assist the Plmming Commission and the Zoning Officer in their
reviews of all site plans. These guidelines are meant to encourage creativity,
innovation and well-designed developments. They apply to principal buildings
and structures and to all accessory buildings, sh"uctures, signs and other site
features.
(1) Relation of Proposed Building to the Surrounding
Environment. Relate proposed structure(s) harmoniously to the terrain
and to existing buildings that have a visual relationship to the proposed
structure(s). To achieve this favorable relationship between existing and
proposed uses, create focal points with respect to avenues of approach,
terrain features or other buildings and relate open space between all
existing and proposed buildings.
(2) Drive, Parking and Circulation. For vehicular and
pedestrian circulation (including walkways, interior drives and parking)
give special attention to the location and number of access points to public
streets, width of interior drives and access points, general interior
circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, arrangement of
safe and convenient parking areas. Design these vehicular and pedestrian
areas to enhance the appearance of and access to the proposed buildings
and structures and to the neighboring properties.
(3) Surface Water Drainage. Give special attention to proper
site surface drainage to ensure that removal of surface waters will not
adversely affect either neighboring properties or the public storm
drainage system. Remove and efficiently carry away all stormwater from
all roofs, canopies and paved areas. Collect surface water from all paved
areas to permit vehicular and pedestrian movement.
(4) Utility Service. Place electric and telephone lines
underground, where possible. Locate, paint and undertake any other
h"eatrnent to ensure that any utilities which remain aboveground will have
a minimal adverse impact on neighboring properties.
(5) Advertising Features. Ensure that the size, location, lighting
and materials of all permanent signs and outdoor advertising structures or
XXXII-312
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
features will enhance rather than detract from the design of proposed
buildings and structures and the neighboring properties.
(6) Special Features. Provide needed setbacks, screen plantings
and other screening methods for exposed storage areas, exposed
machinery installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility
buildings and structures and similar accessory areas and structures to
help make them compatible with the existing or contemplated site design
and with neighboring properties.
(7) Preservation of Landscape. Preserve the landscape in its
natural state by minimizing tree and soil removal. Ensure that grade
changes are compatible with the general appearance of neighboring
developed areas.
(8) Solar Energy Use. Consider the desirability and feasibility of
active and passive solar energy use. Orient proposed buildings and
provide structures to provide for solar energy use and to prepare solar
access of adjoining properties.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 409 of Section 2)
Section 410. Easements. No structure shall be constructed, erected, relocated to
or placed within an existing easement or right-of-way without the written permission of
the person, party or entity to which the easement or right-of-way benefits. (Ordinance
No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 410 of Section 2)
Section 411. Historic Buildings.
(A) Purpose. This Section regulating the demolition and use of historic
buildings is intended to:
(1) Promote the retention of community character through
preservation of the local heritage by recognition and protection of
historical and architectural resources;
(2) Establish a clear process to review and approve demolition
of designated historical buildings;
(3) Encourage continued use, appropriate and
adaptive reuse of historic buildings; and
XXXII-313
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(4) Regulate uses and structures at or near places having unique
historic, architectural or patriotic interest or value.
(B) Applicability. This Section shall apply to any building eligible for
the National Register of Historic Places, identified by the Berks County
Conservancy or identified by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission.
(C) Delay of Demolition of Historic Buildings. A principal building
regulated by this Section shall not be partially or entirely demolished unless a
minimum of sixty (60) days has passed from the date that a valid permit
application has been duly submitted to the Zoning Officer for the demolition.
After such time period, the permit may be issued by the Zoning Officer for the
demolition if all requirements of Township Ordinances have been met. The
intent of this delay is to provide:
(1) A mechanism to discourage thoughtless and unnecessary
destruction of valuable historic resources;
(2) A mechanism that allows interested parties an opportunity
to encourage a property owner to consider alternatives to demolition; and
(3) Opportunities for historic resources to be documented
before they may be demolished, and to permit the salvage of historic
features before demolition.
(D) Partial Demolition. For purposes of this Section, partial demolition
shall include, but not be limited to, removal of a porch or a wing of a building.
(E) Municipal Review. The Township Planning Commission and
Board of Supervisors shall receive a copy of application for demolition of a
building regulated by this Section and shall have thirty (30) days to review and
make comments.
(F) Emergency. The Zoning Officer may issue a permit for the
demolition without compliance with the sixty (60) day delay if the Township
Building Inspector certifies in writing that the building represents a clear and
immediate hazard to public safety, and that no other reasonable alternatives exist
to demolition.
(G) Exceptions. The delay of demolition required by this Section shall
not be applicable to the following:
XXXII-314
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) Demolition of accessory structures that are not attached to
the principal building.
(2) Interior renovations or removal of features that do not harm
the structurally stability of the building and that are not visible from a
public street.
(3) Removal of features that were added within the last
80 years.
(4) Relocation of a building, provided that it does not result in a
partial or complete demolition as regulated in this Section.
(H) Modification to Lot Area and Yard Regulations. As a special
exception, the Board may modify a specific yard, lot coverage or lot area
requirement if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board that such
Modification is necessary to allow a reasonable use of a building regulated by
this Section.
(I) Demolition by Neglect.
(1) Every owner of a building regulated by this Section shall
repair and maintain the building to avoid demolition by neglect. This
shall include maintaining the structural integrity of the building and
protecting the building and attached features from damage from the
elements. These attached features include the roof, chimney, cornice,
soffit, fascia, spouting, columns, beams, posts, window sills, door sills and
lintels.
(2) If a property owner fails to comply with an order from the
Building Inspector to repair a building regulated by this Section to correct
a code violation that threatens the structural integrity of a building, such
matter shall be considered a violation of this Section and the property
owner may also be cited for a violation of this Chapter.
(n Additional Uses within Rehabilitated Historic Buildings
(1) A rehabilitated building regulated under this Section may be
used for any principal use and its accessory uses as permitted in the
zoning district within which it is located, and in accordanc with all
relevant provisions of this Chapter.
XXXII-315
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Each of the following additional principal uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted within a rehabilitated building regulated
under this Section as a special exception use by the Board in accordance
with the standards contained in §325 of this Chapter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Art or photography studio*.
Bed and breakfast*.
Community center*.
Financial establishment*.
Medical clinic/ medical of£ice*.
Nursery school or day care center*.
Office*.
(h) Personal service establishment*.
*See §324 for additional requirements.
(3) To be eligible for the above uses, the applicant shall prove to
the Board's satisfaction that the exterior of-the building as visible from
public streets shall be historically rehabilitated in accordance with
accepted standards and practices.
(4) The building shall not be expanded by more than twenty
(20%) percent of its floor area for a use permitted under this Section. This
limitation on building expansion shall not apply if the proposed use is
allowed in the zoning dish"ict without applying the provisions of this
Section.
(5) All above uses shall be in accordance with the relevant
provIsIOn listed in this Chapter for that use, including the off-street
parking provisions.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 411 of Section 2)
Section 412. Airport Zoning.
(A) The Township Reading Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter XXXIII), including the Airport Zoning Map, shall be considered in
addition to this Chapter.
(B) No building, structure or land shall be used, occupied, erected,
moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless it is in conformity with the
applicable provisions of the Township Reading Municipal Airport Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter XXXIII).
XXXII-316
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 412 of Section 2)
XXXII-317
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
PartS
Environmental Protection
Section 501. Environmental Preservation Required.
(A) All uses shall be developed in a mamLer consistent with the
preservation of the quality of the existing environment and of any natural
amenities present on the site.
(B) All uses shall provide for the preservation and the ffilllimum
desh"uction of natural drainage areas, minimum grading and desh"uction of the
ground surface, the preservation of substantial stands of trees and forested areas
and the preservation of ath"active views and any other natural features existing
on the site.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 501 of Section 2)
Section 502. Prohibited Nuisances. No land or sh"ucture in any zoning district
shall be used or occupied in any manner that creates any nuisance in such manner or in
such amount as to adversely affect the reasonable use or value of the surrounding area
or adjoining premises or be dangerous to public health or safety. (Ordinance No. 335,
March 26, 2007, Section 502 of Section 2)
Section 503. Slope Controls.
(A) Intent. Areas exist within each zoning district that would have
special constraints on development because of the topography. These concerns
include soil erosion, stream siltation, unsatisfactory onlot sewage disposal,
excessive cut and fill requirements, loss of vegetation and increase runoff and
flooding. The intent of this Section is to establish certain restrictions relating to
permitted uses, bulk, area and coverage requirements for property located on
slopes of fifteen percent (15%) or more. It is not the intent, however, to prohibit
development, but merely to insure that adequate consideration has been given to
these unique problems and that adequate safeguards will be taken.
(B) Exceptions. The following existing features are excluded from the
definition of steep slope areas;
(1) Man-made embankments within street rights-of-way which
are a result of cut and fill operations and are not the natural condition of
the land.
XXVII-3I8
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Stormwater detention and retention basins.
(3) Man-made landscape berms.
(C) Lots Containing Slopes of Fifteen Percent (15%) or Greater.
(1) The minimum lot area for a lot containing slopes of fifteen
percent (15%) or greater shall be the summation of the following:
(a) The percentage of the lot area having slopes less than
fifteen percent (15%) multiplied times the minimum lot area
required for the district within which it is located; plus
(b) The percentage of the lot area having slopes between
fifteen percent (15%) and twenty-five (25%) multiplied times three
(3) acres; plus
(c) The percentage of the lot area having slopes greater
than twenty-five percent (25%) multiplied times five (5) acres.
(2) The minimum lot width for a lot containing slopes of fifteen
percent (15%) or greater shall be the summation of the following:
(a) The percentage of the lot area having slopes less than
fifteen percent (15%) multiplied times the minimum lot width
required for the district within which it is located; plus
(b) The percentage of the lot area having slopes between
fifteen percent (15 %) and twenty-five (25 %) multiplied times two
hundred (200') feet; plus
(c) The percentage of the lot area having slopes greater
than twenty-five percent (25%) multiplied times three hundred
(300') feet.
(3) Slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater shall not be
altered, regraded, cleared, built upon or otherwise disturbed unless such
disturbance is necessary:
XXVII-319
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) To accommodate an access drive or driveway when
no other feasible route for such an access drive or driveway exists
and if the slope is disturbed to the minimum extent necessary to
accommodate such access drive or driveway; or
(b) To accommodate a trail or trails that are part of an
existing or planned trail network and are located and constructed
based upon accepted best management practices for minimizing
erOSIOn.
(c) Installation of underground utilities, where the
applicant has demonstrated to the Township's satisfaction that no
alternative location is feasible and that the proposal consists of the
minimum disturbance necessary to provide utility service.
(4) In no case shall more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
area containing slopes between fifteen percent (15%) and twenty-five
percent (25 %) be disturbed.
(5) In no case shall more than fifteen percent (15 %) of the area
containing slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater be disturbed.
(D) Procedures.
(1) The Zoning Officer will advise the applicant when his
property or parcel lies within such a slope designation. The Zoning
Officer will not issue a zoning permit until a plan is submitted indicating,
to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, that all potential problems of
steep slopes have been resolved.
(2) Plans shall show existing topography, proposed structure
and building locations, streets and driveways location and grade, site
drainage, sanitary facilities, grading plan, revegetation or planting plan
prepared by a registered architect, engineer or landscape architect. Plans
shall be accompanied by drawings or a statement of how problems of
surface water runoff, erosion, soil stabilization, onlot sewage disposal,
revegetation, sediment control and all other associated problems are
proposed to be overcome.
XXVII-320
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(3) Should the area designated as steep slopes be found to be
inaccurate, based on a topographical survey prepared by a licensed
surveyor or engineer, showing two (2) foot contour intervals, then the
zoning requirements for such property shall be deemed to be the
regulations of the district in which the property is located.
(4) The Zoning Officer should maintain a map or overlay
including areas of steep slopes.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 503 of Section 2)
Section 504. Areas With High Water Table.
(A) Any proposed land use which may directly (by means of effluent
discharge into the ground) or indirectly (though the leaching of stored materials)
result in the pollution of the groundwater shall be prohibited from developing in
any area which has a year-round or seasonal high water table which comes to
within any distance of the ground surface which violates P ADEP regulations.
(B) The determination of such hazards shall be made by the
appropriate State agency and! or by a qualified sanitary engineer, geologist or
soil scientist approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(C) The County Soil Survey developed by the United States Soil
Conservation Service shall be used to establish high water table soils, unless
more accurate information is available.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 504 of Section 2)
Section 505. Development Along Water Bodies. No structure nor off street
parking area shall be within fifty (50) feet of the banks of any stream, lake or pond,
except for public recreation uses. (See also §517 Wetland Buffers and §518 Riparian
Buffers) (Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 505 of Section 2)
Section 506. Floodplain Regulations. Any proposed land use or activity, or any
proposed site or building alteration, shall comply with the provisions of the Township
of Spring Floodplain Ordinance (Chapter X). (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Section 507 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance 392, Sections 7 and 8, June 2012)
XXVII-321
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 507. Filling, Excavation and Grading.
(A) All activities which require the moving of earth or the filling or
excavating of an area shall submit a plan to the Township showing site grading
and erosion control measures.
(B) Grading Regulations.
(1) The existing grade shall not be increased so that unstable
slopes are created.
(2) The surface area of any yard adjacent to a building or
structure shall be graded so that surface water will be drained away from
such structure.
(3) The deposit of soils, detritus or other debris (as a result of
site preparation, grading or excavating) shall not be unsightly or
detrimental to any property, street, sewer or natural Watercourses.
(4)
apply.
All County Soil Conservation Service regulations shall
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 508 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 9, June 11, 2012)
Section 508. Tree Preservation.
(A) Intent. The purpose of this Section is to conserve forested areas in
order to preserve wildlife and bird habitats, encourage groundwater recharge,
avoid pollution of creeks by high temperature runoff, maintain the attractive
character of areas, conserve energy, protect and enhance property values and
avoid other negative environmental impacts.
(B) Applicability. Forestry, including timber harvesting, shall be a use
permitted by right within all zoning districts. The provisions of this section shall
apply to all timber harvesting operations where lumber will leave the site and
where the affected area will exceed one-half (1/2) acre for clear cutting
operations or one (1) acre for all selective cutting operations.
(C) All forestry or timber harvesting operations, having affected areas
which exceed the sizes listed above, shall comply with the regulations for
forestry and timber harvesting under §324 of this Chapter. All forestry or timber
harvesting operations, regardless of the size of the affected area, shall comply
XXVII-322
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
with the applicable provIsIOns of Part S, including, but not limited to, the
provisions of §S03 Slope Controls, §S17 Wetland Buffers and §S18 Riparian
Buffers.
(D) Exceptions. These provisions shall not apply to the following:
(1) The cutting of trees for the personal use of the landowner;
(2) A bonafide plant nursery or Christmas tree farm;
(3) The routine /I thinning" of a wooded area, involving the
cutting down on one (1) or more abutting lots, within a single calendar
year, up to 20% of the trees having a diameter at breast height (DBH,
typically 4.S feet from the ground) greater than 6 inches, with such cutting
being well-distributed throughout the wooded area;
(4) The cutting of trees that create a hazard to vehicular sight
distance.
(S) The removal of defective, decayed, diseased or dying trees.
(E) Compliance Responsibility. The landowner and the operator
performing the timber harvesting operations shall be jointly and individually
responsible for complying with the provisions of this Section.
(Ordinance No. 33S, March 26, 2007, Section S09 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section S09. Outdoor Storage Control.
(A) No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above the ground, except for tanks or drums of less than six hundred (600)
gallons of fuel which is directly connected with engines, heating devices or
appliances located and operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel
and which have been approved by the Township.
(B) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products
stored outdoors (including those permitted in §S09(A) shall be enclosed by a
fence of a type, construction and size as shall be adequate to protect th ublic
health, safety and welfare.
(C) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot iI
or manner that they may be transported off by natural causes or fo
XXVU-323
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(D) No substance which can (i) contaminate groundwater or surface
water, (ii) render groundwater or surface water undesirable as a source of water
supply or recreation or (iii) desh'oy aquatic life shall be allowed to enter any
groundwater or surface water.
(E) Applicable P ADEP regulations shall apply.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 510 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 510. Sewage Waste Treatment and Disposal Control.
(A) All methods of sewage and waste treatment and disposal shall be
approved by the P ADEP and in accordance with the sewage plan for the
Township.
(B) The standards of the regulations specified in §510(A) or the
following standards (whichever is more restrictive) shall apply:
(1) Discharged wastes shall not contain any:
(a) Toxic substance.
(b) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel, oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(c) Cyanides or halogens.
(d) More than ten (10) ppm of the following gases:
hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrogen dioxide.
(e) A chlorine demand in excess of fifteen (15) ppm.
(f) Phenol in excess of 0.0005 ppm.
(g) Grease fats or oils, or any oily substance in excess of
one hundred (100) ppm or exceeding a daily average of twenty-five
(25) ppm.
(h) Liquid having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty (150) degrees F.
XXVII-324
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(i) Matter containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
sh'aw shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
paunch manure or any solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstructions or other interference with the proper
operation of a sewage treatment plant.
G) Any insoluble substances which:
1) Are in excess of ten thousand (10,000) ppm.
2) Exceed a daily average of five hundred (500)
ppm.
3) Fail to pass a No.8 sieve.
4) Have a dimension greater than one-quarter
(0.25) inch.
(k) Liquid having a pH lower than five (5.0) or higher
than nine (9.0) or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or persoID1el.
(1) Material which would be harmful to the treatment of
sewage.
(2) Acidity and alkalinity of wastes shall be neutralized with a
pH seven (7.0) as a daily average on a volumetric basis, with a temporary
variation of pH five (5.0) to nine (9.0).
(C) Recertification of the adequacy of sewage disposal systems shall be
required, prior to the expansion or conversion of an existing use.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 511 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 511. Noise Control.
(A) No person shall operate or cause to be operated on private or
public property any source of continuous sound (any sound whic
fluctuating or intermittent with a recurrence greater than one (1)
fifteen (15) second interval) in such a manner as to create a sou
exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use category .
XXVII-325
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
table when measured at or within the property boundary of the land use
generating such sound:
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use and Time
Receiving Land Use
Category
Time Sound Level Limit
Residential, Public Space,
Open Space, Agricultural
or Institutional
1) 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
2) 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. plus
Sundays and legal
holidays
60dBA
50dBA
Commercial or Business 1) 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 65dBA
Industrial
2) 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. plus
Sundays and legal
holidays
At all times
50dBA
70dBA
(B) For any source of sound which emits a pure tone, the maximum
sound level limits set forth in §511(A) shall be reduced by five (5) dBA.
(C) The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in §511(A)
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency.
(2) Emergency work to provide electricity, water or other public
utilities when public health or safety are involved.
(3) Domestic power tools, between the hours of 8 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. on Mondays through Fridays and between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
Saturdays or Sundays.
(4) Explosives and construction operations.
(5) Agriculture.
XXVII-326
-------1
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(6) Motor vehicle operations, other than parked trucks and
other parked vehicles that run continuously for more than fifteen (15)
minutes.
(7) Public celebrations, specifically authorized by the Township.
(8) Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad.
(9) The unamplified human voice.
(D) For any source of sound which emits an impulsive sound (a sound
of short duration, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay and an occurrence of not
more than one (1) time in any fifteen (15) second interval) the excursions of
sound pressure level shall not exceed twenty (20) dBA over the ambient sound
pressure level, regardless of time of day or night or receiving land use, using the
"fast" meter characteristic of a Type II meter, meeting the ANSI specifications
Sl.4-1971.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 512 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11,2012)
Section 512. Dust, Dirt, Smoke, Vapors, Gases and Odors Control.
(A) No person shall operate or permit the operation of any device, or
conduct or permit any use to be conducted which does not conform with the
standards established under the State Air Pollution Control Act of January 9,
1960, Public Law 2119, as amended, and Title 25, Rules and Regulations, PADEP,
Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources, Article III Air Resources.
(B) No one shall generate odors that would be seriously offensive to
persons of average sensibilities.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 513 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 513. Light, Glare and Heat Control. All uses shall mlnlffilZe the
production of light, heat or glare that is perceptible beyond any property line of the lot
on which the light, heat or glare is produced. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Section 513 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance 392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
Section 514. Electric, Diesel, Gas or Other Power. Every use
shall be so operated that any service lines, substation or other facility shall:
XXVII-327
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(A) Conform to the highest applicable safety requirements.
(B) Be constructed and installed as an integral part of the architectural
features of the plant.
(C) Be concealed by evergreen planting from residential properties.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 515 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June II, 2012)
Section 515. Conh<ol of Radioactivity, Electrical Emissions and Elech<ical
Disturbances.
(A) No person shall operate or permit the operation of any device, or
conduct or permit any use to be conducted which does not comply with the
regulations of the P ADEP' s Division of Radiology, the Federal Nuclear
Regulatory Commission, and the Federal Interstate COlmnerce Commission.
(B) No person shall conduct or permit any use to be conducted which
causes electrical disturbances (except from domestic household appliances) to
adversely affect any equipment at any time other than the equipment creating
the disturbance.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 516 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June II, 2012)
Section 516. Manufacturing and Storing of Dangerous Material Prohibited.
(A) No person shall use any land or erect any building or structure for
the commercial or indush<ial manufacture or storage of coal, oil, coal oil, chlorine,
fuel oil, burning fluid, naphtha, benzol, benzene, gasoline, dynamite, nitro
glycerin, gunpowder, petroleum, or other combustible, inflammable, or
dangerous liquid or material, unless otherwise permitted in this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 517 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June II, 2012)
XXVII-328
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 517. Wetland Buffers.
(A) Wetland buffers, having a minimum width of thirty-five (35) feet,
shall be required adjacent to all jurisdictional wetlands identified pursuant to
this section. Buffers shall serve as an ecological transition zone from nonwetlands
to wetlands, which is an integral portion of the wetlands ecosystem,
providing temporary refuge for wetland fauna during high water episodes,
critical habitat for animals dependent upon but not resident in wetlands, and
slight variations of wetland boundaries over time due to hydrologic or
climatologic effects. Buffers also serve as a sediment and stormwater control
zone to reduce the impacts of development upon wetlands and wetland species.
(B) Within the required wetland buffer no removal of existing natural
vegetation, earth moving activities or impervious surfaces shall be permitted.
(C) Exceptions. Notwithstanding the above, the following
encroachments shall be permitted within a wetland buffer in cases where a
permit has been obtained from the appropriate State or Federal agency for such
encroachment within the adjacent wetland area. In such cases the Township
must be provided with a copy of the permit or a notice from these agencies
stating the proposed encroachment is exempt from their permit requirements.
Where such encroachments are permitted, the wetland and buffer areas shall be
restored to their natural condition and grade, to the maximum extent possible.
(1) Underground utilities.
(2) Access roads or drives, where the applicant has
demonstrated to the Township's satisfaction that no alternative location is
feasible and that the proposal consists of the minimum disturbance
necessary to provide adequate access.
(D) All lands designated as wetlands within the Township are subject
to the restrictions and/ or permits of the P ADEP and the United States Army
Corps of Engineers.
(E) For any proposed improvements or earth disturbance, the
Township shall determine whether a wetland delineation will be required by a
qualified professional. Wetland delineations shall be accompanied by a technical
report and appropriate data forms describing the results of the evaluati~n.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 518 of Section 2) ; Amended
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
XXVII-329
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 518. Riparian Buffers.
(A) Riparian buffers are required along all streams or watercourses in
order to provide water resource protection, including the following:
(1) Reduction of the amount of nutrients, sediment, organic
matter, pesticides, and other harmful substances that reach watercourses.
(2) Provision of shade which moderates stream temperature
and protects fish habitat.
(3) Provision of stream bank stability which protects fish habitat
and controls sediment and erosion.
(4) Provision of organic matter through leaves which fall in the
stream and provide food and habitat.
(5) Conservation of the natural features important to land and
water resources.
(B) Riparian buffers shall be consist of any area within thirty-five (35)
feet of any stream bank.
(C) No woodland or land disturbance shall be permitted within any
riparian buffer, except for the following:
(1) Timber harvesting in accordance with a woodland
management plan submitted to the Township and prepared by a
professional consulting forester;
(2) Vegetation management in accordance with an approved
landscape plan or open space management plan;
(3) Customary agricultural practices in accordance with a soil
conservation plan approved by the Berks County Conservation District;
(4) Regulated activities permitted by the Commonwealth.
XXVII-330
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(5) Installation of underground utilities and access roads or
drives, where the applicant has demonstrated to the Township's
satisfaction that no alternative location is feasible and that the proposal
consists of the minimum disturbance necessary to provide utility service
or adequate access.
(6) Provision of unpaved trail access;
(7) Selective removal of hazardous or invasive alien vegetative
specIes.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 519 of Section 2; Amended by Ordinance
392, Sections 7 and 8, June 11, 2012)
XXVII-331
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Part 6
Signs
Section 601. Scope and Applicability.
(A) Signs perform an important function by identifying a broad range
of land uses.
(B) Control of the construction, location, size, conspicuity, brightness,
legibility, operational characteristics and maintenance of signs is necessary to
promote the health, safety, general welfare and aesthetics of the Township. Signs
have a direct and substantial impact on traffic safety, pedestrian safety,
community aesthetics and property values. Signs also provide a guide to the
physical environment and, as such, serve an important function to the
community and economy. Elech"onic signs, including video display signs, are
highly visible from long distances and at very wide viewing angles both day and
night and are designed to draw the attention of persons in their vicinity and hold
it for extended periods of time. If left uncontrolled, electronic signs, including
video display signs, can constitute a serious traffic safety threat.
(C) The term /I sign" shall mean any object, device, display or structure
that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, inform or ath"act attention.
(D) Those elements which may be excluded from sign controls include
(1) flags of any governmental unit or branch or of any charitable or religious
organization, (2) flags or signB posted by any religious organization to provide
directions to a place of worship, (3) interior signs not visible from a public right
of way or adjoining property, (4) cornerstones built into or attached to a wall of a
building commemorating a person or event, (5) official notices of any court or
public office, (6) legal notices posted pursuant to law, and (7) public service signs
as aids to safety or service.
(E) In all permitted districts signs may be erected, altered, maintained,
used, removed or moved only if they comply with the provisions of this Chapter
and other regulations of the Township relating to such activities.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 601 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
XXVII-332
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 602. General Sign Regulations.
(A) No sign shall be erected containing information which states or
implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the
provisions of this Chapter in the zoning district within which the property to
which the sign relates is located.
(B) On-site signs advertising a use no longer in existence or a product
no longer available shall be removed or changed to advertise the new use or
product within thirty (30) days of the cessation of the original use or product
availability. Only signs in conformance with this Chapter shall replace signs
once removed.
(C) No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic
because of glare; blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks, or
driveways; confusion with a traffic control device (by reason of color, location,
shape, or other characteristic); or any other reason.
(D) In no case shall any sign, other than an official sign, be erected
within the official right-of-way of any street, unless specifically authorized by
ordinance or regulation of the Township and in conformance with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulations, where appropriate.
(E) In no case shall any sign, other than an official sign, be erected
within the boundaries of a designated clear sight triangle at an intersection of
streets or access drives, unless it complies with the provisions of Section 405(H)
of this Chapter.
(F) Signs may be illuminated by direct lighting but shall have such
lighting shielded so no glare or direct light will shine on abutting properties or in
the normal line of vision of the public using the streets or sidewalks. No red,
amber, or green lights shall be permitted, and no flood or spotlights shall be
mounted higher than fifteen (15) feet above ground level.
(G) No sign, except such directional devices as may be required by the
Federal and State Aviation Authorities, that is a part of or is supported by a
building, shall be placed, inscribed, or supported upon the roof or upon any
structure which extends above the roof of any building.
(H) All sign provisions of this Chapter shall apply to
smokestacks, water towers, and other similar structures.
XXVU-333
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) Non-illuminated temporary signs may be permitted on new
construction sites, if such signs do not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in total
area and if they are removed within seven (7) days after completion of the
construction work. Not more than one (1) sign shall be placed on each sh<eet
frontage of the construction site.
0) Temporary signs announcing or advertising any political,
educational, charitable, civic, professional, religious, philanthropic or similar
campaign, drive or event may be permitted on non-residential properties only
for a total period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any calendar year, providing
such signs do not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and are removed
promptly after the completion of the campaign, drive or event.
(K) If an establishment has walls fronting on two (2) or more streets,
the sign area for each street may be computed separately.
(L) No sign in other than a residential district shall be located so as to
face any residential district on the same side of the street on which the property
bearing the sign fronts.
(M) Free-standing signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the
street right of way line. No free-standing sign~ shall project beyond a street rightof-
way line. No free-standing sign in other than a residential district shall be
within thirty-five (35) feet of any residential district boundary line.
(N) Wall signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any facade or other
surface to which they are mounted and shall not project more than twelve (12)
inches from its surface.
(0) Projecting signs shall not extend more than four (4) feet from the
wall or surface to which they are mounted. Projecting signs shall not interfere
with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic, shall not be less than ten (10) feet
above the pavement of ground, and shall not be closer than six (6) feet to the
property line.
(P) No signs shall be posted, stapled, or otherwise permanently
attached to public utility poles or trees within a street right-of-way. No
temporary signs shall be placed on any Township-owned property or on any
other edifice owned or controlled by any governmental entity or any public
utility except signs specifically authorized by such government or public utility.
(Q) All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of durable
material and kept in good condition and repair. Any sign which is allowed to
XXVII-334
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
become dilapidated or a hazard shall be repaired or removed by the property
owner or lessee of the property or may, after 30 days notification, be removed by
the Township at the expense of the owner or lessee of the property on which it is
located.
(R) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any
premises that they own or control a sign which has been abandoned. Any such
abandoned sign shall be repaired or removed by the property owner or lessee of
the property or may, after 30 days notification, be removed by the Township at
the expense of the owner or lessee of the property on which it is located. An
"abandoned sign", for the purpose of this Section is a sign that:
(1) Is located on and/ or related to the use of a property which
becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of nine months of more,
(2) Was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the
present occupant in business and is not being lawfully used for the new
occupant; or
(3) Which relates to a time, event or purpose which is past.
(S) Signs existing at the time of passage of this Chapter and which do
not conform to the requirements of this Chapter shall be considered nonconforming
signs and once removed shall be replaced only with conforming
signs. Nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired (including lighting),
provided that a repainted or repaired sign does not exceed the dimensions of the
existing sign. Copy may also be changed, but a new permit must be obtained
before such copy change takes place. Any nonconforming sign which is
damaged in excess of 25% of its cost of replacement or is removed shall be
replaced only with a conforming sign.
(T) In addition to other applicable regulations of the Township and
state laws, the following shall apply to all adult business use signs and other
visible messages:
(1) Sign messages shall be limited to written descriptions of
material or services available on the premises.
(2) Sign messages shall not include any graphic or pictorial
depiction of material related to specific sexual activities or anato ical
areas.
XXVII-335
FINAL (Revised 5-19-]5)
(3) Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials
related to specific sexual activities or anatomical areas shall not be shown
or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the
building.
(4) The entrance of the adult business should include a SIgn
warning all individuals that the premises is classified as an adult business.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 602 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 603. Permitted Signs. The types, numbers and sizes of signs shall be in
accordance with the following regulations.
(A) All Zoning Districts.
(1) Official traffic or directional signs and other official Federal,
State, County or local govermnent signs.
(2) Temporary signs announcing any political, educational,
charitable, civic, religious, philanthropic, or similar campaign, drive or
event only for a total period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any calendar
year, provided such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
area and shall be removed promptly upon the completion of the
campaign, drive or event.
(3) Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon
which the sign is located. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
area and shall be removed within seven (7) days after settlement or a lease
has been entered into. No more than one (1) such sign shall be placed on
the property unless said property fronts on more than one (1) street, in
which case one (1) sign may be located on each street frontage.
(4) Temporary signs of architects, builders, conh"actors,
developers, engineers and similar artisans, which are erected and
maintained on the premises where the work is being performed. Such
signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and shall be removed
promptly upon completion of the work.
XXVII-336
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(5) Trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a
road, driveway or premises, signs controlling fishing or hunting on the
premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed four (4)
square feet.
(6) Nameplate signs displaying the name and address of the
occupant of a dwelling, or dwelling unit, provided that the area of each
such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet and provided that such a
sign shall not be internally illuminated or illuminated by any lighting
having a total wattage of more than one hundred (100) watts.
(7) Temporary signs erected in connection with the
development or proposed development on the premises by a builder,
contractor, developer, or other persons with an interest in such
development. The aggregate area of such signs shall not exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area and shall be removed within seven (7) days
after the last structure has been initially occupied. When a developer is
engaged in selling lots only, the temporary signs advertising the sale of
lots in the development shall be permitted during the initial period of the
development project, which period shall commence with the recording
date of the development plan and shall end twelve (12) months thereafter.
The permit for such signs may be renewed at the end of each twelve (12)
month period. The text of the sign shall clearly indicate that a
development is "proposed" unless all necessary municipal approvals have
been obtained.
(8) Signs identifying a permitted home occupation displaying
the name, profession or activity, and address of the occupant, provided
that not more than one (1) such sign shall be erected for each permitted
use, and provided that the area of each such sign shall not exceed two (2)
square feet. Each such sign shall not be internally illuminated or
illuminated by any lighting having a total wattage of more than one
hundred (100) watts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no signs shall be
permitted which advertise a no-impact home-based business.
(9) Signs identifying residential subdivisions or land
developments comprising ten (10) or more dwelling units. Such signs
shall have a maximum area of thirty (30) square feet and a maximum
height of eight (8) feet. These signs may be located at up to three ot, the
major entrances from exterior streets and may include the overall n~ of
the development and any logo. Such signs shall not include adver .
XXVII-337
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(10) Temporary signs identifying a yard or garage sale, provided
(1) no more than two signs per event, (2) each sign shall not exceed four
square feet in area, and (3) all signs shall be placed a maximum of twentyfour
(24) hours prior to a sale and removed within twenty-four (24) hours
after the sale.
(11) Temporary signs advertising the temporary sale of products
or goods such as Chrishnas trees, Easter flowers, fireworks, etc., provided
such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and shall not be posted
earlier than thirty (30) days before the date of the event to which they
pertain and shall be removed within seven (7) days of said event.
(B) Residential Districts.
(1) Sign, bulletin, announcement board or identification sign for
schools, churches, hospitals, sanitariums, clubs, multi-family dwellings or
other principal uses and buildings for the purpose of displaying the name
of the institution and its activities or services, provided that the area of
any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet and not more than
one (1) such sign shall be erected on anyone street frontage.
(2) Sign offering the sale of farm products, nursery products or
livestock produced or raised on the premises, provided that the area of
any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet and not more than
one (1) such sign shall be erected on anyone street frontage.
(3) Sign denoting membership in agricultural associations,
cooperatives or indicating specialization in a particular breed of cattle,
hogs, etc., or in a particular hybrid or strain of plant, provided that such
sign is limited to six (6) square feet and not more than one (1) sign on any
one street frontage.
(C) Signs for Multi-Family Dwellings (Garden Apartments or
Townhouses). The following signs shall be permitted:
(1) Freestanding signs advertising the sale or rental of the
premises upon which the sign is erected, provided that (a) the total area of
the sign does not exceed forty (40) square feet, (b) there shall be no more
than one (1) such sign. on anyone lot on the same sh"eet frontage, and (c)
no sign shall be erected so as to stand higher than any of the buildings it
advertises. For the purpose of this Chapter, multi-family dwelling units
shall not be advertised by such real estate signs for more than twelve (12)
months after building construction is completed.
XXVII-338
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Directional signs, not to exceed two (2) square feet each,
erected within the multi-family complex itself to direct persons to a rental
office or sample apartment.
(3) Permanent identifying signs for the purpose of indicating
the name of the multi-family complex and for the purpose of identifying
the individual buildings within the complex. Not more than one (1) sign
for each entrance to the complex shall be permitted and no such sign shall
exceed ten (10) square feet in size. Signs to identify the individual
buildings within the complex shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size.
(D) Commercial and Industrial Districts.
(1) Signs directing patrons, members or audience to temporary
exhibits, shows or events and signs erected in conjunction with a political
election, provided that such sign (a) shall not exceed six (6) square feet, (b)
shall be removed within two (2) weeks after the date of the exhibit, show,
event or election, and (c) shall not be posted earlier than two (2) weeks
before the date of the exhibit, show or event, except that political signs
shall not be posted earlier than one (1) month prior to an election.
(2) Wall or free-standing signs on the same lot as the use to
which they relate, provided that the total area of such signs shall be
limited to two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of horizontal building
fac;:ade length, but not to exceed an aggregate area of one hundred
sixty (160) square feet. No more than one (1) freestanding sign structure
shall be permitted on a lot having less than five hundred (500) feet of
street frontage. No more than two (2) freestanding sign structures shall be
permitted per lot.
(3) Special temporary promotional devices, signs or displays,
such as banners or pennants. Where such signs are outside of a building,
they shall remain on display for a period not to exceed sixty (60)
consecutive days. Banners shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign
area.
(4) "A" type, sandwich type, sidewalk, or curb signs and
balloons or devices shall be permitted only in commercial, busine
industrial districts for special occasions not more than four (4) tim
for a period totaling not more than fifteen (15) days within
year, as long as they do not obsh'uct any public right-of-way.
time shall such devices be permitted. Such "A" type, sa
XXVU-339
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
sidewalk, or curb signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area
per side.
(5) Window signs shall not exceed 20% of the total area of the
window.
(6) Signs identifying office, commercial or industrial
subdivisions or land developments comprising three (3) or more principal
uses. Such signs shall have a maximum area of thirty (30) square feet and
a maximum height of eight (8) feet. These signs may be located at up to
three of the major entrances from exterior streets and may include the
overall name of the development and any logo. Such signs shall not
include advertising.
(7) Signs indicating the existence of, and direction to tourist
attractions of a natural, scenic and/ or outdoor recreational nature,
provided that no such sign shall exceed twenty (20) square feet.
(8) Electronic Changeable Copy Signs, in accordance with the
provisions under Section 606.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 603 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 604. Signs Prohibited in all Districts
(A) Signs which in any way simulate official, functional, directional, or
warning signs erected or maintained by the Federal, State, County, or any
municipal government, or by any railroad, public utility, or similar agency
concerned with the protection of public health or safety.
(B) Banners, spinners, flags, pennants, or any moving objects used for
commercial advertising purposes, whether containing a message or not, except
as otherwise permitted within this Chapter.
(C) Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated, or moving signs of any
type, except those portions of signs which indicate time, temperature, or other
similar information of general interest.
(D) Video display signs.
(E) Electronic changeble copy SIgns, except as otherwise permitted
within this Chapter.
XXVII-340
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(F) Off-Premises Signs, except as otherwise permitted within this
Chapter.
(G) Multi-Vision Signs.
(H) Portable changeable copy signs.
(1) Any type of sign that fluctuates in light intensity or uses
intermittent, strobe or moving lights that does not fall under the definition of a
video display sign, an electronic changeable copy sign, or an electronic graphic
display sign.
(J) Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon the roof or upon any
structure which extends above the eaves of the roof of any building.
(K) Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or color.
(L) Signs or displays that include words or images that are obscene,
pornographic or highly offensive to public decency.
(M) Signs that are not in good repair or do not meet construction
standards.
(N) Signs erected without a building permit.
(0) Signs that contain out-of-date political messages.
(P) Signs that are illegal under State law or regulations.
(Q) Signs that attempt or appear to attempt to regulate, warn, or direct
the movement of traffic or that interfere with, imitate, or resemble any official
traffic sign, signal, or device.
(R) Signs that are erected or maintained on trees or painted or drawn
on rocks or other natural features.
(S) Signs that prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or
fire escape or that are attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(T) Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a mam1.er
carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle'
purpose, but becomes a primary purpose in itself.
/
XXVII-341
FINAL (Revised 5-19- I 5)
(U) Temporary signs, when located on the same property as an
electronic changeable copy sign.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 604 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 605. Off-Premises Signs (Billboards).
(A) Location of Off-Premises Signs.
(1) Off-premises signs shall be permitted only within the
Planned Business and Residential (PBR) District along U.s. 222 and the
Plam1ed Industry/Business (PIB) District along the corridor of u.s. 222.
(2) No off-premises sign shall be erected less than ten (10) feet
nor more than fifty (50) feet from any street right-of-way line.
(3) No off-premises sign shall be located closer than 300 feet
from any existing dwelling on an adjoining residential lot.
(4) V-type or back-to-back off-premises sign shall be considered
one SIgn.
(5) No two (2) off-premises signs shall be spaced less than 1,500
feet apart along any street.
(6) No off-premises sign shall be located in such a manner as to
obscure or otherwise physically interfere with the effectiveness of an
official traffic sign, signal, or device or obstruct or physically interfere
with a driver's view of approaching or intersecting traffic.
(B) Size of Off-Premises Signs.
(1) The maximum gross surface area of an off-premises sign
shall be six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet, with a maximum
length of forty-eight (48) feet, plus temporary embellishments not
exceeding twenty (20) percent of the sign's gross surface area.
(C) Height of Off-Premises Signs.
XXVII-342
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) There shall be a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet to the
top of an off-premises sign face, measured from the ground level at the
base of the sign.
(D) Lighting of Off-Premises Signs.
(1) No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light that
simulates any emergency light device shall be permitted as part of any offpremises
sign.
(2) Flashing devices shall not be permitted on an off-premises
sign. However, illuminated signs that indicate customary public
information, such as time, date, temperature, or other similar information,
shall be permitted.
(3) External lighting, such as floodlights, thin line, and
gooseneck reflectors, are permitted, provided that the light source is
directed on the sign face and is effectively shielded so as to prevent beams
of light from being directed onto any portion of a street.
(4) The illumination of any sign shall be diffused or indirect in
design to prevent direct rays of light from shining onto residential
districts.
(E) Off-Premises Signs with an Electronic Process or Remote Control.
(1) All messages/displays shall remain unchanged for a
minimum of five (5) seconds.
(2) The time interval used to change from one complete
message/ display to the next complete message/ display shall be a
maximum of one (1) second.
(3) There shall be no appearance of a visual dissolve or fading,
in which any part of one message/ display appears simultaneously with
any part of a second message/ display.
(4) There shall be no appearance of flashing or sudden bursts of
light, animation, movement, or flow of the message/ display.
(5) Any illumination intensity or contrast of light level ~~"?~'U_'f~'''U:\
relnain constant.
XXVII-343
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(F) Prohibited Off-Premises Signs.
(1) Signs that have multiple sign faces oriented in the same
direction and aligned in a side-by-side or high/low fashion.
(2) Signs that advertise defunct businesses.
(3) Signs that are not securely fixed on a substantial structure.
(4) Signs that meet the definitions of video display signs or
multi-vision signs, or contain portions that meet such definitions.
(G) Construction Standards.
(1) All off-premises signs shall be constructed in accordance
with the current Building Code of the Township of Spring.
(2) The sh'uctural elements of all off-premises signs shall be of
metal construction.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 605 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 606. Electronic Changeable Copy Signs. In addition to complying with
all other requirements of this Chapter, electronic changeable copy signs shall comply
with the following provisions.
(A) Location of Electronic Changeable Copy Signs
(1) Electronic changeable copy signs shall be permitted only
within the following Dish'icts:
(a) Neighborhood Convenience (NC) District.
(b) Penn Avenue Mixed Use (PMU) District.
(c) Pem1 Avenue Comn1ercial (PAC) District.
(d) Planned Highway Interchange (PHI) District.
(e) Planned Office/Business District (POB) District.
(f) Planned Business and Residential (PBR) District.
(g) Planned Industry/Business (PIB) District.
(h) Extractive Industry (EI) District.
(i) Manufacturing and Industrial (MI) District.
G) Fuel Storage (FS) District.
XXVII-344
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) In Zoning Districts other than those listed in Section
606(A)(1), electronic changeable copy signs may be permitted by the
Board as a special exception use in accordance with the standards
contained in Section 325 of this Part for any lot containing one of the
following principal uses:
(a) College or university.
(b) Community center.
(c) Nursery school or day care center.
(d) Place of worship.
(e) Public recreation.
(f) School, publici private.
(g) Township-owned use, including Township park fire
station.
(3) Such sign must be located on the lot containing the use
identified or advertised on the sign. No electronic changeable copy sign
shall advertise for businesses, goods or products not located on the
premises on which the sign is located. This shall not prohibit general
messages to the public such as community events, birthdays, etc.
(B) Setbacks of Electronic Changeable Copy Signs.
(1) Any electronic changeable copy sign shall be set back a
minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the property boundary line of any
existing principally residential use and from the boundary of any
residential district.
(C) Size of Sign. An electronic changeable copy sign may be used only
in conjunction with an immediately adjacent wall sign or as part of a free
standing sign and shall not be displayed on its own. The electronic changeable
copy portion of the sign shall not be larger than (40 %) of the total area of the
permanent graphic portion of the sign when compared as graphic components.
For purposes of determining the allowable total sign area, the permanent graphic
portion of the sign and the electronic changeable copy portion of the sign shall be
included in the same perimeter inclusive of any physical separation between the
two components.
(D) Operational Limitations. Electronic changeable copy signs shall
contain static messages only, changed only through dissolve or fade tran . ·ons
which may otherwise not have movement, or the appearance or optical .
of movement, of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial seg
XXVII-345
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
sign, including the movement of any illumination or flashing, scintillating or
varying of light intensity.
(E) Limit on Number of Signs. Only one (1) electronic changeable copy
sign, or sign containing a portion thereot shall be permitted per lot. Such signs
must be included in the total number of signs permitted, and shall not be in
addition to that permitted total.
(F) Duration of Message. Any message, or portion thereof, displayed
on such sign shall have a minimum duration of one (1) minute and must be a
static display. The time of transition from one message or image to the next shall
be no longer than one (1) second. No portion of the message may flash, scroll,
twirt change color, fade in or out, or in any manner imitate movement.
(G) Text of Message. The text of the sign must be limited to ten words
to allow passing motorists to read the entire copy with minimal distraction.
(H) Illumination of Electronic Changeable Copy Signs.
(1) The brightness of an electronic changeable copy sign shall
not exceed an illumination of 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter)
during daylight hours, and 500 nits between dusk and dawn, as measured
from the sign's face at maximum brightness. The sign shall have an
automatic dimmer switch control to produce a distinct illumination
change from a higher illumination level to a lower illumination level for
the period of time between one half hour before sunset and one half hour
after sunrise. Electronic changeable copy signs shall also be equipped
with automatic monitors and dimmer features to adjust brightness levels
based upon ambient light. At no time shall the sign be operated at a
brightness level greater than the manufacturer's recommended levels.
(2) The lamp wattage and luminance level in nits (candelas per
square meter) shall be provided at the time of permit application. Permit
applications for electronic changeable copy signs shall also include a copy
of the manufacturer's operating manuat which includes the
manufacturer's recommended standards for brightness, and a certification
from the owner or operator of the sign stating that the sign shall at all
times be operated in accordance with all applicable Township regulations
and that the owner or operator shall provide proof of such conformance
upon request of the Township.
(Ordinance No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
XXVII-346
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 607. Area of Sign.
(A) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any
supporting framework and bracing which is incidental to the display itself.
(B) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted on a surface, the area shall be considered to be the smallest rectangle
which can be drawn to encompass all of the letters and symbols.
(C) The size of any sign shall be computed by multiplying its greatest
height by its greatest length, exclusive of supporting structures, unless such
supporting structure is illuminated or is in the form of a symbol or contains
advertising copy.
(D) In the case of signs that have no definable edges, such as raised
letters attached to a building facade, the sign size shall be that area within a
single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual message or
copy area.
(E) In computing square foot area of a double-face sign, only one (1)
side shall be considered, provided both sign~ faces are identical. If the interior
angle formed by the two (2) faces of a double-faced sign is greater than forty-five
(45) degrees, then both sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the
sIgn area.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 606 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 608. Supplemental Sign Regulations.
(A) Projection. No sign shall project more than twelve (12") inches
from the building fa<;ade to which it is attached. No freestanding sign may
project beyond the lot line or beyond a sh"eet right-of-way.
(B) Height. No sign that is a part of or is supported by a building shall
be erected upon the roof of such building, nor shall such sign extend above the
height of the building. Freestanding signs shall meet the height requirements of
the particular zoning district in which they are located.
XXVII-347
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(C) Illumination. Signs may be lighted with nonglaring lights or may
be illuminated by shielded floodlights, provided, however, that no red, green or
amber lights shall be permitted and provided that lighting is screened from
adjacent properties. No lights of intermittent, flashing or animated types shall be
permitted.
(D) Placement. No signs shall be permitted which are posted, stapled
or otherwise permanently attached to public utility poles or trees within a street
right-of-way. No portion of any freestanding sign shall be located within
five (5') feet of any side lot line.
(E) Consh"uction. All signs, except temporary signs, shall be
constructed of durable material and kept in good condition and repair. Any sign
which is allowed to become dilapidated may, after thirty (30) days notification,
be removed by the Township at the expense of the owner or lessee of the
property on which it is located.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 607 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
Section 609. Sign Permits.
(A) General
(1) All signs, with the exception of those specifically excluded
under Section 601(D), shall require the issuance of a sign permit prior to
erection or replacement.
(2) No permit will be required for each time the copy changes
on a sign which involves frequent or periodic changes of copy.
(3) All signs must comply with all of the regulations contained
herein, regardless of whether or not a permit is required.
(B) Signs Not Requiring Permits
(1) Official signs of any governmental unit and legal notices
posted pursuant to law.
(2) Nameplate signs.
(3) Memorial or historic markers when approved by the Board
of Supervisors or the Pennsylvania Museum and Historical Commission.
XXVII-348
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(4) Public services signs such as those advertising availability of
restrooms, telephone, meeting times of service organizations or other
similar public conveniences.
(5) No-trespassing signs or signs indicating the private nature of
a road, driveway or premises and signs prohibiting or controlling hunting
and fishing upon the premises.
(C) Freestanding Signs.
(1) If the sign is to be supported by a separate sh"ucture to be
erected for that purpose, then the applicant shall supply a map of the lot
indicating the location of the proposed sign and the relative distances to a
point perpendicular to the lot lines. A scaled diagram or photograph of a
similar sign shall also be attached.
(2) A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for freestanding
signs only.
(D) Hazardous Signs.
(1) When in the discretion of the Zoning Officer the type of sign
in question constitutes a potential danger to the community, a certificate
of insurance shall be required. Such policy shall provide $20,000
minimum benefits.
(2) No Sign Permit shall be granted unless the application
conforms to the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 608 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 366, January 12, 2009, Section 3)
XXVII-349
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Part 7
Off-Sh"eet Parking and Loading
Section 701. Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces.
CATEGORY
(A) Requirement.
(1) Each use established, enlarged or altered in any dish"ict shall
provide and satisfactorily maintain off-street parking spaces in accordance
with Table 7.1 and the regulations of this Part.
(2) Uses not specifically listed in Table 7.1 shall comply with the
requirements for the most similar use listed in Table 7.1.
(3) Where a proposed use contains or includes more than one
(1) type of use (regardless of whether each use is listed in Table 7.1 or is an
unlisted use), or where a single use involves two or more activities that
have separate and distinct parking demands, the number of parking
spaces required shall be the sum of the parking requirements for each
separate use or activity, except where such proposed use complies with
the provisions of Section 702(G) pertaining to cormnon parking areas.
(4) Where the computation of required parking spaces results in
a fractional number, the fraction of one-quarter (1/4, 0.25) or more shall be
counted as one (1).
Table 7.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
PARKING SP ACES***
AGRICULTURAL USES
Agriculture 1 per employee
Animal Hospital/Veterinarian 1 per employee + 4 per doctor
Animal Husbandry 1 per employee
Greenl10use / Nursery (Retail) 1 per employee + 1 per 120 SF*
XXVII-350
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
CATEGORY PARKING SPACES***
Kennel 1 per employee + 1 per 4 animals of capacity
Seasonal Roadside Produce Stand 1 per employee + 1 per 120 SF**
Stable or Riding Academy, 1 per employee + 1 per 4 animals of capacity
Commercial
RESIDENTIAL USES
Dwelling, 3 bedrooms or less
Dwelling, 4 bedrooms or more
Group Home
Home Occupation
Housing for the Elderly
2 per dwelling unit
3 per dwelling unit
1 per each employee on largest shift + 1 space per
resident, unless the applicant proves the home will be
limited to persons who are unable, or not permitted
to drive
1 per 200 SF of floor area accessible to customers* + 1
per each nonresident employee, to a maximum of
3 spaces in addition to those required for the
dwelling unit
1 per 2 dwelling units + 1 per each employee on
largest shift
Rooming/Boarding House, 1 per roomer/boarder + 1 per each rental unit + 1 for
Fraternity and Other Similar Places each employee
RECREATIONAL USES
Bowling Alley
Community Center
Health Club
Library
4 per lane + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per 200 SF** or 1 per 4 seats, whichever shall require
more spaces
1 per 200 SF** + 1 per employee on largest shift
4 per 1,000 SF' + 1 per employee j", "
t~' U
XXVII-3S1
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
CATEGORY
Indoor Recreation, including
Membership Club
Outdoor Recreation
(Ballfields, Golf Course)
Swimming or Tennis Club
Stadium
Theater or Auditorium
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
PARKING SP ACES***
1 per 45 SF of floor area accessible to customers*
+ 1 per each employee on largest shift
1 per 3 persons of design capacity + 1 per each
Employee on largest shift
1 per 4 persons of maximum occupancy + 1 per each
employee on largest shift
1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee on largest shift
INSTITUTIONAL AND EDUCATIONAL USES
Ambulatory Surgical Center
College or University, with
dormitories
College, without dormitories
Conference/Training Center
Convalescent or Nursing Home
Cultural Center
Hospital/Medical Center
Hospital Staff Dormitory
Medical or Dental Office/ Clinic
Medical Laboratory
1 per 600 SF**
1 per 2 students + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per student + 1 per staff member/ employee
1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee
1 per 2 beds + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per 500 SF** + 1 per employee (indoor facility) or 1
per 4,000 SF of lot area dedicated to use + 1 per
employee (outdoor facility)
1 per bed + 1 per employee
1 per resident + 1 per employee on largest shift
4 per person engaged in practice + 1 per employee
(including doctor)
1 per 250 SF**
XXVII-352
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
CATEGORY
Nursery School or Day Care
Center, including Adult Day
Care
Patient Hostel
Places of Worship
School, Elementary/Middle/
Jr. High
School, High
Treatment Center
Utility Substation
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
PARKING SP ACES***
1 per employee + 1 per 6 children or persons being
cared for at the facility
1 per guest room + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee
2 per admin. Employee + 1.5 per additional employee
+ 0.25 per gymnasium and auditorium seat
1 per employee + 1 per every 3 students
accommodated at one time
1 per each employee on largest shift + 1 space per
resident, unless the applicant proves the treatment
center will be limited to persons who are unable, or
not permitted to drive
1 per vehicle required to service such facility
RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES USES
Adult Bookstore
Auto, Gas/Service/Repair
Auto, Recreational or Boat Sales
Bed and Breakfast
Casino or Gaming Establishment
1 per 100 SF** + 1 per employee
2 per service bay + 1 per employee
1 per 10 vehicles/RVs/boats on display + 1 per each
employee
1 per guest unit + 1 per employee on largest shift.
1.5 per gaming position + 1 per employee
Fast Food Restaurant or Fast Food 1 per 2 seats + 1 per 2 employees on largest shift + 3
Restaurant with Drive-Through for takeout from restaurant
(with Seating)
Fast Food Restaurant or Fast Food 1 per 80 SF** + 1 per employee on ::Ir(ypC:,R
Restaurant with Drive Through
(without seating)
XXVII-353
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
CATEGORY
Financial Establishment
Food Stand
Furniture Store
Funeral Home
Hotelj Motel
Laundromat
Nightclub
Office, less than 400 SF
Office, more than 400 SF
Off-Track Betting Parlor
Open Air Retail
Personal Service Business
Restaurant
Tavern
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
PARKING SP ACES***
1 per 250 SF** + 1 per employee
1 per 20 SF** + 1 per employee
1 per 750 SF**
1 per 50 SF** + 1 per employee
1 per guest unit + 1 per employee on largest shift.
Parking for any associated restaurant, nightclub,
conference/ training, recreation or other use shall be
calculated separately.
1 per 3 machines + 1 per each employee
1 per 30 SF** + 1 per employee on largest shift or 1
per 2 persons of maximum occupancy + 1 per
employee on largest shift, whichever shall require
more spaces
1 per 150 SF**
1 per 250 SF**
1 per 40 SF** + 1 per employee on largest shift or 1
per 2 persons of maximum occupancy + 1 per
employee on largest shift, whichever shall require
more spaces
1 per 1,500 SF of lot mea dedicated to use
1 per 150 SF* + 1 per employee
1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee on largest shift
1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee on largest shift or 1
per 3 persons of maximum occupancy + 1 per
employee on largest shift, whichever shall require
more spaces
Retail/ General Merchandise Store 1 per 200 SF** + 1 per employee
XXVII-354
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
CATEGORY
Shopping Center
Vocational School
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
PARKING SP ACES***
5 per 1,000 SF** (See additional parking requirements
under §324)
1 per student + 1 per staff member/ employee
INDUSTRIAL, WHOLESALE AND WAREHOUSING USES
Industrial, Manufacturing or
Warehousing Uses
1 per each employee on two largest successive shifts
* Of all floor area occupied by equipment, furnishings or inventory
accessible to customers or patrons, but not including corridors, toilet rooms
and other such accessory rooms as may be provided.
** Gross floor area.
***In addition to the required off-street parking spaces, a day care or any interior service
and convenience uses that involve a day-care shall have one (1) off-street stacking space
for every ten (10) participants in the day-care, which shall be in accordance with the
Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations of §707.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 701 of Section 2; as amended by Ordinance
No. 354, March 10,2008, Section 4)
Section 702. General Regulations Applying to Required Off-Street Parking
Facilities.
(A) General. Parking space layout and requirements shall be adequate
for the intended use.
(B) Existing Parking. Structures and uses in existence at the effective
date of this Part shall not be subject to the requirements of this Part provided that
the kind of use is not changed and that any parking facility now serving such
structures or uses shall not in the future be reduced to an amount less than that
required by this Chapter.
(C) Changes in Use.
(1) The required number of parking spaces may be affecte¢\by
changes or enlargements in floor area, number of dwellings, type J~'~~%{
number of employees, seating capacity or other applicable criteria/;:j(:;'iY;\
llji~~~'~ I '1 ~n
i/:C;/ {(~ J" ,-<)
&~\ ~
~-~ XXVII-355
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) The parking requirements for §701 shall be used to
determine if additional parking is needed. If the requirement after the
change would be greater than one hundred and ten percent (110%) of
what is currently provided, then the use shall provide the additional
parking prior to receiving an occupancy permit.
(D) Continuing Character of Obligation.
(1) All required parking facilities shall be provided and
maintained so long as the use which the facilities were designed to serve
still exists.
(2) Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced in total
extent except when such reduction is in conformity with the requirements
of this Part in conjunction with a change in the nature of the use.
(E) Conflict With Other Uses. No parking area shall be used for any
other use that interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
(F) Location of Parking Spaces. Required off-street parking spaces
shall be on the same lot or premises with the principal use served, except where
off-site parking is permitted as a conditional use or where common parking lots
are permitted.
(G) Joint Use. In the commercial and mixed use areas, two (2) or more
buildings, properties or uses may provide for required parking in a common
parking lot. The total number of spaces in such lot shall not be less than the sum
of spaces required for each building, property or use individually; however, the
total number of spaces may be reduced by the Board of Supervisors in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The applicant for such common parking shall provide
sufficient evidence to justify the requested reduction in parking based
upon accepted plam1ing and engineering practice. The applicant must
show that the peak parking demand and operating hours for each use are
suitable for a common parking facility.
(2) The applicant for such common parking shall follow the
following procedure to determine the required number of parking spaces:
(a) The minimum number of parking spaces shall be
determined separately for each building, property or use by time
XXVII-356
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Use
Residential
Office
Commercial/Retail
Hotel
Restaurant (not 24 hr.)
Restaurant associated
with hotel
Entertainment/recreation
(theaters, bowling allies,
cocktail lounges, taverns
and similar)
Day-care facilities
All other
period. That number shall be based upon the requirements of
Table 7.1 multiplied by the percentages shown in the following
table:
Weekday Weekend
1 :00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m. 1:00 a.m. 7:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m. 1:00 a.m.
(percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent)
100 60 90 100 80 90
5 100 10 5 15 5
5 80 90 5 100 70
100 70 100 100 70 100
20 60 100 30 50 100
10 50 60
100
50 60
10 40 100 30 80 100
5 100 10 5 20 5
100 100 100 100 100 100
(b) The total number of parking spaces required for each
time period shall be the sum of the requirements for each building,
property or use for that time period.
(c) The minimum number of parking spaces provided
shall not be less than the greatest total resulting for any time
period.
(3) Such parking lot shall be within three hundred (300) feet
walking distance of all of the principal uses served by such lot.
(4) If a lower total is approved, no change in use shall thereafter
be permitted without further evidence that the parking will remain
adequate in the future, and if said evidence is not satisfactory, then
additional parking shall be provided before a change in use is authori~~
(5) Evidence of continued availability of common or
parking facilities, such as a written agreement, shall be provide~~{
I} .. "",
XXVII-357
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(6) The applicant shall demonstrate that adequate pedestrian
access will be provided between the proposed facility and the buildings,
properties or uses being served.
(H) Parking of Commercial Vehicles. No more than one (1) commercial
motor vehicle with more than six (6) wheels may park on a residential lot within
the RS, MDS, LDS, SS and U Districts.
(I) Recreational Vehicles. Overnight parking of recreational vehicle,
motor homes or campers shall be permitted on non-residential parking lots only
within a campground or a recreational vehicle sales area.
(J) Unlicensed Vehicles. Vehicles without current license plates or
valid inspections, including boats and trailers, shall not be parked or stored
along any public or private street or alley, or upon any residentially zoned
property outside the rear yard area or garage. The number of such vehicles
parked within the rear yard area shall be as provided for in the provisions of the
Township's Property Maintenance Code. The duration for which such vehicles
shall be permitted within the rear yard shall not exceed ninety (90) days.
(K) Vehicle Repair. Except for emergency repairs, no repair to or
maintenance of vehicles shall be permitted in any parking lot or street.
(L) Temporary Seating. Where parking requirements are determined
by the number of seats and temporary seats are provided, the number of parking
spaces to be provided shall be based upon the capacity for temporary seats in
normal usage.
(M) Off-Site Parking. Where off-street parking is permitted by
conditional use approval to be located on a separate lot from the permitted
principal use, the number of required off-street parking spaces may be met by
off-site or remote parking spaces. Off-site parking facilities shall comply with
the following provisions.
(1) Off-site or remote parking facilities shall be located within
two hundred (200) feet of the parcel containing the principal use.
(2) Walking paths between the off-site or remote parking
facilities and the principal use shall not cross streets.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate a copy of a written contract
or agreement with the owner of the property upon which the off-site
XXVU-358
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
parking facility is located, granting the applicant use of said property.
Conditional use approval of off-site or remote parking shall expire upon
the expiration of such contract or agreement.
(4) Such off-site parking facilities shall comply with all other
applicable provisions of this Section.
(N) All off-street parking facilities shall comply with the applicable
AD A standards.
(0) Parking Reduction. Where an Applicant believes that the
requirements for the number of parking spaces are inappropriate for a proposed
use or shared parking arrangement, a Special Exception Application for a
Parking Reduction may be submitted at the applicant's expense. The Township
Board may authorize, by Special Exception, a reduction in the number of parking
spaces required, in accordance with the provisions of Section 805(B) of this
Chapter. Such Special exception shall be granted only when an applicant
provides compelling evidence that the requirements, as applied to the particular
use, would exceed the minimum necessary to adequately serve the customers,
clients, visitors and employees.
(1) Such application shall include a Parking Reduction Study,
prepared by a qualified professional, that shall, at a minimum, include
the following:
(d) A narrative discussion of the type of use and an
explanation of why such use is unique from a parking needs
standpoint.
(e) Computation of the number of parking spaces
required by the regulations using the standard parking provisions,
as well as the reduced number requested by the applicant.
(f) Anticipated number of employees, parking counts
from similar land uses, amount of time a typical user parks at the
site, possibility of shared parking between one or more adjacent
land uses, peak period parking demand information, and any
additional relevant information requested by the Township.
(g) Basic traffic generation data such as numbers of \
an:icipated ~ehicles entering. and exiting the si~e at peak h~1~\\
ThIS should mclude data denved from the InstItute of &?~I,\.;~t)
l/{!i~t ;', %
pl'-r~ ~
If
XXVII-359
FINAL (Revised 5-J 9-15)
Transportation Engineers (ITE) or similar uses at other sites.
(h) Proposed parking reduction techniques including
parking/traffic mitigation measures such as car pools/vanpools,
varied workshifts, remote parking facilities, company-operated
buses or shuttles and employee incentives for utilizing alternate
modes of transportation.
(i) Existing or proposed public transit facilities available
to the site and the availability of potential pedestrian or bicycle
access to the site.
G) An estimate of the impact of actual parking demand
exceeding the estimated demand, along with its impact upon onstreet
parking and parking lots not owned or controlled by the
applicant. Measures to mitigate these impacts must be included.
(k) A Site Plan showing the layout, extent and
dimensions of the proposed parking facilities along with any other
pertinent information required under Section 409(C) Site Plan
Requirements. Where a proposal constitutes a "land development"
(as defined in the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (Chapter XXVII)), the sketch or preliminary plan may be
submitted to serve as the required Site Plan.
(1) If deemed necessary by the Board, the Site Plan shall
show an area identified as Reserved Parking. The applicant shall
demonstrate that the size of this area is suitable for the number of
parking spaces that would be required to comply with the standard
parking requirements without reduction. The Site Plan shall show
that this area shall be landscaped and maintained by the applicant.
In evaluating the need for a reserve parking area, the Board may
take into account:
1) The ability of the applicant to provide a reserve
parking area based upon the subject property's size and
configuration.
2) Whether the proposal is for a new building or
for a new use to be established within an existing unused or
partially unused building.
XXVU-360
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
3) The potential impact of increased on-street
parking upon nearby properties and streets.
4) The character of the neighborhood within
which the subject property is located.
5) The amount of the reduction requested by the
applicant and the percentage of the required parking spaces.
6) Any other factors deemed pertinent by the
Board.
(2) Five (5) copies of an application for a reduction in the
amount of required parking shall be submitted to the Township. The
Township staff shall forward the application to the following:
(a) Board
(b) Board of Supervisors.
(c) Township Planning Commission.
(d) Township Engineer and! or Township Consulting
Engineer.
(e) Township Zoning Officer.
(3) Such application shall include all information specified for a
zoning permit application and any other information necessary to allow
the Board to determine that all requirements of this Chapter have been
met. The applicant shall be responsible for all pertinent costs incurred for
the review of the application.
(4) The Zoning Hearing conducted for a Special Exception for a
reduction in parking shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section
807 of this Chapter, including those provisions for public notice.
(5) The Township Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors shall receive a copy of the application and shall have t 1irty
(30) days to review and make comments and a recommendation t 1eir
discretion.
XXVII-361
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(6) Where the Board requires a reserve parking area, the
applicant shall enter into a performance agreement with the Township
which allows the reduction in parking until such time that demand for a
greater number of parking spaces is reached or a change of use or
occupancy occurs. The performance agreement shall:
(a) Require annual parking demand monitoring reports
which will note any changes in use, occupancy or demand for
additional parking.
(b) Require conversion of all or a portion of the reserve
area to a fully functioning parking area at such time that the
Township Board of Supervisors deems that it is warranted based
upon changes in use, occupancy or parking demand, or when it has
been determined that the actual parking demand has exceeded the
parking demand estimated in the Parking Reduction Study. Such
reserve parking area shall be paved pursuant to the applicable
Township regulations, within the time specified by the Township.
(c) Provide penalties for failure to comply with terms of
approval of the parking reduction.
(7) The granting of a Special Exception for a reduction in the
number of required parking spaces does not exempt an applicant from
compliance with all other provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance
and Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (see
Chapters XXVII and XXXII of the Township Code of Ordinances).
(8) A reduction in parking shall be valid only insofar as the
specific land use for which it was approved remains unchanged,
including, but not limited to, tenancy, hours of operation, clientele served,
services or goods offered and mix of activities within the use.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section; 702 of Section 2)
XXVII-362
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 703. Design Standards for Off-Street Parking Facilities.
(A) General Requirements.
(1) Every parking facility shall be designed so that its use does
not constitute a nuisance, hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
(2) Every parking area shall be arranged for orderly, safe
movement.
(3) No parking area shall be designed to require or encourage
parked vehicles to back into a public street in order to leave a parking
space, except those of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
(4) Every parking area shall be designed so that each motor
vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle, except those of s
single-family or two-family dwelling.
(5) No parking area shall be located in a required buffer yard.
(6) No parking area shall be located within ten (10) feet of a
septic system absorption area.
(7) All common parking areas and access drives shall be
surfaced with asphalt or other appropriate material approved by the
Township, shall be graded to provide convenient vehicular access and
proper drainage and shall be maintained in usable condition. The
maximum grade of areas for parking shall not exceed six percent (6%).
Surface water shall not be concentrated onto streets, sidewalks or other
lots.
(8) All dead-end parking areas shall be designed to provide
sufficient backup area for the end stalls of the parking area.
(9) Parking areas and interior accessways shall be designed so
as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site.
(B) Parking Spaces located within the Penn Avenue Overlay District
(1) Each parking space shall have a stall width of at lea
and one-half (9.5) feet.
XXVII-363
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) Each parking space shall have a stall depth of:
(a) At least eighteen (18) feet for all angle parking.
(b) At least twenty-two (22) feet for parallel parking.
(C) Parking Spaces not located within the Penn Avenue Overlay
District.
(1)
(10) feet.
Each parking space shall have a stall width of at least ten
(2) Each parking space shall have a stall depth of:
(a) At least twenty (20) feet for all angle parking.
(b) At least twenty-two (22) feet for parallel parking.
(3) All spaces shall be marked in parking areas so as to indicate
their location, except those of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
(D) Aisles.
(1) Each aisle providing access to stalls for one-way traffic only
shall be at least the minimum aisle width specified as follows:
Angle of Parking Minimum Aisle Width
Parallel 12 feet
30 degrees 12 feet
45 degrees 14 feet
60 degrees 18 feet
90 degrees 20 feet
(2) Each aisle providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall
be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width.
(3) No aisle shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in length.
XXVII-364
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(E) Grading, Surface Drainage. Except for areas that are landscaped
and so maintained, all portions of required parking facilities, including
driveways and access drives, shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt or other
appropriate material approved by the Township, and drained to the extent
necessary to prevent dust, erosion or excessive water flow across streets or
adjoining properties.
(F) Nighttime Illumination.
(1) Any parking area designed for use by six (6) or more cars
after dusk shall be adequately illuminated.
(2) All lighting fixtures used to illuminate parking areas shall be
arranged to prevent glare into public streets and adjoining properties.
(3) Parking lots serving residential uses shall, as a minimum, be
illuminated over their entire surface to one-half (0.5) average maintained
footcandles (5.4 avg. maintained lux).
(4) Parking lots serving commercial and industrial uses shall, as
a minimum, be illuminated over their entire surface to one (1.0) average
maintained footcandles (10.8 avg. maintained lux).
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 703 of Section 2)
Section 704. Access Drives and Driveways.
(A) General Requirements.
(1) Adequate provIsIons shall be made to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street at the point of
driveway or access drive entry. No driveway or access drive shall be
constructed in such a way as to create a drainage problem to an adjacent
property or public street.
(2) Where access is to a State road, a State Highway Occupancy
Permit shall be obtained.
(3) Where access drives and driveways are proposed as part of
subdivision or land development, the provisions of the To ship'S
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) also
be met.
XXVII-365
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(4) Access drives and driveways shall be designed so as to
prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site.
(5) Provisions shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways, without undue
congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow within the
Township.
(6) All streets and accessways shall conform to the specifications
determined by the Township Engineer and the requirements of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter
XXVII). Provision shall be made for adequate signalization, turn, standby
and deceleration lanes and similar facilities where deemed necessary by
the Township Engineer, after receiving any input or requirements of the
Pennsylvania Deparhnent of Transportation.
(B) Design Standards.
(1) Each access drive shall have a minimum width of twelve (12)
feet and maximum width of fifteen (15) feet at the street line for one- way
use only and a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and maximum
width of thirty-five (35) feet at the sh'eet line for two-way use.
(2) Grades of access drives shall not exceed ten percent (10%)
and grades of driveways shall not exceed twelve percent (12%); however,
in both cases the initial twenty (20) feet from the edge of the cartway shall
not exceed five percent (5%).
(3) Uses Fronting on an Arterial or .Collector Street. The
following requirements apply to any use fronting on an arterial or
collector street:
(a) Each use that has one hundred (100) feet of frontage
shall have a maximum of one (1) access drive or driveway onto
each such street. Each use that has one hundred (100) feet or more
of frontage shall be permitted to have a second access drive or
driveway onto each such street, provided that all appropriate
separation distances and sightlines otherwise required in this
Chapter are met. In addition to the above, one additional access
drive or driveway unto each such street is permitted for each one
hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage beyond the original one
hundred (100) feet. Where practicable, access to parking areas shall
XXVII-366
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
be provided by a common service drive in order to avoid direct
access to an arterial or collector street.
(b) A minimum separation distance of one hundred fifty
(150) feet along street frontage is required between any newly
created private entrance or exit driveway or access drive serving a
commercial or industrial use and any existing public street that
intersects the fronting street. The separation distance shall be
measured from the centerline of the driveway or access drive and
closest right-of-way line of the street.
(c) Large Developments. In the case of any development
intended to involve more than five (5) commercial or industrial
buildings or lots, or more than ten (10) acres of commerciat
industriat garden apartment or townhouse uses, each point of
vehicular access to and from a public street shall be located at least
two hundred (200) feet from the intersection of any public street
right-of-way lines, provided that such point of vehicular access
which converts a liT" intersection into an intersection of two (2)
streets which cross one another shall be permitted. The separation
distance shall be measured from the centerline of the vehicular
access and the closest right-of-way line of the street.
(4) At least fifty (50) feet shall be provided between any two (2)
access drives along one (1) street for one (1) lot.
(5) No access drive or driveway shall be less than thirty (30) feet
from any street intersection. The separation distance shall be measured
from the centerline of the driveway or access drive and closest right of
way line of the street
(6) No driveways or access drives shall be within two (2) feet of
any property line unless such driveway or access drive is shared by an
adjacent house.
(7) Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, no driveway
shall be constructed so that there is more than one (1) entrance to a street
unless entrances are separated by a distance of two hundred (200) feet.
(8) No driveway or access drive shall be const or
maintained which does not meet the following regulations:
XXVU-367
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) Entrance to the street shall be at an angle of seventyfive
(75) degrees to one hundred and five (105) degrees with the
intersecting street.
(b) The driveway or access drive between the right-ofway
of the street and the cartway shall be paved.
(c) All curb cuts shall be properly constructed to
Township standards when curbing is provided; if curbing is not
provided, then adequate drainage provisions shall be provided as
determined by the Township Engineer.
(9) All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service
areas or spaces between or about buildings, other than those related to a
dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated during night hours of use at no
cost to the Township, in accordance with the provisions of Section 703(F).
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 704 of Section 2)
Section 705. Off-Street Loading.
(A) General Requirements. Each use shall provide paved off-street
loading facilities sufficient to accommodate the maximum demand generated by
the use, which comply with the regulations contained in §705.
(B) The number and size of off-street loading spaces shall be
appropriate for the use to be conducted on the premises and sufficient to
accommodate all vehicles serving the use. Off-street loading spaces shall comply
with the following provisions:
(1) Loading docks shall be provided for all uses that require the
loading of any truck requiring a CDL or that contain in excess of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area in an area under single
lease or ownership.
(2) No repair work or servlcmg of vehicles, except for
emergency repairs, shall be conducted in a loading area.
XXVII-368
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(3) The number of required off-street loading spaces shall be
determined as follows:
CATEGORY
Commercial
Industrial
NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET
LOADING SPACES
1 per 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
1 per 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(4) Deviations from the above-required number of off-street
loading spaces may be permitted by the Zoning Officer if, when a zoning
approval or building permit is applied for, the application shall show all
provisions for off-street loading and include supporting data (number,
frequency and size of vehicles which will use the loading facilities), which
justify the number and size of the spaces provided. Number and size of
spaces provided shall be approved by the Zoning Officer unless otherwise
indicated in this Section.
(C) Design and Layout of Off-Street Loading Facilities. Off-street
loading facilities shall be designed to conform to the following specifications:
(1) The requirements of this Section shall apply to all new
industrial, commercial, office and mixed-use developments and to all
expansions of such existing uses resulting in an increase in gross floor area
of twenty percent (20%) or more from the effective date of this Part.
(2) Each off-street loading and unloading space shall be at least
fourteen (14) feet in width by seventy-five (75) feet in depth and shall have
a clear height of no less than fourteen (14) feet.
(3) Off-street loading areas shall be completely contained upon
the site of the building served and shall neither occupy nor infringe upon
any parking spaces, traffic lanes within a parking area, driveways, access
drives or street rights-of-way.
(4) A planting screen in accordance with the requirements of
§405(I) shall be provided between loading areas and any existing
residential use.
i\ / '
(5) Each space shall have sufficient maneuvering roqny, e
from other parking to eliminate traffic conflicts within off-;~'/"
and parking areas. '
XXVII-369
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(6) Each space shall be located entirely on the lot being served
and be so located that each space and all maneuvering room is outside of
required buffer areas, yard areas and right-of-ways.
(7) An appropriate means of access to a street or alley shall be
provided that the maximum width of driveways (measured at the street
lot line) shall be thirty-five (35) feet and that the minimum width shall be
twenty-four (24) feet.
(8) All off-street loading and unloading spaces, maneuvering
areas, driveways and entranceways shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt
or other suitable material and drained to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances of dust, erosion or
excessive water flow across public ways and to protect adjoining property.
(9) No such facilities shall be designed or used in any manner so
as to constitute a nuisance, a hazard or an unreasonable impediment to
h"affic.
(10) Any loading docks or truck maneuvering areas shall be
placed in such locations that are the maximum distance possible from any
adjacent residential district and from existing residences. Buildings and
loading docks shall be located and oriented, to the greatest extent
practicable, so that the loading docks shall be located along walls that do
not face adjoining residences or residential districts. It shall be the
applicant's responsibility to demonstrate compliance with these
requirements.
(11) All such facilities shall comply with the lighting
requirements of §703(F) and the landscaping requirements of §706.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 705 of Section 2)
Section 706. Parking Lot Landscaping.
(A) All areas not serving as parking spaces, aisles, access drives or
pedestrian walkways shall be covered with an all-season groundcover and be
well maintained.
(B) Except where entrance and exit drives cross street lines, all parking
areas for any purpose other than single-family residences and two- family
residences shall be physically separated from any public street by a raised curb
XXVII-370
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
or landscaped berm and an area not less than ten (10) feet in depth (measured
from the right-of-way line) which shall be covered with an all-season
groundcover and maintained.
(C) Any lot that would include more than thirty (30) parking spaces
shall be required to provide landscaped areas within the paved area. This
required landscaped area shall be equal to a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
total paved area. Such landscaped areas shall be configured to promote
pedestrian safety by defining walkways, to enhance motorist safety by defining
traffic lanes and discouraging cross-lot taxiing, to act as a barrier against windborne
debris and dust, to provide shade moderating micro climatic conditions, to
reduce the volume and velocity of stormwater runoff and to enhance the
appearance of the parking areas.
(D) One (1) deciduous tree of a minimum caliper of one and one-half (1
1/2) inches shall be required for every eighteen (18) required off-street parking
spaces. The trees shall be of species acceptable to the Planning Commission.
(E) A substantial proportion of the trees required by this Section
should be planted within the parking lot within protected islands. Required
trees are also encouraged to be planted in highly visible locations, especially
between parking areas and major streets.
(F) The landscaped areas shall not obstruct sight distances for
motorists or pedestrians, nor shall such landscaping create any potential hazard
to public safety.
(G) Each individual plot of landscaping within a parking lot shall
occupy an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet and shall
have no side dimension of less than five (5) feet.
(H) Landscaped areas shall be protected from the encroachment of
vehicles by use of curbing, wheel stops, bollards, fencing or other approved
barriers.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 706 of Section 2)
XXVII-371
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 707. Drive-Through Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations.
(A) General Provisions. The purpose of off-street stacking space
regulations is to promote public safety by alleviating on-site and off-site traffic
congestion from the operation of a facility which utilizes a drive-through service
unit. Any use having a drive-through service unit shall provide the required offstreet
stacking area on-site and shall locate the drive-through facilities in such a
way as to ensure that on-site and off-site traffic conflicts, hazards and congestion
are avoided. Each drive-through service unit shall provide the stacking spaces as
follows:
(1) Each stacking space shall be not less than eight and one-half
(8-1/2) feet in width and seventeen and one-half (17-1/2) feet in length,
with additional spaces for necessary turning and maneuvering.
(2) The area required for stacking spaces shall be exclusive of
and in addition to any required parking space, loading space, driveway,
access drive or aisle, unless otherwise permitted.
(3) A parking space at any component of a drive-through
service unit (window, menu board, order station, or service bay) shall be
considered to be a stacking space.
(4) Any area reserved for stacking spaces shall not double as a
circulation drive or maneuvering area.
(5) Sites with stacking spaces shall include an exclusive bypass
aisle, drive or other circulation area in the parking lot design to allow
vehicles to bypass the stacking area.
(6) Any component of a drive-through service unit may project
up to one (1) foot into the stacking area.
(7) Drive-through service units may contain more than one (1)
component part. Service units may contain such components as menu
board(s), pay windows, and food-service pickup windows. To determine
the number of off-sh<eet stacking spaces located before a service unit, the
final component of the service unit shall be used in determining the
location of the off-street stacking spaces. In the case of car washes, the
final component of a service unit is the entrance to the car wash building
itself.
XXVII-372
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(8) Where a single drive-through lane serves more than one (1)
drive-through service unit, the minimum number of stacking spaces
provided shall equal the combined total required for each service unit.
(B) Required stacking spaces.
(1) Car wash:
(a) Self-service or hand wash: Three (3) spaces before the
final component of each service unit; two (2) spaces at the exit of
each unit.
(b) Semi- or fully automatic: Ten (10) spaces before the
final component of each service unit; two (2) spaces at the exit of
each unit.
(2) Drive-In (Outdoor) Theater. Before the ticket service
window or area, stacking space shall be equal to twenty (20) percent of the
total off-street parking capacity of the theater. The in-bound reservoir
area shall not connect or conflict in any way with the exit drives.
(3) Restaurants or Financial Establishments (including ATMs).
(a) One (1) drive-through service unit. Six (6) spaces
before the final component of the service unit; two (2) spaces at the
exit of the unit.
(b) For each additional drive-through service unit. Four
(4) spaces before the final component of each additional service
unit; one (1) space at the exit of each unit.
(c) The number of stacking spaces required above shall
be considered minimums. The Township may require additional
stacking spaces when they are deemed necessary to comply with
the general provisions of this section.
(d) Where an applicant can provide compelling evidence
that fewer than the required number of stacking spaces would
adequately serve a drive-through establishment, the nurg er of
required stacking spaces may by Special Exception be re7~~ by
the Board. /;" ',\;,~
XXVII-373
; , ~
~
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(4) All other facilities utilizing a drive-through service unit,
including, but not limited to, laundry and dry cleaning stations, photo
drop-off/ pick-up stations, automobile oil change or lubrication facilities:
Three (3) spaces before the final component of the service unit; one (1)
space at the exit of each service unit.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 707 of Section 2)
XXVII-374
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Part 8
Administration
Section 801. General Procedure.
(A) Persons desiring to undertake any new construction, structural or
site alteration, or changes in the use of a building or lot shall apply to the
Township Zoning Officer for a zoning permit by filling out the appropriate
application form and by submitting the required fee.
(B) The Zoning Officer shall either issue the zoning permit or shall
deny the permit, indicating in writing the reason for refusal. Certain
construction, alterations or uses require approval of the Board and/ or of the
Board of Supervisors, and/ or the recommendations of the Planning Commission.
(C) If denied a permit by the Zoning Officer, the applicant may appeal
to the Board for further consideration.
(D) After the zoning permit has been received by the applicant, he may
undertake the action permitted by the zoning permit, so long as no other permits
are required, including, but not limited to, state and local building permits and
approvals.
(E) Upon completion of such action, the applicant may apply to the
Township Zoning Officer for an occupancy permit (where such a permit is
required).
(F) If the Zoning Officer finds that the action of the applicant is in
accordance with the zoning permit and any other required permits, he shall issue
an occupancy permit allowing the premises to be occupied.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 801 of Section 2)
Section 802. Permits and Certificates.
(A) Zoning Permit.
(1) Scope.
(a) No person shall erect, alter, convert,
any building, structure or sign, nor alter the use
XXVII-375
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
structure, until the Zoning Officer issues a zoning permit to the
person for said change or construction.
(b) No zoning permit is required for normal maintenance
and repairs.
(2) Types of Uses.
(a) Permitted Uses. A zoning permit for a permitted use
may be issued by the Zoning Officer.
(b) Special Exception, Variance. A zoning permit for a
use requiring a special exception or variance shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer only upon the written order of the Board after a
hearing. An application for a special exception, variance or for
interpretation of any part or provision of this Chapter shall be
made to the Board on forms which may be obtained from the
Township Secretary.
(c) Conditional Use. A zoning permit for a conditional
use shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only upon the written
order of the Board of Supervisors. An application for a conditional
use shall be made to the Board of Supervisors on forms which may
be obtained from the Township Secretary.
(3) Application.
(a) All applications shall be made in writing and shall be
accompanied by two (2) sets of plans. Such plans shall be prepared
by a licensed surveyor or engineer at the discretion of the Zoning
Officer. The plan shall depict at least the following information if
applicable:
1) Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be
built upon prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer.
2) The exact size and location on the lot of
buildings, structures, all rights-of-way and easements,
public or private, signs and existing and/ or proposed
extensions thereto prepared by a licensed surveyor or
engmeer.
3) The number of dwelling units if applicable.
XXVII-376
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
4) Vehicular access, parking spaces and loading
facilities.
5) Statement indicating the existing or proposed
use.
6) Height of structure, building or sign.
7) All other information necessary for such
Zoning Officer to determine conformance with and provide
for enforcement of this Chapter.
8) A detailed scaled drawing of the signs showing
intended location and stating how it shall be affixed.
9) A statement indicating the type of construction
and the manner of installation for signs, together with the
materials to be used.
(b) One (1) copy of the plans shall be returned to the
applicant by the Zoning Officer after he shall have marked such
copies either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by
his signature on such copy.
(c) One (1) copy of all such plans shall be retained by the
Zoning Officer for his permanent records.
(4) Issuance.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall issue or refuse an application
for a zoning permit within thirty (30) days after the date such
application was made, except as specifically provided for in this
Chapter.
(b) A zoning permit shall be issued in at least triplicate.
(c) One (1) copy shall be kept conspicuously on the
premises. No person shall perform building operations of any kind
unless a zoning permit is being displayed as required this
Chapter.
XXVII-377
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(d) In case of denial, the applicant shall be informed of
his rights of appeal. Any appeal must be filed with the Board
within thirty (30) days of the date of denial of the permit.
(5) Expiration of Zoning Permit. Zoning permit shall expire
within six (6) months from date of issuance, if work described in any
permit has not begun. If work described in any zoning permit has begun
within the six (6) month period, said permit shall expire after one (1) year
from date of issuance thereof.
(B) Occupancy Permit.
(1) Scope. Prior to the use, occupancy of any land or building or
for any change of use of any existing building or for any change of use of
land, an occupancy permit shall be secured from the Zoning Officer.
(2) Application. The application for certificate of use and
occupancy shall be submitted in such form as the Zoning Officer may
prescribe accompanied by an lias built survey" prepared by a licensed
surveyor or engineer.
(3) Issuance.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall inspect any structure,
building, sign and/ or land or portions thereof and shall determine
the conformity therewith. If he is satisfied that the completed work
is in conformity with this Chapter and with the work listed in the
zoning permit, he shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy.
(b) Certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted or
refused in writing within ten (10) days from the date of application.
(c) In zones in which performance standards are
imposed, no certificate of occupancy shall become permanent until
thirty (30) days after the facility is fully operating and only after,
upon reinspection by the Zoning Officer, it is determined that the
facility is in compliance with all performance standards. After said
reinspection the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant that the
facility is in full compliance with all performance standards and
that the certificate of use and occupancy is permanent or that the
facility does not comply and that the certificate of use and
occupancy is still temporary.
XXVII-378
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(C) Other Permits. The Township may reqmre additional permits
specified in other related ordinances and laws.
(D) Certificate of Nonconforming Use or Structure.
(1) The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful
nonconforming use or structure may secure a certificate of nonconforming
use or structure from the Zoning Officer.
(2) Such certificate shall be authorized by the Zoning Officer
and shall certify to the owner his right to continue such nonconforming
use or structure.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 802 of Section 2)
Section 803. Zoning Officer.
(A) Appointment.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors and shall not hold any elective office.
(2) The Zoning Officer or staff shall continue to serve the
Township until such time as the Board of Supervisors declares otherwise.
(B) Duties and Powers
(1) The Zoning Officer shall:
(a) Administer this Chapter in accordance with its literal
terms.
(b) Identify and register nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures.
(c) Receive and examine all applications required under
the terms of this Chapter.
(d) Issue or refuse permits within sixty (60) days of the
receipt of the application, except as specifically provided for 1 this
Chapter.
(e) Receive complaints of violation of this Ch
XXVII-379
FINAL (Revised 5-J 9-15)
(f) Issue a written notice of violation to any person
violating any provision of this Chapter.
(g) Keep records of applications, permits and certificates
issued, of variances and special exceptions granted by the Board, of
conditional uses granted by the Board of Supervisors, of complaints
received, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notice or
orders issued.
(h) Make all required inspections and perform all other
duties as called for in this Chapter.
(i) Be responsible for keeping this Chapter and the
Zoning Map up to date so as to include all amendments thereto.
G) Issue certificates of use and occupancy in accordance
with the terms of this Chapter.
(k) Perform such other duties and functions as
authorized by the Pem1sylvania Municipalities Plamung Code, 53
P.5. Section 10101, et seq., as amended, and/ or by the Board of
Supervisors.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall not have the power to permit any
construction, use or change of use which does not conform to this
Chapter.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 803 of Section 2)
Section 804. Zoning Hearing Board.
(A) Appointment.
(1) The Board shall consist of three (3) residents of the
Township appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Board members shall serve terms of three (3) years, so fixed
that the term of office of one (1) member shall expire each year.
(3) Members of the Board shall hold no other elective or
appointed office in the Township.
XXVII-380
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(4) The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least
one but no more than three residents of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall be
three (3) years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of this Section, an
alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions
of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by law for the Board
members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting Board
member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties
set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code and as otherwise provided
by law. Alternates shall hold no other elected or appointed office in the
Township, including service as a member of the Plam1ing Commission or
as a zoning officer, nor shall any alternate be an employee of the
Township. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion
of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor
be compensated pursuant to this Part unless designated as a voting
alternate Board member pursuant to this Section.
(B) Vacancies.
(1) The Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors of
any vacancies which occur.
(2) Appointments to fill vacanCIes shall be only for the
unexpired portion of a term.
(C) Removal. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of
the Board of Supervisors which appointed the Board member, taken after the
Board member has received fifteen (15) days advance notice of the intent to take
such vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member
shall request it in writing.
(D) Organization.
(1) The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers,
who shall serve mIDual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the Board members, but the Board may
appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on it behalf and the parties may waive further action by t Board
as provided in this Section.
XXVII-381
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(2) The chairman of the Board may designate alternate members
of the Board to replace any absent or disqualified member, and if, by
reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the chairman of the Board shall designate as may alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to reach a
quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on
the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a final decision
on the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this Section
shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining
seniority among the alternates.
(3) The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for
its procedure, consistent with this Chapter, and all applicable Township
ordinances and laws of the Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full
public records of its business, which records shall be the property of the
Township, and shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of
Supervisors as requested by the Board of Supervisors.
(E) Expenditures for Services. Within the limits of funds appropriated
by the Board of Supervisors, the Board may employ or contract for secretaries,
clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services.
Members of the Board may receive compensation for the performance of their
duties, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, but in no case shall it exceed
the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the Board of Supervisors.
Alternate members of the Board may receive compensation, as may be fixed by
the Board of Supervisors, for the performance of their duties when designated as
alternate members pursuant to this Section, but in no case shall such
compensation exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the
members of the Board of Supervisors.
(F) Hearings and Meetings. Hearings and meetings of the Board shall
be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board, by
majority vote, may determine. The Board shall conduct hearings and make
decisions in accordance with this Part.
(G) Jurisdiction.
(1) The Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(a) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use
ordinance, except those brought before the Board of Supervisors.
XXVII-382
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance
raising procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by appeal
taken within thirty (30) days after the effective date of said
ordinance.
(c) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning
Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any
permit, or failure to act on the application therefore, the issuance of
any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register
any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
(d) Appeals from a determination by the Township
Engineer or the Zoning Officer which reference to the
administration of the floodplain ordinance or such provisions
within a land use ordinance.
(e) Applications for variances from the terms of this
Chapter and the floodplain ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
(f) Applications for special exceptions under this
Chapter or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
(g) Appeals from the determination of any officer or
agency charged with the administration of any transfers or
development rights or performance density provisions of this
Chapter.
(h) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination.
(i) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer
or municipal engineer in the administration of any land use
ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and
erosion control and storm water management.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
(a) All applications for approvals of plam1~\idential
developments. ['\i"ea~
/ ' ~
:tti
~.' ~
XXVII-383
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) All applications for approval of subdivisions or land
developments.
(c) Applications for conditional use under the express
provisions of this Chapter.
(d) Applications for curative amendment to this Chapter.
(e) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances.
Any action on such petitions shall be deemed legislative acts,
provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to
enlarge or diminish existing law with reference to appeals to court.
(H) Applications to the Board.
(1) All appeals from a decision of the Zoning Officer and
applications to the Board shall be submitted in writing on forms
prescribed by the Board. Four copies shall be required.
(2) Every appeal or application shall include the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, or appellant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the property to
be affected by such proposed change or appeal. A copy of the Deed
of Record or other instrument under which applicant claims
standing shall be attached to the application.
(c) A brief description and location of the property to be
affected by such proposed change or appeal.
(d) A statement of the present zoning classification of the
property in question, the improvements thereon and the present
use thereof.
(e) A statement of the Section of this Chapter under
which the appeal is made and reasons why it should be granted, or
a statement of the Section of this Chapter governing the situation in
which the alleged erroneous ruling is being appealed and the
reasons for this appeal.
(f) A reasonably accurate description of the additions or
changes intended to be made under this application, indicating the
XXVII-384
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
size, material and general construction of such proposed
improvements. A plot plan of the property to be affected,
indicating the location and size of the lot and the size of existing
and intended improvements, shall be attached to the description.
(I) Time Limitations.
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the
Board later than thirty (30) days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate municipal
officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or
to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves
that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that such approval
had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such
approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in
interest. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from
an adverse decision on a tentative plan pursuant to this Chapter or from
an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of
this Chapter or map shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except
in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative approval.
(2) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners
shall be filed by the landowner within thirty (30) days after notice of the
determination is issued.
(J) Stay of Proceedings. Upon filing of any proceeding before the
Board and during its pendency before the Board, all land development pursuant
to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of the
Board or Board of Supervisors, and all official action thereunder, shall be stayed
unless the Zoning Officer or Board of Supervisors certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which
case the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or
Board of Supervisors. When an application for development, preliminary or
final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed to reserve or limit the
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant, the
applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order
such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the procee . ngs before
the Board.
XXVII-385
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 804 of Section 2; As amended by Ordinance
No. 392, Section 10, June 11, 2012)
Section 805. Zoning Hearing Board Functions.
(A) Variances.
(1) Four (4) copies of an application for a variance shall be
submitted to the Board. Such application shall include all information
specified for a zoning permit application and any other information the
Board deems necessary to make determination. The applicant shall be
responsible for all pertinent costs incurred for the review of the
application.
(2) The administrative procedures for a variance hearing shall
be consistent with the requirements specified by Section 807 of this Part.
(3) The Township Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors shall receive a copy of the application and shall have thirty
(30) days to review and make comments and a recommendation at their
discretion.
(4) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this Chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot
size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
ullilecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of
this Chapter in the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Chapter
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
XXVII-386
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created
by the appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the
minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the
least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(5) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and this
Chapter.
(B) Special Exceptions.
(1) Four (4) copies of an application for a special exception shall
be submitted to the Board. Such application shall include all information
specified for a zoning permit application and any other information the
Board deems necessary to make determination. The applicant shall be
responsible for all pertinent costs incurred for the review of the
application.
(2) The administrative procedures for a special exception
hearing shall be consistent with the requirements specified by Section 807
of this Part. .
(3) The Township Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors shall receive a copy of the application and shall have thirty
(30) days to review and make comments and a recommendation at their
discretion.
(4) Where the Board of Supervisors, in this Chapter, has stated
special exceptions to be granted or denied by the Board pursuant to
express standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and decide requests
/'
for such ~pecial exc~ptions in .accordance with such standards ;in~ criteria.
In grantmg a special exceptIon, ~he Board may attach s~r""/r~;~~;onable
conditions and safeguards, in addItion to those expressed .iij;:thj.s\~ '~apter,
!".--,' ,I
if}>:
1,,:';"1" .
/:1
XXVII-387 1/, l L !C= Foul:!:mDD 1850
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the Municipalities
Planning Code and this Chapter.
(5) Persons with Disabilities. The Board shall hear requests for
special exceptions where it is alleged that modifications to specific
requirements of this Chapter are required under applicable Federal law to
provide a "reasonable accommodation" to serve persons who the
applicant proves have "disabilities" as defined and protected by such
laws.
(a) Such reasonable accommodations shall be
requested in accordance with the u.s. Fair Housing Act of
1988, as amended, and / or the Americans With Disabilities
Act, as amended.
(b) If the applicant is requesting a reasonable
accommodation under the u.S. Fair Housing Act of 1988 or
the Americans With Disabilities Act, the applicant shall
identify the disability that is protected by such statues, the
extent of the modification of the provisions of this Chapter
necessary for a reasonable accommodation, and the manner
by which the reasonable accommodation may be removed
when such person(s) with a protected disability no longer
will be present on the property.
(c) Any modification approved under this Section
may be limited to the time period during which the persons
with disabilities occupy or utilize the premises.
(d) In granting such special exception, the Board
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the
Municipalities Planning Code and this Chapter. "
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 805 of Section 2)
Section 806. Conditional Uses.
(A) Four (4) copies of an application for permission to conduct a use
permitted by condition shall be submitted to the Township Board of Supervisors.
Such application shall include all information specified for a zoning permit
application and any other information necessary to allow the Township Board of
Supervisors to determine that all requirements of this Chapter have been met.
XXVII-388
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
The applicant shall be responsible for all pertinent costs incurred for the review
of the application.
(B) The administration procedures for a conditional use hearing shall
be consistent with the requirements specified by Section 807 of this Part.
(C) The Township Planning Commission shall receive a copy of the
application and shall have thirty (30) days to review and make comments and a
recommendation at their discretion.
(D) Conditional uses shall meet the specific standard established for
each use by this Chapter and all other applicable Zoning District requirements
and general regulations established by this Chapter. In addition, the following
standards shall be met:
(1) The use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a
conditional use in the Zoning District wherein the applicant is seeking a
conditional use.
(2) The use conforms with the goals, objectives and policies of
the Township Comprehensive Plan.
(3) The use conforms with the spirit, purposes and intent of all
other applicable provisions of all other Township ordinances.
(4) The use conforms with all pertinent State and Federal laws,
regulations and requirements.
(5) Services and utilities shall be made available to adequately
service the proposed use.
(6) The use will not generate traffic such that hazardous or
unduly congested conditions will result.
(7) The use is appropriate to the site in question.
(8) The use shall not adversely affect the character of the general
neighborhood, nor the health and safety of residents or workers on
adjacent properties and in the general neighborhood.
(E) The granting of permission to conduct a use permitted
does not exempt an applicant from acquiring all approvals re
XXVII-389
FINAL (Revised 5- I 9-15)
Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (see Chapter XXVII
of the Township Code of Ordinances).
(F) The approval of a conditional use, if authorized by the Board of
Supervisors, which anticipates construction or modification of a structure,
creation of new or revised lot lines or dimensional standards for a property or
structure situated thereon, shall be valid and remain in effect for a term of one (1)
year from the date of said approval and shall thereafter expire and be void,
unless said construction, modification, new or revised lot lines or dimensional
standards or change of use or occupancy be initiated within said one (1) year
term or said term is expressly extended as part of the initial approval. In the
event that the activity anticipated by the conditional use should not be initiated
within one (1) year of the approval or such additional term as may be expressed
in the approval or should the activity which is the subject of the conditional use
be discontinued, the premises or structure or structure situated thereon shall not
thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
(G) The Board of Supervisors shall hold hearings on and decide
requests for conditional uses in accordance with the standards and criteria set
forth in this Chapter. The hearing shall be conducted by the Board of
Supervisors or the Board of Supervisors may appoint any member or an
independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is
called for, the findings shall be made by the Board of Supervisors. However, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Township may,
prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Board of
Supervisors and accept the decision or finding of the hearing officer as final. In
granting a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Chapter, as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this act in this Chapter.
(H) The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision or, when
no decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use application
within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board of Supervisors. Where the
application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact or conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions to this Chapter or of any ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons
why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
(I) Where the Board of Supervisors fails to render the decision within
the period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete
the required hearing as provided in this Part, the decision shall be deemed to
XXVII-390
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in
writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been
rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board of
Supervisors to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board of
Supervisors shall give public notice of the decision within ten days from the last
day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by the
public notice requirements of this Chapter. If the Board of Supervisors shall fail
to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
(J) Nothing in this Section shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of
the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no
later than the day following its date.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 806 of Section 2)
Section 807. Hearings. Hearings before the Township Board of Supervisors or
the Township Zoning Hearing Board (individually or collectively referred to as
the "board" in this Section only) as required by this Chapter shall be conducted
and decisions shall be made in accordance with the following:
(A) Public Notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the zoning officer, adjacent property owners, the Township Planning
Commission and to any person who has made timely request for the same.
Written notices shall be given by regular mail at least one week prior to the
hearing. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said
hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one
week prior to the hearing.
(B) Mailed Notice and / or Electronic Notice shall be given to an owner
of a tract or parcel of land located within the Township or an owner of the
mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the Township who has
made a timely request in accordance with Section 203 of this Chapter.
(C) The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearings before the board, by Resolution, from time-to-time. Fees for
said hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of the
Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative verhead
com1ected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include leg
of the Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or oth
consultants or expert witness costs.
XXVII-391
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(D) The first hearing before the board or hearing officer shall be
commenced within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of applicant's
application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
Each subsequent hearing before the board or hearing officer shall be held within
forty-five (45) days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall complete the
presentation of his case-in-chief within one hundred (100) days of the first
hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the board or hearing officer shall
assure that the applicant receives at least seven (7) hours of hearings within the
one hundred (100) days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the
application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application
within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing held after the completion of
the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted
additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the persons opposed
to the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings. Persons
opposed to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the
record by the applicant and Township, be granted additional hearings to
complete their opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
(E) The hearings shall be conducted by the board or the board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The
decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the
board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to
the Township, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as
final.
(F) The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any persons
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
board, and any other person including civic or community organizations
permitted to appear by the board. The board shall have power to require that all
persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms
provided by the board for that purpose.
(G) The chairman or acting chairman of the board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
(H) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence an argument
and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
XXVII-392
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(I) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(J) The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for the stenographer
shall be shared equally by the applicant and the board. The cost of the original
transcript shall be paid by the board if the transcript is ordered by the board or
hearing officer or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the
board if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the
party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
(K) The board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall
not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an
opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his
representatives unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
(L) The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called or, make written findings on the
application within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the board or
hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall
be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with
the reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provision of this act or of any
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on
and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the
facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been
no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the board shall make his
report and recommendations available to the parties within forty-five (45) days
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the
board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the board's decision shall
be entered no later than thirty (30) days after the report of the hearing officer.
Except for challenges filed where the board fails to render the decision within the
period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the
required hearing as provided in this Section, the decision shall be deemed to
have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in
writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision/has :peen
rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the board/to . ;,e~pr
render a decision as hereinabove provided, the board shall give . ;n.b:t1 ,.. ~ , f
'"
XXVII-393
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
said decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a
decision in the same manner as provided in this Section. If the board shall fail to
provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision
to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(M) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of
the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not
later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their
name and address with the board not later than the last day of the hearing, the
board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings
and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be
examined.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 807 of Section 2)
Section 808. Challenge to the Validity of Ordinance or Map.
(A) A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the
validity of this Chapter or map or any provisions thereof which prohibits or
restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest shall submit
the challenge either:
(1) to the Board; or
(2) to the Board of Supervisors, together with a request for a
curative amendment.
(B) Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land
of another by this Chapter or map, or any provision thereof, who desires to
challenge its validity on substantive grounds shall first submit their challenge to
the Board for a decision thereon.
(C) The submissions referred to above shall be governed by the
following:
(1) In challenges before the Board, the challenging part shall
make a written request to the Board that it hold a hearing on its challenge.
The request shall contain the reasons for the challenge. Where the
landowner desires to challenge the validity of this Chapter, or map, or
provisions thereof, and elects to proceed by curative amendment, his
application to the Board of Supervisors shall contain, in addition to the
requirement of the written request hereof, the plans and explanatory
XXVII-394
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
materials describing the use or development proposed by the landowner
in lieu of the use or development permitted by this Chapter or map, or
provisions thereof. Such plans or other materials shall not be required to
meet the standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval
or for the issuance of a permit, so long as they provide reasonable notice
of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for evaluating
this Chapter or map, or provisions thereof, in light thereof. Nothing
herein contained shall preclude the landowner from first seeking a final
approval before submitting his challenge.
(2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the Board of
Supervisors as stated above, the request also shall be accompanied by an
amendment or amendment to the Chapter, map, or provision thereof,
proposed by the landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
(3) If the submission is made to the Board of Supervisors, the
Township Solicitor shall represent and advise it at the hearing or hearings.
(4) The Board of Supervisors may retain an independent
attorney to present the defense of the challenged Chapter, map, or
provIsIOns thereof, on its behalf and to present their witnesses on its
behalf.
(5) Based upon the testimony presents at the hearing or
hearings, the Board of Supervisors or the Board, as the case may be, shall
determine whether the challenged Chapter, map, or provisions thereof,
are defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge heard by the
Board of Supervisors is found to have merit, the Board of Supervisors
shall proceed with a Landowner Curative Amendment. If a challenge
heard by a Board is found to have merit, the decision of the Board shall
include recommended amendments to the challenged Chapter, map, or
provisions thereof, which will cure the defects found. In reaching its
decision, the Board shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory
material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(a) the impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer
facilities, water supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
XXVII-395
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) if the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of
the proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available
to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of this Chapter, map or
provisions thereof;
(c) the suitability of the site for the intensity of use
proposed by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood
plains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(d) the impact of the proposed use on the site's soils,
slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood plains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any
adverse environmental impacts; and
(e) the impact of the proposal on the preservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential to public health
and welfare.
(6) the Board of Supervisors or the Board, as the case may be,
shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of
the last hearing.
(7) If the Board of Supervisors or Board, as the case may be, fails
to act of the landowner's request within the time limits referred to above,
a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the forty-sixth (46th)
day after the close of the last hearing.
(D) The Board or Board of supervisors, as the case may be, shall
commence its hearings within sixty (60) days after the request is filed unless the
landowner requests or consents to an extension of time.
(E) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of
this Chapter, map or provisions thereof, is in question and shall give the place
where and the times when a copy of the request, including any plans,
explanatory material or proposed amendments may be examined by the public.
XXVII-396
._-_i
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(F) The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(1) the Board or the Board of Supervisors, as the case may be,
fails to commence the hearing within the time limits set forth herein;
(2) the Board of Supervisors notifies the landowner that it will
not adopt the curative amendment;
(3) the Board of Supervisors adopts another curative
amendment which is unacceptable to the landowner; or
(4) the Board or the Board of Supervisors, as the case may be,
fails to act of the request forty-five (45) days after the close of the last
hearing on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual consent by
the landowner and Township.
(G) Where, upon enactment of this Chapter, a curative amendment
proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment application by the
Board of Supervisors or a validity challenge is sustained by the Board or the
court acts finally on an appeal from denial of a curative amendment proposal or
a validity challenge, and the proposal or challenge so approved requires a
further application for subdivision or land development, the developer shall
have two (2) years from the date of such approval to file an application for
preliminary or tentative approval. Within the two (2) year period, no subsequent
change or amendment in this Chapter, map, Chapter XXVII of the Code of
Ordinances (Subdivision and Land Development) or other ordinance or plan
shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant
as granted in the curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. Upon
the filing of the preliminary or tentative plan, the provisions of Section 508 of the
Municipalities Planning Code shall apply. When the proposal appended to the
curative amendment application or the validity challenge is approved but does
not require further application under Chapter XXVII of the Code of Ordinances
(Subdivision and Land Development), the developer shall have one year within
which to file for a building permit. Within the one (1) year period, no
subsequent change or amendment in this Chapter, map or Chapter XXVII of the
Code of Ordinances (Subdivision and Land Development), or any other
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely
affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the
sustained validity challenge. During these protected periods, the court shall
retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding such Supp}..e mental
relief as may be necessary. I
XXVII-397
1)/·
i)~:(
t.(Z~., I
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(H) If the Township has adopted a multimunicipal comprehensive plan
but not a joint municipal zoning ordinance and all the municipalities in the
multimunicipal comprehensive plan have adopted and are administering zoning
ordinances generally consistent with the provisions of the multimunicipal
comprehensive plan, and a challenge is brought to the validity of this Chapter
involving a proposed use, then the Board or Board of Supervisors, as the case
may be, shall consider the availability of uses under zoning ordinances within
the municipalities participating in the multimunicipal comprehensive plan
within a reasonable geographic area and shall not limit its consideration to the
application of this Chapter.
(I) A landowner who has challenged on substantive grounds the
validity of this Chapter or map, wither by submission of a curative amendment
to the Board of Supervisors or the Board, shall not submit any additional
substantive challenges involving the same parcel, group of parcels or part thereof
until such time as the status of the landowner's original challenge has been
finally determined or withdrawn. Provided, however, that if after the date of the
landowner's original challenge the Township adopts a substantially new or
different Chapter, or portion thereof, or map, the landowner may file a second
substantive challenge to the new or different Chapter, or portion thereof, or map,
under this Section.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 808 of Section 2)
Section 809. Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinions. In order not to
unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure assurance that this Chapter,
or portion thereof, or map under which he proposed to build is free from challenge, and
recognizing that the procedure for preliminary approval of his development may be too
cumbersome or may be unavailable, the landowner may advance the date from which
time for any challenge to this Chapter, or portion thereof, or map will run by the
following procedure:
(A) The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing
his proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary opinion
as to their compliance with this Chapter, or portion thereof, and map. Such
plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed
for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a building
permit so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or
development and a sufficient basis for a preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
XXVII-398
_I
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(B) If the Zoning Officer's preliminary OpInIOn is that the use or
development complies with this Chapter, or portion thereof, or map, notice
thereof shall be published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall include a
general description of the proposed use or development and its location, by some
readily identifiable directive, and the place and times where the plans and other
materials may be examined by the public. The favorable preliminary approval
and the time specified for commencing a proceeding with the board shall run
from the time when the second notice thereof has been published.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 809 of Section 2)
Section 810. Amendments.
(A) The Township may, on its own motion or by petition, amend,
supplement, change, modify or repeal this Chapter.
(B) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to Public Notice and
pursuant to Mailed Notice and Electronic Notice to an owner of a tract or parcel
of land located within the Township or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract
or parcel of land within the Township who has made a timely request in
accordance with Section 203 of this Chapter.
(C) In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map
change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality along the tract to
notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at
least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
(D) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted under this
Section, where the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice
of the public hearing shall be mailed by the municipality at least thirty (30) days
prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the addressees to which real
estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within the area being rezoned,
as evidenced by tax records within the possession of the Township. The notice
shall include the location, date and time of the public hearing. A good faith
effort and substantial compliance shall satisfy the requirements of this
Subsection. This Subsection shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a
comprehensive rezoning.
(E) In the case of an amendment other that that prepared
Township Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall sub
XXVII-399
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
such amendment to the Township Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days
prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Township
Planning Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
(F) The Township shall submit each amendment to the County
Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing on the
amendment by the Township.
(G) Within thirty (30) days after enactment, a copy of the amendment
to this Chapter shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 810 of Section 2)
Section 811. Curative Amendments.
(A) Landowner Curative Amendment.
(1) A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of any provision of this Chapter, which prohibits or
restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest, may
submit a curative amendment to the Board of Supervisors with a written
request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and
decided as provided in Section 804 of this Part. The Board of Supervisors
shall commence a hearing thereon within sixty (60) days of the request.
The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the Township
Planning Commission and County Planning Commission and public
notice shall be given.
(2) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section
807 of this Part. If the Township does not accept the landowner's curative
amendment brought in accordance with this Section and a court
subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision shall
not result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire Chapter and map, but
only for those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's
curative amendment and challenge.
(3) The Board of Supervisors, when it has determined that a
validity challenge has merit, may accept a landowner's curative
amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative
amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The Board of
Supervisors shall consider the curative amendments, plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
XXVII-400
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer
facilities, water supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of
the proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available
to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of this Chapter or map;
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use
proposed by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood
plains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(d) The impact of the proposed use of the site's soils,
slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood plains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any
adverse environmental impacts; and
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential to public health
and welfare.
(B) Municipal Curative Amendments. If the Township determines that
this Chapter or any portion thereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the
following actions:
(1) That Township shall declare by formal action, this Chapter
or portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within thirty (30) days
following such declaration and proposal, the Board of Supervisors shall:
(a) By resolution make specific findings setting for the
declared invalidity which may include:
1) references to specific uses which are either not
permitted or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
2)
revision; or
3)
revisions.
reference to a class of use or uses which req-.q.ire
! \
/ \ //, \
[,'j\O~
";""':"1\,'1\
reference to the entire Chapter whic~~%1f~*~ , /tf!!!::'
g
XXVII-401
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment
to the Chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
(2) Within one hundred eight (180) days from the date of the
declaration and proposal, the Township shall enact a curative amendment
to validate, or reaffirm the validity of this Chapter in order to cure the
declared invalidity of the Chapter.
(3) Upon the initiation of these procedures, the Board of
Supervisors shall not be required to entertain or consider any landowner's
curative amendment filed nor shall the Board be required to give a report
requested subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon the
grounds identical to or substantially similar to those specified in the
resolution. Upon completion of these procedures, no rights to a cure
pursuant to the landowner curative amendments shall, from the date of
the declaration and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the
substantive invalidity of the unamended Chapter for which there has been
a curative amendment pursuant to this Subsection.
(4) Once the Township has utilized the procedures set forth in
this Subsection, the Township may not again utilize this procedure for a
thirty-six (36) month period following the date of the enactment of the
curative amendment or reaffirmation of the validity of this Chapter,
provided, however, if after the date of the declaration and proposal there
is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the Township by
virtue of a change in a statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate
Court decision, the Township may utilize the provisions of this Subsection
to prepare a curative amendment to this Chapter to fulfill the said duty or
obligation.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 811 of Section 2)
Section 812. Filing Fees and Costs.
(A) The Board of Supervisors shall establish schedule of fees, charges
and expenses and collection procedures for zoning permits, certificates of
occupancy, special exceptions, variances, conditional uses and appeals and other
matters pertaining to this Chapter.
(B) The schedule of fees shall be available for inspection in the office of
the Zoning Officer and may be altered or amended by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors from time-to-time.
XXVII-402
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(C) Until all application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in
full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 812 of Section 2)
Section 813. Remedies and Penalties.
(A) Enforcement Remedies. In case any buildings or structures are
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained
or any building, structure or land is used, in violation of this Chapter, the Board
of Supervisors, or, with its approval the Zoning Officer, in addition to, other
remedies, may institute in the name of the Township any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use to restrain, correct, or abate
such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, sh-ucture or land, or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct business or use in or about such premises. The
rights and remedies provided in this Chapter are cumulative and are in addition
to all other remedies provided by law.
(B) Enforcement Penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who
or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Chapter
shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus
all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership, or corporation violating
this Chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of
this Chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
(Ordinance No. 335, March 26,2007, Section 813 of Section 2)
XXVII-403
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 814. Savings Clause. The provisions of this Chapter shall be severable,
and if any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this Chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this Chapter would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid provision not been
included herein. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Section 814 of Section 2)
XXVII-404
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Part 9
Appendices
Section 901. Open Space Developments (Appendix A). (Ordinance No. 335,
March 26,2007, Appendix A of Section 2)
Section A.I01. Purpose. The intent of this section IS to encourage a residential
development type that will:
(A) Preserve open space and agricultural land by locating new residential
units in close proximity to one another on a smaller portion of a parcel than would be
the case with conventional development;
(B) Preserve scenic vistas from public roads by concentrating development on
the least visually prominent portions of the parcels;
(C) Reduce disturbance of environmentally constrained areas, such as steep
slopes, floodplains, and wetlands;
(D) Require less impervious surface than necessary with conventional
development by concentrating development in smaller areas, thus necessitating smaller
road areas;
(E) Reduce environmental impacts associated with disturbance of constrained
areas and impervious coverage, such as erosion and sedimentation, pollutants in
surface water, and decreased ground water recharge.
Section A.I02. Qualifying Conditions.
(A) To be eligible for development under the open space development
regulations, a site must, at a minimum:
(1) Be located within the RHA, RC, RS or PHT District.
(2) Be at least 10 acres in area within the RC, RS or PHT District, or at
least 20 acres in area within the RHA District.
(3) Consist of either:
(a) A single parcel of land, or
XXVII-405
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(b) Multiple contiguous, undivided parcels. In the case of
multiple contiguous, undivided parcels, all applicable parcels shall be
developed according to a single plan and with common authority and
common responsibility. The Township may require evidence of an
agreement between all owners of included parcels demonstrating binding
commitment to common development of the parcels.
(4) Be served by a centralized sewage disposal system and a
centralized water supply system.
(B) It shall be the complete responsibility of the applicant to prove to the
satisfaction of the Township that a proposed development would meet the
requirements and purposes of this Section (Appendix).
Section A.l03. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within an open space
development:
(A) Single-Family Detached Dwellings
(B) Accessory uses as would be permitted within the LDS or MDS Districts.
Section A.l04. Lot Size Requirements.
(A) Lots for Single-family detached dwelling within an Open Space
Development must comply with the following minimum lot areas:
District Lot Area
RHA 20,000 sq. ft.
RC 10,000 sq. ft.
RS 7,500 sq. ft.
PHT 10,000 sq. ft.
(B) Within any open space development that is developed as condominium
units, the total number of units permitted shall not exceed the amount that would be
permitted if individual lots were proposed.
Section A.l05. Slope Controls.
(A) In addition to the minimum lot areas specified above, residential lots
within the Development Area of an Open Space Development shall also comply with
the provisions of Section 503 Slope Controls, with the following exceptions:
XXVII-406
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(1) The factor utilized in the calculation required under §S03(C)(1)(a)
shall be the minimum lot area required in §A.104(A).
(2) The factor utilized in the calculation required under §S03(C)(1)(b)
shall be 1.S acres.
(3) The factor utilized in the calculation required under §S03(C)(1)(c)
shall be 2.5 acres.
Section A.106. Net Density and Area Regulations.
(A) Common Open Space. The amount of common open space provided in an
Open Space Development shall be not less than SO% of the total tract area within the
RC, RS or PHT District, or not less than 7S% of the total tract area within the RHA
District.
(B) Development Area
(1) The area(s) of the tract not designated as part of the Common Open
Space area shall be designated on the plan as Development Area(s).
Development Areas are all areas not designated as common open space and
include (but are not limited to) building areas, yards, driveways, and roads.
(2) Within a Development Area, single-family detached dwellings may
be arranged so as to provide for individual lots for each unit, or may be arranged
as condominiums. In either case, sufficient yard areas shall be set aside and
designated on the plan, so that throughout the development the maximum net
residential density shall not exceed four (4) units per acre in any development
area.
(3) Within any development area that is developed as condominium
units, rather than individual lots, the remaining area within development area
(that area not containing structures, roads, driveways, etc.) shall be designated
Local Open Space. Local Open Space shall remain separate from Common Open
Space and its use shall be primarily for the residents of the development area in
which it is located. Uses within Local Open Space areas shall be limited to yard
area, landscape areas, walkways, and accessory structures allowed within that
zoning district.
Section A.107. Design Standards. The following design standards shall ~J?/f,.lY to all
Open Space Developments: !./,\~
XXVII-407
FiNAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(A) Site Design Principles. The location of common open space, dwellings,
and site improvements shall be in accordance with all requirements of the Township of
Spring Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter XXVII) that are not
specifically waived by this Section (Appendix). The following standards shall apply
during the siting process:
to:
(1) Areas designated as common open space shall be configured so as
(a) Minimize negative impacts of development upon the tract;
(b) Maximize conservation of the site features identified as
having particular conservation value, historical significance, or
recreational value, including: mature trees, woodlands, hedgerows, fence
lines, historic sites of structures, historic road or other hoansport traces,
paths, trails, and other noted landscape features; and
(c) Serve as buffer areas between grouped dwellings and
adjacent tracts.
(2) Dwellings and accessory buildings shall be configured so as to:
(a) Be situated below ridgeline elevations to preserve existing
vistas. To achieve this objective, dwellings and accessory structures
should be sited entirely below the elevation of the nearest ridge line
whenever possible. Where the applicant claims that dwellings and
accessory structures cannot be situated below the ridgeline, it shall be the
burden of the applicant to demonstrate why this cannot be achieved and
how the proposed design creates the minimum possible disturbance of
views of the ridgeline per the requirements of Section A.108(B)(2) below;
(b) Be located outside of environmentally constrained areas,
including steep slopes in excess of 25% floodplains, wetlands and natural
drainage swales;
(c) Be located outside of broad, open vistas visible from roads
or other public vantage points; and
( d) Provide maximum views of and access to open space by
residents of proposed dwellings.
(e) Minimize the impact upon existing wooded areas.
XXVII-408
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(B) Dimensional Standards. The following dimensional standards shall apply
to all Open Space Developments:
(1) All dwelling units within a tract must be set back a minimum of
one hundred (100') feet from the nearest tract boundary line except where
existing natural features of the site, including but not limited to woodland areas,
changes in topography, hedgerows, or other site characteristics result in the
dwelling unit being completely visually screened from the adjacent property and
guarantees are provided through the planning process that such features will
remain undisturbed, this setback may be reduced to seventy-five (75') feet.
(2) Building height shall be limited to 2-1/2 stories, and 30 feet. To the
extent that any portion of a structure must be located above a ridgeline elevation,
such siting shall be contingent upon the submission and approval by the Board
of Supervisors of a plan for the mitigation of such ridgeline impacts. Such plans
shall identify the locations and dimensions of the proposed structure(s), the
architectural style proposed, and shall demonstrate how the structure(s) shall be
effectively screened from the adjacent tracts through screening and/ or designed
to minimize disruption of views of the ridgeline.
(3) The minimum distance between single-family detached dwellings
shall be twenty (20') feet.
(4) All structures shall be set back at least twenty-five (25') feet from
the curbline or edge of cartway of any internal access road.
(5) All structures shall be set back at least ten (10') feet from the edge
of any shared parking area except in the case of contiguous, adjacent driveways
that lead to a garage or carport, for which no setback shall be required.
(6) Where Common Open Space is designated as separate,
noncontiguous parcels, no single parcel shall consist of less than one (1) acre in
area. No single area or portion of an area designated as Common Open Space
shall be counted toward the minimum required open space wherever such area
or portion of area is less than one hundred fifty (150') feet in width, except in the
case of a trail corridor or other linkage between two larger, noncontiguous, open
space areas.
Section A.l0S. Uses Allowed Within Common Open Space Areas. The following uses
shall be permitted within all common open space areas:
(A) Natural Area, including but not limited to, steep slopes,
meadows, wetlands, streams, game preserves, etc.;
XXVII-409
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(B) Lawn, a grass area with or without trees which may be used by the
residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be mowed regularly to insure a neat
and tidy appearance. Lawn shall only be allowed in those portions of the Common
Open Space that do not contain any Environmentally Sensitive Areas;
(C) Outdoor Recreation Area, either active or passive;
(D) Sewage Treatment Facility involving land disposal and groundwater
recharge facilities but excluding buildings and other aboveground structures associated
with such facilities;
(E) Stormwater management facilities or portions thereof that can be
integrated into the natural environment, such as swales, retention ponds, etc.;
(F) Agriculture, subject to the ownership mechanism, procedures and
limitations under Section A.108(B)(6), below.
Section A.109. Common Open Space Ownership and Maintenance Standards.
(A) Development Plan. The development plan submission shall include
documents creating and governing a property owner's organization and containing the
declaration of covenants, restrictions, easements, charges and liens deemed necessary to
own and maintain the common open space area(s), local open space area(s), and any
recreation areas within the open space development.
(B) Ownership Options. Common open space shall be held under anyone of
the following forms upon receiving approval from the Board of Supervisors:
(1) Homeowners Association. The applicant may provide for the
establishment of an organization for the ownership and maintenance of the
common property and improvements. The organization shall consist of the
property owners within the open space development, each receiving an equal
vote and responsibility. Such an organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of the common property and improvements unless transferred to
another type of ownership permitted hereunder.
(2) Condominium. The open space as authorized herein may be
controlled through the use of a condominium agreement. Such agreement shall
conform to the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act. In such instance, all
open space and improvements shall be held as a "Common Element".
XXVII-410
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(3) Dedication of Easements. The Township may at any time accept
easements for the public use of any portion or portions of the common open
space. Such land shall be thereby accessible to the residents of the Township. In
the event of a dedication of an easement, the Township shall enter into a
maintenance agreement with the owners of the open space.
(4) Transfer of Easements to Private Conservation Organization.
Easements on common open space may be transferred to a private, nonprofit
organization involved in the conservation of natural resources upon approval of
the Board of Supervisors. The conveyance of an easement shall contain
appropriate provisions for the reversion to the Township at any time the
property is not used pursuant to the intentions of this Chapter. Prior to the
transfer of an easement a maintenance agreement shall be entered into between
the Township, the organization holding ownership and the proposed
conservation organization.
(5) Fee Simple Dedication. The Township may at any time accept
dedication of all or part of the common open space for the use and maintenance
by the Township as common open space.
(6) Agricultural Lease Option. To encourage the retention of
agricultural lands, the Township, Homeowners Association or the Condominium
Agreement may permit all or portions of the open space lands to be leased to a
farmer. Approval of the lease option shall be conditioned on appropriate
agreements between the titleholder and the farmer concerning permitted farming
practices and use of the land in the event farming practices cease.
(C) Homeowners Association Regulations. The formation of a Homeowners
Association shall be governed according to the following regulations:
(1) The applicant shall provide a description of the organization
including its by-laws and methods for maintaining open space and
improvements.
(2) The organization is established by the applicant and operated with
financial subsidization by the applicant prior to the sale of a percentage of the
lots within the development, per Section A.108(C)(4) below.
(3) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
homes and their successors.
XXVII-411
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
(4) Controlling interest shall not be conveyed from the applicant to the
Homeowners Association prior to completion and sale of at least sixty (60)
percent of the total number of units.
(5) The organization shall be responsible for meeting insurance and tax
obligations on the common open space and improvements.
(6) Rights and duties of the members of the organization in the event
of a breach of the covenants and restrictions shall be defined.
(7) The by-laws shall include a statement, which grants to the
Township such power, but not the duty, to maintain the common open space and
common facilities, and to assess the cost of the same as provided within the
Pem1sylvania Municipalities Code.
(D) Delinquency of Maintenance.
(1) In the event an organization or a condominium organization
undertakes the responsibility of maintaining the common open space and
improvements and fails to maintain the same in reasonable order and conditions
in accordance with the development plan, the Township may serve written
notice upon the organization or residents in the development setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to properly maintain the common
areas.
(2) Notices shall demand that the deficiencies of maintenance be
corrected within thirty (30) days and shall establish the date and place of a
hearing to be held on the delinquency. Such a hearing shall take place within
fourteen (14) days of the notice. Should the deficiencies set forth in the original
notice or in the subsequent modifications fail to be corrected within the
established thirty (30) days, the Township, in order to preserve the taxable values
of the affected properties, may enter the common open space and improvements
and maintain them for a period of one (1) year. Such efforts shall not constitute a
taking of the property nor vest in the public any right to use the same. The cost
of maintenance by the Township shall be assessed ratably against the properties
within the development that have a right of enjoyment. Such assessments shall
become a lien on the said properties and shall be perfected by filing in the office
of the Prothonotary of Berks County.
XXVII-412
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section A.IIO. Additional Requirements.
(A) The proposed plan for an open space development shall comply with the
applicable provisions of the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(Chapter XXVII).
(B) No individual residential driveways shall directly enter onto an arterial or
collector street.
(C) The Site Design Guidelines of §409(D) shall be used as criteria to evaluate
whether a proposal meets the intent of this section.
(D) It is an intention of this Section (Appendix) to encourage a well-designed
and complementary variety of architectural styles. As an additional submission criteria,
the applicant shall submit preliminary general architectural sketches. These sketches
are for informational purposes only.
XXVII-413
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 902. Street Classification Map. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007,
Appendix of Section 2)
XXVII-414
I e-'
FINAL (Revised 5-19-15)
Section 903. Zoning Map. (Ordinance No. 335, March 26, 2007, Appendix of
Section 2; as amended by Ordinance No. 357, Apri12S, 200S, Section 1)
XXVII-41S

I
'--
)
Section 2. All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with
this Ordinance.
Section 3. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent
of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Pennsylvania that
this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
Section 4. The Code of Ordinances of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, as amended, shall be and remain unchanged and in full force and effect
except as amended, supplemented and modified by this Ordinance. This Ordinance
shall become a part of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Spring, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, as amended, upon adoption.
Section 5. This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days from the date of
enactment.
DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED this 22nd day of June, 2015.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
TOWNSHIP OF SPRING
BERKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
()... .... d, -7~~
Alan S. Kreider, C airperson
Barry W. lrich, Vice Chairperson
"I
.'
MUNICIPAL CERTIFICATION
I, ou)Q..rl (A:ssts tdftt) Secretary of the Township of
Spring, Berks Count ,Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and
correct copy of Ordinance No. L/IS duly enacted and ordained at a regular
meeting of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania held on the 22nd day of June, 2015.
[SEAL]
(~~ttntt) S cretary


2
RETENTION OF EXPERTS, PERMIT FEES, COLLOCATE REQUIREMENTS,
SECURITY FENCING, NONCOMMERCIAL USAGE EXEMPTION, DESIGN
REGULATIONS AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS; AND (F) ESTABLISH
CERTAIN REGULATIONS REGARDING COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE
LOCATED IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY, INCLUDING CO-LOCATION,
SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS, AND DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS, TIME, PLACE AND MANNER OF CONSTRUCTION,
EQUIPMENT LOCATION, AND RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES; (3)
AMEND IN ITS ENTIRETY SECTION 324 ENTITLED “COMPLIANCE AND
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PRINCIPAL USES”, SUBSECTION
(29) ENTITLED “COMMUNICATIONS TOWNERS” TO: (A) PROVIDE FOR
PURPOSES AND FINDINGS OF FACT RELATED TO THE ADOPTION OF THE
AMENDMENT; (B) ADD DEFINITIONS FOR APPLICANT, COLLOCATION,
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA, COMMUNICATIONS TOWER, CONTEXT
SENSITIVE, DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS), DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA
SYSTEM HUB, EMERGENCY, FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FCC), HEIGHT OF
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER, PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY OR PUBLIC
STREET ROW, RELATED EQUIPMENT, STEALTH TECHNOLOGY,
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE OR SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE, PENNSYLVANIA
WIRELESS BROADBAND COLLOCATION ACT (WBCA), WIRELESS, WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF), AND WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE;
(C) ESTABLISH CERTAIN GENERAL AND SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS, INCLUDING: STANDARD OF CARE, LOCATIONS
PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION, SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCESS AND
REQUIRED INFORMATION, ENGINEER INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS, VISUAL
APPEARANCE, COLLOCATION AND SITING OF NEW COMMUNICATIONS
TOWERS, PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR MODIFICATIONS, GAP IN COVERAGE
OR CAPACITY, ADDITIONAL COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE, RESISTANCE TO
WIND, HEIGHT, RELATED EQUIPMENT, PUBLIC SAFE COMMUNICATIONS AND
OTHER COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES, MAINTENANCE, RADIO FREQUENCY
EMISSIONS, HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR DISTRICTS, SIGNS, LIGHTING, NOISE,
AVIATION SAFETY, RETENTION OF EXPERTS, TIMING OF APPROVAL,
NONCONFORMING TOWNERS, REMOVAL, PERMIT FEES, FCC LICENSE
REQUIREMENTS, INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION, ENGINEER SIGNATURE,
AND FINANCIAL SECURITY; (D) ESTABLISH CERTAIN REGULATIONS
REGARDING COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS OUTSIDE THE PUBLIC STREET
RIGHT OF WAY (ROW), INCLUDING DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS, DESIGN
REGULATIONS, SURROUNDING ENVIRONS, FENCE / SCREEN, RELATED
EQUIPMENT, ACCESS ROAD, PARKING, AND INSPECTION; (E) ESTABLISH
CERTAIN REGULATIONS REGARDING COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS INSIDE
3
THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY (ROW), INCLUDING LOCATION AND
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS, TIME, PLACE AND MANNER OF CONSTRUCTION,
EQUIPMENT LOCATION, DESIGN REGULATIONS, RELOCATION OR REMOVAL
OF FACILITIES, AND REIMBURSEMENT FOR PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY
(ROW) USE; AND (4) ESTABLISH REGULATIONS REGARDING POLICE POWERS,
SEVERABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE.
NOW THEREFORE, be it, and it is hereby ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Spring, Berks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it is hereby
ENACTED and ORDAINED by authority of same as follows:
SECTION I: Repealer of Definitions
A. The following definitions are hereby repealed and removed from Section 202,
Definitions, of the Spring Township Zoning Code: “Communications Antenna,”
“Communications Equipment Building,” “Communications Tower,” and “Height of a
Communications Tower.”
SECTION II: Repealer, Replacement and Adoption of New Communications Antennae
and New Communications Towers Provisions
The terms, conditions, and provisions of Section 324(B)(28) and 324(B)(29) of the
Spring Township Zoning Code are hereby repealed, removed, and replaced by the following:
(28) Communications Antennae
A. Purposes and Findings of Fact.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for the siting, design,
permitting, maintenance, and use of Wireless Communications Facilities in the
Township. While the Township recognizes the importance of Wireless Communications
Facilities in providing high quality communications service to its residents and
businesses, the Township also recognizes that it has an obligation to promote public
safety, to minimize the adverse visual effects, and to promote the Context Sensitivity of
such facilities through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
(2) By enacting these provisions, the Township intends to:
a. Accommodate the need for Wireless Communications Facilities while regulating
their location and number so as to ensure the provision of necessary services;
b. Provide for the managed development of Wireless Communications Facilities in a
manner that enhances the benefits of wireless communication and accommodates
4
the needs of both Township residents and wireless carriers in accordance with
federal and state laws and regulations;
c. Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction, installation, maintenance
and removal of both Communications Towers and Communications Antennae in
the Township, including facilities both inside and outside the Public Street ROW;
d. Address new wireless technologies, including but not limited to, Distributed
Antenna Systems, data collection units, and other Wireless Communications
Facilities;
e. Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such facilities through
proper design, siting, screening, material, color and finish, and by requiring that
competing providers of wireless communications services co-locate their
Communications Antenna and related facilities on existing towers or
infrastructure; and
f. Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Township's residents.
B. Definitions. The following terms are defined for purposes of this Section alone. All other
defined terms, which may also be applicable to this Section, are contained within Section
202.
APPLICANT - any entity or person that applies for a building permit, for zoning
approval and/or for permission to use the Public Street ROW for a Wireless
Communications Facility , within the Township.
COLLOCATION - the mounting of one or more Communications Antennae, on an
existing Communications Tower, or on any structure that has been previously approved
by the Township to support at least one Communications Antenna.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA - any antenna and Related Equipment attached to a
Wireless Support Structure. Communications Antennae shall not include support
structures for antennae or any Related Equipment that is mounted to the ground or at
ground-level. This definition shall not include any antenna owned and or operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio operator, and operated solely for such amateur radio
communications purposes.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER - any structure that is constructed for the primary
purpose of supporting one or more Communications Antennae, including, but not limited
to, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles. Distributed antenna system
hub facilities are considered to be Communications Towers. This definition shall not
include towers and supportive structures for amateur purposes, including but not limited
5
to ham and citizens band radios maintained and/or utilized by federally licensed amateur
radio operators.
CONTEXT SENSITIVE - A design concept applicable to Wireless Communication
Facilities, in which the design of the facilities is complementary to and integrated with
the aesthetics of its adjacent environs, which may range in scope, at the discretion of the
Municipality, from the immediate area surrounding the item in question to the
Municipality as a whole. Also may be referred to as “Context Sensitivity”. An example
of a facility that does not exhibit Context Sensitivity would be the use of a silo for stealth
purposes within an urbanized or commercial area.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) – a network of spatially separated
antenna or node sites connected to a common source that provides wireless service within
a geographic area or building.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM HUB - the point or structure to which the cellular
signals are routed, via fiber optic cable or other means, in order to be processed by a
cellular base station for distribution and/or broadcast.
EMERGENCY - a condition, as determined by the Township or its designee, that (1)
constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public, or
(2) has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the Public Street ROW to be unusable and
result in loss of the services provided.
FCC - Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT OF COMMUNICATIONS TOWER - the vertical distance measured from the
ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a Communications Tower,
including Communications Antennae mounted on the tower and any other appurtenances,
such as lightning rods, lighting equipment, etc.
PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC STREET ROW– land reserved for the
public for use as a public thoroughfare, excluding alleys and private thoroughfares.
RELATED EQUIPMENT - any piece of equipment related to, incidental to, or necessary
for, the operation of a Communications Tower or Communications Antenna. By way of
illustration, not limitation, Related Equipment includes generators and base stations.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY - camouflaging methods applied to Wireless
Communications Facilities which render them more visually appealing or blend the
proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to
render it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not
limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennae, building-mounted antennae
painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs,
flagpoles, windmills, silos and light poles. Use of stealth technology shall be Context
Sensitive.
6
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE OR SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE - A modification to an
existing Wireless Communications Facility that changes the physical dimensions of a
Communications Tower or base station if it meets any of the following criteria:
(a) For a Communications Tower outside the Public Street ROW:
(1) it increases the height of the Wireless Communications Facility by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the
nearest existing antenna, not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater;
(2) it protrudes from the edge of the Wireless Communications Facility by more than
twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the Tower structures at the level of the
appurtenance, whichever is greater.
(b) For a Communications Tower in the Public Street ROW:
(1) it increases the height of the facility by more than ten percent (10%) or ten (10)
feet, whichever is greater;
(2) it protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet;
(3) it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment
cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets;
(4) it entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the
Communications Tower; or
(5) it does not comply with conditions associated with prior approval of construction
or modification of the Communications Tower, unless the non-compliance is due
to an increase in height, increase in width, or addition of cabinets.
WBCA - Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S. §11702.1 et. seq.)
WIRELESS - transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited to, infrared
line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) - the antennae, nodes, control
boxes, towers, poles, wireless support structure, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics
and other Related Equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, distributing,
providing, or accommodating wireless communications services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE a freestanding structure, such as a
Communications Tower or any other support structure that could support the placement
or installation of a Wireless Communications Facility.
C. General and Specific Requirements for Communications Antennae
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all Communications Antennae:
a. Permit required. The installation, construction and operation of a
Communications Antenna shall require a building permit from the Township.
7
b. Standard of care. All Communications Antennae shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with
all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to the most recent editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Commercial
Code, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, and National
Electrical Code. Any Communications Antennae shall at all times be kept and
maintained in good condition, order, and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person
or any property in the Township.
c. Permitted by right in certain zoning districts pursuant to regulations.
Communications Antennae are permitted by right pursuant to this zoning
ordinance within the following districts, so long as they comply with all of the
terms and conditions of this Zoning Ordinance:
(1) Rural Holding Area (RHA) District
(2) Rural Conservation (RC) District
(3) Rural/Suburban (RS) District
(4) Planned Highway Interchange (PHI) District
(5) Planned Highway Transitional (PHT) District
(6) Planned Office/Business (POB) District
(7) Planned Business and Residential (PBR) District
(8) Planned Industry/Business (PIB) District
(9) Extractive Industry (EI) District
(10) Manufacturing and Industrial (MI) District
(11) Fuel Storage (FS) District
d. Permitted by special exception in certain zoning districts pursuant to regulations.
Communications Antennae are permitted by special exception pursuant to this
zoning ordinance within the following districts, so long as they comply with all of
the terms and conditions of this Zoning Ordinance:
(1) Low Density Suburban (LDS) District
(2) Moderate Density Suburban (MDS) District
(3) Suburban/Semiurban (SS) District
(4) Urban (U) District
(5) Penn Avenue Mixed Use (PMU) District
(6) Penn Avenue Commercial (PAC) District
(7) Neighborhood Convenience (NC) District
e. Historic areas. No Communications Antenna (either inside or outside the Public
Street ROW) may be located upon any property, building, or structure, or within
one-hundred (100) feet of such property, building or structure, that is listed on the
National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, listed by the Pennsylvania
8
Historical and Museum Commission, included in the list of historic buildings in
the Township’s Comprehensive Plan, or that is deemed by the Township to be of
specific historical significance.
f. Wind. All Communications Antennae, Wireless Support Structures, or other
facilities regulated by this Section, shall be designed to withstand the effects of
wind gusts of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour in addition to the standard
designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).
g. Aviation safety. Communications Antennae shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
h. Public safety communications and other communications services.
Communications Antennae shall not interfere with public safety communications
or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
i. Radio frequency emissions. A Communications Antennae shall not, by itself or in
conjunction with other Communications Antennae and/or Communications
Towers, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and
regulations of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled “Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields,” as
amended.
j. Removal.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a Communications Antenna
the owner or operator shall post financial security in a form acceptable to
the Township in a sufficient amount to cover the facility removal and site
cleanup. Exemption: a commercial communications tower or antenna
necessary for and clearly used for emergency communications by a police
department, fire company, emergency medical service and other similar
public safety organizations is exempt from the requirements of this
Section.
(2) In the event that use of a Communications Antennae is planned to be
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the Township of its
intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned Communications Antennae, or portions of
Communications Antennae, shall be removed as follows:
(a) All abandoned or unused Communications Antennae and Related
Equipment shall be removed within sixty (60) days of the cessation of
9
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the
Township.
(b) If the Communications Antenna or Related Equipment is not removed
within sixty (60) days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within
any longer period approved by the Township, the financial security
may be utilized by the Township to remove the Communications
Antenna and/or Related Equipment. In this event, the Township shall
provide written notice of such intended action to the Applicant and,
after the expiration of thirty (30) days, the Communications Antenna
or Related Equipment may be removed by the Township.
Furthermore, the Township reserves the right to the salvage value of
any removed Communications Antenna and/or Related Equipment, if
such Communications Antenna and/or Related Equipment are not
removed by the owner within the specific timeframe enumerated in
this Chapter.
k. Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a Communications Antenna shall
provide the Township with a certificate of insurance, naming the Township as an
additional insured, and evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum
amount of $3,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $3,000,000 per occurrence covering the Communications
Antenna.
l. Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a Communications Antenna
shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Township, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents (individually
and/or collectively the “Indemnities”), at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in whole or in part
from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the review,
approval, permitting, construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal
of the Communications Antenna. Each person that owns or operates a
Communications Antenna shall defend any actions or proceedings against the
Indemnities in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or
property damage was caused by the review, approval, permitting, construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a Communications Antenna.
The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
reasonable attorneys’ fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs
of indemnification. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for such facilities
the applicant shall be required to execute an indemnification agreement with the
Township.
m. Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following maintenance
requirements shall apply:
10
(1) The Communications Antenna shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency
repair.
(2) Maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the facility in
order to promote the safety and security of the Township’s residents. At
a minimum such maintenance shall be performed at such frequencies
and in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer(s) of
the Communications Antenna and Related Equipment.
(3) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
n. Removal and Replacement, or Modification.
(1) To the extent permitted by law, the removal and replacement of
Communications Antennae and/or Related Equipment for the purpose of
upgrading or repairing the Communications Antenna is permitted, so long
as such repair or upgrade does not Substantially Change the overall size of
the Wireless Support Structure or the numbers of Communications
Antennae.
(2) Any modification to a Communications Antenna shall require notice to be
provided to the Township, and possible supplemental permit approval to
the original permit or authorization.
D. Communications Antennae Falling Under the Wireless Broadband Collocation Act
(1) In addition to the regulations enumerated in Section 324(B)(28)(C)(1), the following
regulations shall apply to Communications Antennae that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
a. Permit required. Communications Antenna Applicants proposing changes to an
existing Communications Tower, which do not Substantially Change the
dimensions of the existing, permitted Wireless Support Structure or otherwise fall
under the WBCA, shall obtain a building permit from the Township. In order to
be considered for such a permit, the Applicant must submit a permit application to
the Township in accordance with applicable permit policies and procedures.
b. Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA. Within thirty (30)
calendar days of the date that an application for a Communications Antenna is
filed with the Township, the Township shall notify the Applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application. Within sixty (60)
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the Township shall make its
11
final decision on whether to approve the application and shall advise the
Applicant in writing of such decision.
c. Related Equipment. New ground-mounted Related Equipment greater than three
(3) cubic feet shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a lot in residential use or
a residential zoning district.
d. Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees
directly related to the Township’s actual costs in reviewing and processing the
application for approval of a Communications Antenna or $1,000, whichever is
less. Such permit fees may be amended by resolution from time to time.
E. Communications Antennae That Do Not Fall Under the Wireless Broadband Collocation
Act
(1) In addition to the regulations enumerated in Section 324(B)(28)(C)(1), the following
regulations shall apply to Communications Antennae that do not fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
a. Prohibited on certain structures. No Communications Antenna shall be located on
Single-Family Detached Dwellings, Two-Family Semidetached Dwellings, Two-
Family Detached Dwellings or Single-Family Attached Dwellings.
b. Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/or expert(s)
necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and evaluating the application for
approval of the Communications Antenna and, once approved, in reviewing and
evaluating any potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
Communications Antenna provisions. The Applicant and/or owner of the
Communications Antenna shall reimburse the Township for all costs of the
Township’s consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation in
connection with these activities.
c. Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees
directly related to the Township’s actual costs in reviewing and processing the
application for approval of a Communications Antenna, as well as related
inspection, monitoring and all other related costs. Such permit fees may be
amended by resolution from time to time.
d. Requirement to Collocate. Communications Antennae shall be collocated on
existing Wireless Support Structures subject to the following conditions:
(1) The total height of any Wireless Support Structure and mounted
Communications Antenna shall not exceed twenty (20) feet above the
maximum height of the existing structure.
12
(2) In accordance with industry standards, all Communications Antenna
Applicants must submit documentation to the Township justifying the
total height of the Communications Antenna. Such documentation shall
be analyzed in the context of such justification on an individual basis.
(3) If the Applicant proposes to locate the Related Equipment in a separate
building, the building shall comply with the minimum requirements for
the applicable zoning district, and landscaping shall be required to screen
as much of the equipment building as possible. A planting screen of high
intensity in accordance with the provisions of Section 405(I) shall
surround the site.
e. Security fence. A security fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet shall
surround any separate communications equipment building. Vehicular access to
the communications equipment building, or any structure housing Related
Equipment, shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulations on the
site for the principal use.
f. Non-commercial usage exemption. Township residents utilizing satellite dishes
and antennae for the purpose of maintaining television, phone, radio and/or
internet connections at their respective residences shall be exempt from the
regulations enumerated in this section of the Zoning Ordinance. Amateur radio
operators are exempt from the regulations enumerated in this Section of the
ordinance.
g. Design regulations. Communications Antennae shall employ Stealth Technology
and be treated to match the Wireless Support Structure in order to minimize
aesthetic impact. The application of the Stealth Technology chosen by the
Applicant shall be Context Sensitive and shall be subject to the approval of the
Township.
h. Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any Communications
Antenna to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and
any other provisions found within the Township Code or state or federal law. The
Township and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon
which a Communications Antenna is located at any time, upon reasonable notice
to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
F. Communications Antennae located in the Public Street ROW.
(1) In addition to the regulations enumerated in Section 324(B)(28)(C)(1), the following
regulations shall apply to Communications Antennae located in the Public Street ROW:
a. Collocation and placement on existing infrastructure. Communications Antennae
in the Public Street ROW shall be collocated on existing infrastructure which has
been previously approved as wireless support structures, such as existing utility
13
poles, traffic signals or light poles. If collocation is not technologically feasible,
the Applicant, with the Township’s approval, shall locate its Communications
Antennae on existing infrastructure that does not already act as a Wireless
Support Structure.
b. Special exception approval required. Any Applicant proposing the construction
of a new Communications Antenna, or modification of an existing
Communications Antenna, located within the Public Street ROW, shall first
obtain special exception authorization from the Board. New constructions,
modifications, and replacements that fall under the WBCA or the applicable
provisions of the FCC’s October 2014 Report and Order, shall be not be subject to
the special exception process. The special exception application, and
accompanying documentation, shall demonstrate that the proposed facility
complies with all applicable provisions in the Township of Spring Zoning
Ordinance.
c. Design requirements:
(1) Communications Antenna installations and Related Equipment located
above the surface grade in the Public Street ROW including, but not
limited to, those on streetlights, traffic signals and utility poles, shall
consist of equipment components that are no more than six (6) feet in
height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to the structures
upon which they are mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and
least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
(2) Communications Antennae and Related Equipment shall be treated with
Stealth Technology, which shall be Context Sensitive, by the
Communications Antenna owner or Applicant to match the Wireless
Support Structure and may be required to be painted, or otherwise coated,
to be visually compatible with the support structure upon which they are
mounted.
d. Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time, place and
manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all
Communications Antennae in the Public Street ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the Public Street ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall
be consistent with the police powers of the Township and the requirements of the
Public Utility Code.
e. Equipment location. Communications Antennae and Related Equipment shall be
located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the Public Street ROW as
determined by the Township. In addition:
14
(1) Related Equipment located within the Public Street ROW but not attached
to the support structure shall be placed underground and shall have no
components that either protrude onto the curb, or obstruct the sidewalk.
(2) Ground-mounted Related Equipment that cannot be placed underground
shall be located outside of the Public Street ROW and shall be screened, to
the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Board. In such cases, the
Applicant shall present documentation to the Township that the property
owner has granted an easement for the placement of the proposed
equipment on the owner’s property.
(3) Ground-mounted Related Equipment shall not be installed above ground
directly in front of a residential structure.
(4) Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend in with the
surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Board.
(5) Any graffiti on any Wireless Support Structures or any Related Equipment
shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(6) Any proposed underground vault related to Communications Antennae
shall be reviewed and is subject to approval by the Township.
f. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within sixty (60) days following written notice
from the Township, or such longer period as the Township determines is reasonably
necessary or such shorter period in the case of an emergency, the owner of a
Communications Antenna in the Public Street ROW shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
Communications Antenna when the Township, consistent with its police powers
and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall have determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Township or
other public improvement in the Public Street ROW;
(2) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in the Public
Street ROW;
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or
(4) An Emergency as determined by the Township.
(29) Communications Towers
15
A. Purposes and Findings of Fact. See Section 324(B)(28)(A), above.
B. Definitions. See Section 324(B)(28)(B), above.
C. General and Specific Requirements for All Communications Towers.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all Communications Towers.
a. Standard of care. Any Communications Towers shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with
all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to, the most recent editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Code, as well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices of
the National Association of Tower Erectors. At all times, Communications
Towers shall be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the Township.
b. Permitted by special exception in certain zoning districts pursuant to regulations.
Communications Towers are permitted by special exception pursuant to this
zoning ordinance within the following districts, so long as they comply with all of
the terms and conditions of this Zoning Ordinance:
(1) Rural Holding Area (RHA) District
(2) Rural Conservation (RC) District
(3) Rural/Suburban (RS) District
(4) Planned Highway Interchange (PHI) District
(5) Planned Highway Transitional (PHT) District
(6) Planned/Office Business (POB) District
(7) Planned Industry/Business (PIB) District
(8) Extractive Industry (EI) District
(9) Manufacturing and Industrial (MI) District
(10) Fuel Storage (FS) District
c. Special exception process and required information. In addition to
demonstrating compliance with all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance,
the applicant shall provide the following information:
(1) Notice. Included with the application for special exception approval for a
Communications Tower the Applicant shall provide a list of property
owners’ names and mailing addresses for all owners of every property
within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed facility.
16
(2) Prior to the Board’s consideration of a special exception application
authorizing the construction and installation of a Communications Tower,
it shall be incumbent upon the Applicant for such special exception
approval to prove to the reasonable satisfaction of Board that the
Applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its communications system by
the use of equipment such as redoes, repeaters, Communications
Antennae, and other similar equipment installed on existing structures,
such as utility poles or their appurtenances and other available tall
structures. The Applicant shall further demonstrate that the proposed
Communications Tower must be located where it is proposed in order to
serve the Applicant's service area and that no other viable alternative
location exists.
(3) The special exception application shall be accompanied by a propagation
study evidencing the need for the proposed tower or other communication
facilities and equipment, a description of the type and manufacturer of the
proposed transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range (megahertz
band) assigned to the Applicant, the power in watts at which the Applicant
transmits, and any relevant related tests conducted by the Applicant in
determining the need for the proposed site and installation.
(4) The special exception application shall be accompanied by documentation
demonstrating that the proposed Communications Tower complies with all
state and federal laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(5) Where the Communications Tower is located on a property with another
principal use, the Applicant shall present documentation to the Board that
the owner of the property has granted an easement for the proposed
Communications Tower and that adequate vehicular access will be
provided to the facility.
(6) The special exception application shall be accompanied by documentation
demonstrating that the proposed Communications Tower complies with all
applicable provisions in this section.
d. Engineer inspection. Prior to the Board's issuance of special exception approval
authorizing construction and erection of a Communications Tower, a structural
engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall issue to the Township a written
certification of the proposed Communications Tower’s ability to meet the
structural standards offered by either the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper construction of
the foundation and the erection of the structure. This certification shall be
provided during the special exception proceedings before the Board, or at a
minimum, be made as a condition attached to any approval given such that the
certification be provided prior to issuance of any building permits.
17
e. Visual appearance. Communications Towers shall employ Stealth Technology,
which shall be Context Sensitive and may include the tower portion to be painted
silver, or another color approved by the Board, or to have a galvanized finish. All
Communications Towers and Related Equipment shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and shall maximize
the use of a like facade to blend with the existing surroundings and neighboring
buildings to the greatest extent possible. The Board shall consider whether its
decision upon the subject application will promote the harmonious and orderly
development of the zoning district and/or surrounding area involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development existing in the area;
benefit neighboring properties by preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic
character of the community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to
the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and construction
principles, practices and techniques. Any utilities extending to the
Communications Tower shall be placed underground.
f. Collocation and siting. An application for a new Communications Tower shall
demonstrate that the proposed Communications Antenna and Related Equipment
cannot be collocated or accommodated on an existing or approved structure or
building. The Board may deny an application to construct a new
Communications Tower if the Applicant has not made a good faith effort to
mount the Communications Antenna on an existing structure. The Applicant
shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings, and
towers within a one quarter (¼) of a mile radius of the site proposed, sought
permission to install a Communications Antenna on those structures, buildings,
and towers and was denied for one of the following reasons:
(1) The proposed antenna and Related Equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of the existing building, structure or tower, and its reinforcement
cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed antenna and Related Equipment would cause radio
frequency interference with other existing equipment for that existing
building, structure, or tower and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost.
(3) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have adequate
location, space, access, or height to accommodate the proposed equipment
or to allow it to perform its intended function.
(4) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the
owner of such building, structure, or tower.
g. Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under applicable
state and federal law, any Applicant proposing the modification of an existing
Communications Tower, which increases the overall height of such Wireless
18
Support Structure, shall first obtain a building permit from the Township.
Non-routine modifications shall be prohibited without such permit.
h. Gap in coverage or capacity. An Applicant for a Communications Tower must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity exists in
the applicable area and that the type of Communications Tower being
proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap. The existence
or non-existence of a gap in wireless coverage or capacity shall be a factor in
the Board’s decision on an application for approval of Communications
Tower.
i. Additional Communications Antennae. As a condition of approval for all
Communications Towers, the Applicant shall provide the Township with a
written commitment that it will allow other service providers to collocate
Communications Antennae on Communications Towers where
technologically and economically feasible. To the extent permissible under
federal and state law, the owner of a Communications Tower shall not install
any additional Communications Antennae without obtaining the prior written
approval of the Township.
j. Wind. All Communications Tower structures shall be designed to withstand
the effects of wind gusts of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour in
addition to the standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics
Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry Association
(ANSI/EIA/TIA-222), as amended.
k. Height. Any Communications Tower shall be designed at the minimum
functional height. The maximum height of any new Communications Tower
outside the Public Street ROW shall be one hundred seventy-five (175) feet.
Communications Towers in the Public Street ROW shall not exceed a height
comparable to the average height of utility poles or electrical poles within a
two (2) block radius of the proposed facility. No Applicant shall have the
right under these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height specified
in this section unless it proves the necessity for such height. The Applicant
shall demonstrate that the proposed Communications Tower is the minimum
height necessary for its service area.
l. Related Equipment. Either a one single-story wireless communications
equipment building not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area,
or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not exceeding ten (10) feet
by fifteen (15) feet in area housing the receiving and transmitting equipment,
may be located on the site for each unrelated company sharing space on the
Communications Tower.
19
m. Public safety communications and other communications services. No
Communications Tower shall interfere with public safety communications or
the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties. Communications Towers shall be
designed and constructed to accommodate the future addition of municipal
communications facilities. Prior to issuance of a building permit the applicant
shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement and shall describe any
necessary steps for future addition of municipal communications facilities.
n. Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(1) Any Communications Tower shall be fully automated and unattended on a
daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.
(2) Maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the
Communications Tower in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township’s residents, and utilize the best available technology for
preventing failures and accidents. At a minimum such maintenance shall
be performed at such frequencies and in accordance with the
recommendations of the manufacturer(s) of the Communications Tower
and Related Equipment.
o. Radio frequency emissions. A Communications Tower shall not, by itself or
in conjunction with other Communications Towers or Communications
Antennae, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and
regulations of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled “Evaluating Compliance with
FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic
Fields,” as amended.
p. Historic buildings or districts. No Communications Tower (either inside or
outside the Public Street ROW) may be located upon any property, or on a
building, structure, or within one-hundred (100) feet of such property,
building or structure, that is listed on the National or Pennsylvania Registers
of Historic Places, listed by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission, included in the list of historic buildings in the Township’s
Comprehensive Plan , or that is deemed by the Township to be local historic
significance.
q. Signs. All Communications Towers shall post a sign in a readily visible
location identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in the
event of an emergency. The only other signage permitted on the
Communications Tower shall be those required by the FCC, or any other
federal or state agency.
20
r. Lighting. No Communications Tower shall be artificially lighted, except as
required by law. If lighting is required, the Applicant shall provide a detailed
plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an
effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations. Automatic lighting
is prohibited and all lighting must be controlled manually by an on-site
switch. The Applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of
FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities and to the
Township Manager.
s. Noise. Communications Towers shall be operated and maintained so as not to
produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under state law and the
Township Code, except in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup
generator, where such noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis
only.
t. Aviation safety. Communications Towers shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
u. Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant and/or expert
necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and evaluating the application
for approval of the Communications Tower and, once approved, in reviewing
and evaluating any potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
provisions. The Applicant and/or owner of the Communications Tower shall
reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township’s consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these
activities.
v. Timing of approval. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date that an
application for a Communications Tower is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the Applicant in writing of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Within one hundred fifty (150)
calendar days of the receipt of a fully completed application for the approval
of a Communications Tower, the Township shall act upon such application
and advise the Applicant in writing of its decision. This time period may be
extended if mutually agreed upon by the Applicant and Township. If
additional information was requested by the Township to complete an
application, the time required by the Applicant to provide the information
shall not be counted toward the one hundred fifty (150) day review period.
w. Nonconforming towers. Nonconforming Communications Towers, which at
the effective date of this Chapter or subsequent amendments thereto become
nonconforming, and are hereafter damaged, destroyed or partially destroyed
by fire, explosion or by any means to an extent of seventy-five percent (75%)
or more of the market value thereof immediately prior to such damage or
destruction, shall not be repaired or restored to a nonconforming status, but
21
shall be reconstructed and used only in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter
x. Removal.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a Communications Tower
the owner or operator shall post security in a form acceptable to the
Township in a sufficient amount to cover the facility removal and site
cleanup prior to the issuance of any permits to construct or use said
facility. Exemption: a commercial communications tower or antenna
necessary for and clearly used for emergency communications by a police
department, fire company, emergency medical service and other similar
public safety organizations is exempt from the requirements of this
Section.
(2) In the event that use of a Communications Tower is planned to be
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the Township of
its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued. Unused or abandoned Communications Towers, or
portions of Communications Towers, shall be removed as follows:
(a) All unused or abandoned Communications Towers and Related
Equipment shall be removed within sixty (60) days of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the
Township.
(b) If the Communications Tower and/or Related Equipment is not
removed within sixty (60) days of the cessation of operations at a site,
or within any longer period approved by the Township, the financial
security may be utilized by the Township to remove the
Communications Tower and/or Related Equipment. In this event, the
Township shall provide written notice of such intended action to the
Applicant and, after the expiration of thirty (30) days, the
Communications Tower or Related Equipment may be removed by
the Township. Furthermore, the Township reserves the right to the
salvage value of any removed Communications Tower and/or Related
Equipment, if such Communications Tower and/or Related
Equipment are not removed by the owner within the timeframes
enumerated in this Chapter.
(c) Any unused portions of Communications Towers, including antennae,
shall be removed within sixty (60) days of the time of cessation of
operations. The Township must approve all replacements of portions
of a Communications Tower previously removed.
22
y. Permit Fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit
fees directly related to the Township’s actual costs in reviewing and
processing the application for approval of a Communications Tower, as well
as related inspection, monitoring, and related costs. Such permit fees may be
amended by resolution from time to time.
z. FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a Communications Tower
over forty (40) feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC license,
including the name, address, and emergency telephone number for the
operator of the facility.
aa. Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a Communications Tower
greater than forty (40) feet in height shall provide the Township with a
certificate of insurance naming the Township as an additional insured, and
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000
per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$5,000,000 per occurrence covering the Communications Tower. Each person
that owns or operates a Communications Tower forty (40) feet or less in
height shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance naming the
Township as an additional insured, and evidencing general liability coverage
in the minimum amount of $3,000,000 per occurrence and property damage
coverage in the minimum amount of $3,000,000 per occurrence covering each
Communications Tower.
bb. Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a Communications Tower
shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Township, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all
times against any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with
any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees (individually
and/or collectively the “Indemnities”), arising out of, but not limited to, the
review, approval, permitting, construction, installation, operation, maintenance
or removal of the Communications Tower. Each person that owns or operates
a Communications Tower shall defend any actions or proceedings against the
Indemnities in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or
property damage was caused by the review, approval, permitting, construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the Communications Tower.
The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not
be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
reasonable attorneys’ fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other
costs of indemnification. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for such
facilities the applicant shall be required to execute an indemnification
agreement with the Township.
23
cc. Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a Communications Tower
shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
dd. Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the construction or
placement of a Communications Tower, the Applicant shall provide to the
Township financial security sufficient to guarantee the construction of the
Communications Tower. Said financial security shall remain in place until the
Communications Tower is fully constructed.
ee. All applications for approval of Communications Towers shall include written
documentation from the FCC, FAA and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Bureau of Aviation that the Communications Tower complies with all
applicable regulations, or is exempt from such regulations.
D. Communications Towers Outside the Public Street ROW
(1) In addition to the regulations enumerated in Section324(B)(29)(C)(1), the following
regulations shall apply to Communications Towers located outside the Public Street
ROW:
a. Development regulations.
(1) Communications Towers shall not be located in, or within seventy-five
(75) feet of an area in which all utilities are located underground.
(2) Communications Towers are permitted by special exception outside the
Public Street ROW, subject to the prohibitions contained herein, in the
following zoning districts:
(a) Rural Holding Area (RHA) District
(b) Rural Conservation (RC) District
(c) Rural/Suburban (RS) District
(d) Planned Highway Interchange (PHI) District
(e) Planned Highway Transitional (PHT) District
(f) Planned Office/Business (POB) District
(g) Planned Industry/Business (PIB) District
(h) Extractive Industry (EI) District
(i) Manufacturing and Industrial (MI) District
(j) Fuel Storage (FS) District
(3) Sole use on a lot. A Communications Tower shall be permitted as a sole
use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets the minimum size
specifications set forth in the Township Zoning Code.
24
(4) Combined with another use. A Communications Tower may be permitted
on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant parcel in combination
with another use, except residential, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in the
applicable district, and need not be affiliated with the Communications
Tower.
(b) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable zoning district and shall be the area
needed to accommodate the Communications Tower and guy wires,
the equipment building, security fence, and buffer planting if the
proposed Communications Towers is greater than forty (40) feet in
height. A Communications Tower may also occupy a leased parcel
meeting the minimum lot area for the applicable zoning district,
however, in no case will the size of the leased parcel be required to be
larger than one (1) acre.
(c) Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the base of a
Communications Tower and any adjoining property line or street rightof-
way line shall be equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the height
of the Communications Tower. The underlying lot must be large
enough to accommodate Related Equipment, storm water runoff
mechanisms, and all other features typically found within the
immediate area of a Communications Tower.
b. Design regulations.
(1) The Communications Tower shall employ the most current Stealth
Technology available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The application
of the Stealth Technology chosen by the Applicant shall be Context
Sensitive and shall be subject to the approval of the Board.
(2) To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to an existing
Communications Tower shall require prior approval of the Township.
(3) Any proposed Communications Tower shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the Applicant's
Communications Antennae and comparable Communications Antennae,
for the maximum amount of future users based on the size of the proposed
Communications Tower.
(4) Any Communications Tower over forty (40) feet in height shall be
equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the manufacturer.
25
c. Surrounding environs.
(1) The Applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation, trees and shrubs
located within proximity to the Communications Tower shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible.
(2) The Applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township complying with
the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222,
as amended, to document and verify the design specifications of the
foundation of the Communications Tower, and anchors for guy wires, if
used.
d. Fence/screen.
(1) A security fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet shall completely
surround any Communications Tower greater than forty (40) feet in
height, as well as guy wires, or any building housing Related Equipment.
(2) The Applicant shall provide a buffer yard and planning screen of high
intensity in accordance with the provisions of Section 405(I).
e. Related Equipment.
(1) Ground-mounted Related Equipment associated with, or connected to, a
Communications Tower shall be placed underground or screened from
public view using Stealth Technologies, as described herein.
(2) All Related Equipment shall be architecturally designed to blend into the
environment in which it is situated and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
f. Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall be provided to
ensure adequate emergency and service access to Communications Towers. The
access road shall be a dust-free all-weather surface for its entire length.
Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the
extent practicable. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure
minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the
Communications Tower owner shall present documentation to the Township that
the property owner has granted an easement for the proposed facility.
g. Parking. For each Communications Tower greater than forty (40) feet in height,
there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
h. Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any Communications
Tower to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions
found within the Township Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its
26
agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
Communications Tower is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
E. Communications Towers Inside the Public Street ROW
(1) In addition to the regulations enumerated in Section 324(B)(29)(C)(1), the following
regulations shall apply to Communications Towers located in the Public Rights-of-Way.
a. Location and development standards.
(1) Communications Towers in the Public Street ROW shall consist only of
monopoles and shall not exceed a height comparable to the average height of
utility poles or electrical poles within a two (2) block radius of the proposed
facility. Communications Towers are prohibited in areas in which all utilities
are located underground.
(2) Communications Towers shall not be located in the front façade area of
any structure.
(3) Communications Towers shall be permitted by special exception within
the Public Street ROW along all streets classified as either Expressways or
Arterial Streets on the Township of Spring Street Classification Map,
regardless of the underlying zoning district.
b. Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time, place and
manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all
Communications Towers in the Public Street ROW based on public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the Public Street ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall
be consistent with the police powers of the Township and the requirements of the
Public Utility Code.
c. Equipment location. Communications Towers and Related Equipment shall be
located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the Public Street ROW as
determined by the Township. In addition:
(1) Related Equipment located within the Public Street ROW but not attached
to the support structure shall be placed underground and shall have no
components that either protrude onto the curb, or obstruct the sidewalk.
(2) Ground-mounted Related Equipment that cannot be placed underground
shall be located outside of the Public Street ROW and shall be screened, to
the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other
27
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Board. In such cases, the
Communications Tower owner shall present documentation to the
Township that the property owner has granted an easement for the
placement of the proposed equipment on the owner’s property. If the
Related Equipment is to be located within a building, it shall be a one
single-story wireless communications equipment building not exceeding
one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and shall meet the minimum
setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(3) Ground-mounted Related Equipment shall not be installed above ground
directly in front of a residential structure.
(4) Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend in with the
surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Board.
(5) Any graffiti on the tower or on any Related Equipment shall be removed
at the sole expense of the owner.
(6) Any underground vaults related to Communications Towers shall be
reviewed and approved by the Board.
d. Design regulations.
(1) The Communications Tower shall employ the most current Stealth
Technology available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The application
of the Stealth Technology chosen by the Applicant shall be Context
Sensitive and shall be subject to the approval of the Board.
(2) To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any height
extensions to an existing Communications Tower shall require prior
approval of the Township, and shall not violate the provisions described
herein.
(3) Any proposed Communications Towers shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the Applicant's
Communications Antennae and comparable Communications Antennae
the maximum amount of future users based on the size of the proposed
Communications Tower.
e. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within sixty (60) days following written notice
from the Township, or such longer period as the Township determines is reasonably
necessary or such shorter period in the case of an Emergency, an owner of a
Communications Tower in the Public Street ROW shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
Communications Tower when the Township, consistent with its police powers and
28
applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Township or
other public improvement in the Public Street ROW;
(2) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in the Public
Street ROW;
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or
(4) An emergency as determined by the Township.
f. Reimbursement for Public Street ROW use. In addition to permit fees as described
in this section, every Communications Tower in the Public Street ROW is subject to
the Township’s right to fix annually a fair and reasonable fee to be paid for use and
occupancy of the Public Street ROW. Such compensation for Public Street ROW
use shall be directly related to the Township’s actual Public Street ROW
management costs including, but not limited to, the costs of the administration and
performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other Public
Street ROW management activities by the Township. The owner of each
Communications Tower shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate the
Township for the Township’s costs incurred in connection with the activities
described above.
SECTION III. Miscellaneous
A. Police powers. The Township, by granting any permit or taking any other action pursuant to
this chapter, does not waive, reduce, lessen or impair the lawful police powers vested in the
Township under applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
B. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Ordinance is
for any reason held illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not
render the remainder of this Chapter invalid.
C. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after enactment by the
Township of Spring.
THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING,
BERKS COUNTY. PENNSYLVANIA
oRDTNANCE No. t4s
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING, BERKS COUNTY,
PENNSYI,VANIA, AMENDING THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING ZONING
ORDINANCE OF 2015, ORDINANCE NO. 415 OF 2015, BY: (1)
AMENDING SECTION 202 BY ADDING THERETO A DEFINITION FOR *COLLEGE.ADJACENT PROPERTY', AND AMENDING THE
DEFINITION OF "DWELLING UNIT", (2) AMENDING SECTION 318 By
ADDING THERETO GARDEN APARTMENTS ON COLLEGE.
ADJACENT PROPERTY AS A USE PERMITTED BY RIGHT IN THE
PLANNED OFFICE/BUSINESS ZONING DISTRICT, (3) AMENDING
SECTTON 324(B)(43) By REVTSTNG CERTATN DTMENSTONAL, DENSTTY
AND PARKING STANDARDS FOR GARDEN APARTMENTS; AND (4)
AMENDING SECTION 701 REGARDING REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFFSTREET
PARKING SPACES BY ADDING APARTMENTS UNDER THE
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORY
NOW, THEREFORE, be it, and it is, hereby ORDAINED, by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Spring, Berks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
follows:
SECTION 1. Section 202 the Township of Spring Zoning Ordinance of 2015 is hereby
amended to delete therefrom the definition of "Dwelling Unit" and add the followins definitions
in alphabetical order:
COLLEGE-ADJACENT PROPERTY - land directly adjacent to a college or
university, having a common lot line with the property upon which such college or
university is located, and having direct pedestrian access capable of supporting a
pedestrian walkway having a direct connection to such college or university, but which
does not cross a public street. Such college or university must be state-licensed and must
require that some or all of the students reside on or near the campus. This definition shall
apply only for purposes of the specific use of 'oGarden Apartments located on College
Adjacent Property" within the POB District.
DWELLING UNIT - one (1) or more living or sleeping rooms together with
separate cooking and sanitary facilities which are accessible from the outdoors, whether
directly or through an entrance hall shared with other dwelling units and used or intended
to be used by a single family.
SECTION2. Section 318(8) the Township of Spring Zoning Ordinance of 2015 is
hereby amended by adding thereto a new Subsection (26) thereto, as follows:
*(26) Garden apartments located on college-adjacent property, as defined in
Section 202***.n
-1-
SECTION3. Section 324(B)(43) the Township of Spring Zoning Ordinance of 2015 is
hereby amended and restated in its entirety, as follows:
*(43) Garden Apartments or Single-Family Attached Dwellings
(Townhouses).
(a) Uses. Permitted principal uses include dwelling units permitted
in the district. Permitted accessory uses include a rental office, recreational
facilities, off-street parking, indoor vending machines and laundry or laundromat
facilities. These accessory uses shall be intended onlv for the use of the
residents of the development.
, (b) Sewer and Water. Each dwelling unit shall be served by a public
sewer and centralized water system.
(c) All garden apartment or townhouse developments shall
conform to all of the requirements as herein established:
Minimum tract size:
Minimumlot width at building line:
Minimum side yard:
Minimum rear yard:
Minimum front yard:
Distance between buildinss:
Parking area setback from lot line or
street ultimate right-of-way
Maximum dwelling units per gross
acte
Minimum usable open space (not
including driveway areas) devoted
solely to recreational use and activities:
Maximumheight:
Single-Family
Garden Attached
Apartment Dwellings
5 acres 3 acres
300 feet 22feeti
75 feet 30 feetii
75 feet 30 feet
75feet 30 feet
See $324(8) See $324(8) (43XdX4) (43XdX4)
30 feet 30 feetiii
15
0% of the
tract
10
l0% of the
tractiu
3 Stories or 2-ll2 Stories
40 feet or 35 feetu
a
Maximumbuilding coverage: 50yo 50%
Maximum impervious coverage: 70% 70%
NOTE: i Minimum width of a townhouse dwelling unit is twenty-two
(22) feet per unit.
ii Applies to end building only.
iii Parking areas for individual townhouses.
iv Usable open space shall not include front, side and/or rear yards
of an individual townhouse or garden apartment.
v Whichever is less.
NOTE: See $327(C) of this Chapter for special standards relating to storage
and other accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of the above requirements,
the following shall also apply:
1) No more than six (6) townhouse dwelling units shall
be attached.
2) The developer should vary architectural treatments
within apartment projects, individual apartments and between
dwelling units in a townhouse development. Variations may
include those of exterior elevation, building setbacks, provision of
balconies, architectural details, pitch of roof, exterior materials or use
of color. Variety and flexibility in design layout and arrangement
of buildings, parking areas, services, recreation areas, common
open space and planting that fully considers the particular
physical characteristics of the site and natural amenities is highly
desired.
3) The horizontal distance between groups of
townhouses or garden apartments shall be at least:
i) Two (2) times the average height of the two (2)
groups of townhouses and garden apartments for front or
rear walls facing front or rear walls.
ii) One and one-half (I-l/2) times the average
height for front or rear walls facing side walls.
iii) Equal to the height of the highest building for
side walls facing side walls.
4) Unless a larger setback is otherwise required in this
Chapter, the minimum distance between a building and a street,
driveway or parking area should not be less than fifteen (15) feet.
-3-
5) Parking may be provided on the lot, as ca{ports, as an
integral part of the townhouse or a joint parking facility for a
group of townhouses with such deed restrictions as are necessary to
determine ownership and maintenance of common parking
facilities and methods of assigning charges for maintaining snow
removal and repairs.
6) Garden apartment buildings shall not exceed two
hundred fifty (250) feet in length.
7) In the event a development is designed to contain
more than one (1) permitted,use, the submitted plan shall indicate -an area designed for each such use and shall designate all
requirements of this Chapter for each area.
(e) Number of Spaces. Off-street parking, whether garage or
on-lot, shall be provided on the premises at the following rates:
l) Garden apartments located on college-adjacent
properties: one (1) space for each bedroom (but not less than two
(2) spaces per dwelling unit) plus one (l) space for every three (3)
dwelling units.
2) All other garden apartments: two (2) spaces for
each dwelling unit.
(f) Requirements for off-street parking area shall be as follows:
1) All access drives and parking areas shall be at least
fifteen (15) feet from any building on the lot and from exterior lot
lines.
2) All parking areas shall be designed in accordance with
requirements of $703, except as modified by this Section.
3) Access drives and driveways shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements of $704.
4) All parking areas that include twenty (20) or more spaces
shall be separated from view of any public street and directly abutting
single-family detached residence by a buffer yard as described in
$405(1), but with a width of ten (10) feet. A planting plan specif,zing
type, size and location of existing and proposed planting material shall be
submitted with the application for approval.
-4-
5) No more than fifteen. (15) contiguous spaces shall be
permitted in any continuous row without intemrption by
landscaping.
6) No more than sixty (60) parking spaces shall be
accommodated in any single parking area. A single parking area
shall be separated by a minimum of thirty (30) feet of intemrption
by landscaping measured along the centerline of the access drive
or aisle to any adjoining parking areas.
7) The total length of any single or combined parking area
shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet. The length shall be
measured from the center line of the public or private street
providing access to the furthest point of the parking area. where a
combined parking area has a second access point to a public or
private street, the total length of any single or combined parking
area shall not exceed twelve hundred (1,200) feet measured from
the centerlines of the intersecting public or private streets
providing access.
8) In the case of townhouses, no more than fifty percent
(50%) of the required front yard shall be used for parking.
(g) The developer shall install a storm runoff and drainage system
in accordance with acceptable engineering practices so as to adequately
drain the project site, to adequately dispose of all runoff and drainage away
from the project site, at a rate no greater than existed prior to development.
Plans for such drainage system shall be submitted and shall be subject to
approval by the Township Engineer of the Township.
(h) All provisions of existing Township ordinances and
subdivision and land development ordinances regarding storm drainage
shall be complied with.
(i) Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas shall
be so arranged as not to reflect toward public sheets and not to cause any
annoyance to building occupants or surrounding property owners or
residents. All lighting shall comply with the provisions of g513.
CI) Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be visually
screened on three (3) sides and contained in airtight, vermin-proof
containers. Interior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall at all times be
kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
I
-5-
(k) Swimming Pool.
1) No structure shall be permitted without a filtering
system utilizing chlorinated water.
2) No structure shall be permitted unless a permanent
continuous fence which is four (4) feet minimum in heieht
surrounds the facilities.
3) No structure shall be within fifty (50) feet of any
property line or easement.
4) No structure shall be constructed between the
building setback line and the street line.
5) No structure shall be permitted unless surrounded by
a paved surface extending a minimum of five (5) feet from the water
line.
6) Lighting shall not create a glare on any surrounding
properties.
7) No persons other than residents and their guests shall be
permitted to use the facility.
8) One (1) parking space for each three (3) dwelling units
shall be provided in addition to the residential requirements. Such
additional parking spaces shall not be required for garden
apartments located on college-adj acent property.
(l) Outdoor Recreation.
1) Such facilities shall be limited to tennis courts, which are
completely sulrounded by a fence ten (10) feet in height, barbecue
or other cookout facilities constructed of permanent material, yards
which are completely landscaped, garden areas for tenant use, playlots,
provided that facilities located in this area are surrounded by
fencing at least four (4) feet in height, with benches for adults;
facilities for such games as shuffleboard or basketball, provided that
a paved surface is provided and that such facilities are located at least
fifty (50) feet from any building.
2) No outdoor recreational facilities, except yards and garden
areas shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any lot line.
3) No outdoor facilities, except yards, shall be located
-6-
between the building setback line and the street line.
(m) No outdoor clotheslines shall be located in any required side
yard, rear yard or between the building setback line and the street line with
permanent metal poles for support.
(n) No activities shall be permitted which create a public nuisance
and/or interfere with the use of adiacent land.
(o) No structure or building shall be permitted specifically designed
for pets.
(p) Garden apartment and townhouse development shall be
deemed to be a subdivision governed by the provisions and procedures of
the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter
XXUI) and the procedures established in said ordinance for approval shall
be followed."
SECTION 4. Table 7.1 of Section 701 of the Township of Spring Zoning Ordinance of
2015 is hereby amended to add the following category under RESIDENTIAL USES:
CATEGORY
NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING
SPACES
RESIDENTIAL USES
Apartments, Garden or Upper Level See $ 324(B)(a3)(e).
SECTION 5.
A. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this
Ordinance is for any reason held illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
provision shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall
not render the remainder of this Chapter invalid.
-1-
B. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after enactment
by the Board of Commissioners of Spring Township.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED this 23'd day of January, 2017.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF
THE TOWNSHIP OF SPRING,
BERKS COUNTY. PENNSYLVANIA
Member
-8-
MUNICIPAL CERTIFICATION
l, f\r -) &4zLA\rco,*l) , (Assistant) Secretary of the Township of Spring,
Berks Coon the foregoing Oidinance No. aji '
wis
advertised in the Reading Eagle, a daily newspaper of general circulation in the Township of Spring,
on January 1_,2017, and was duly enacted and approved as set forth at a regular meeting of the
Board ofSupervisors held on January 23,2017.
Date: January 23,2017
lsEALI
-9-





















































A90010
WEST LAWN APPENDIX
The following ordinances are no longer of general interest, primarily because their
provisions were carried out directly after their enactment. Since they are mainly of
administrative and/or historical interest, it has not been considered necessary to include
their entire text. Instead, they are arranged in groups, according to subject matter, and
within each group listed by title in chronological order. The content of the ordinances, in
all necessary detail, is indexed with each listing. Any person who desires to read the full
text of any of the ordinances may do so by consulting the original Ordinance Books on file
in the Township offices.
The enactments included in this Appendix are grouped under the following
headings:
Appendix A. Administration and Government
Appendix B. Agreements
Appendix C. Bond Issues and Loans
Appendix D. Miscellaneous
Appendix E. Real Estate
Appendix F. Sewers
Appendix G. Streets and Roads
Appendix H. Taxes
A90010
A90010
APPENDIX A
Administration and Government
Ordinance No. Description Date
61
An Ordinance establishing a police force in
and for the Borough of West Lawn, fixing the
number of officers to constitute said force, and
their compensation.
1/4/1928
91
An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 61,
entitled an ordinance establishing a police
force in and for the Borough of West Lawn,
fixing the number of officers to constitute said
force, and their compensation
2/ 6/ 1935
159
An Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. 61,
entitled An ordinance establishing a police
force in and for the Borough of West Lawn,
fixing the number of officers to constitute said
force, and their compensation, as mended by
Ordinance no. 91
11/18/1958
160
An Ordinance establishing a police force in
and for the Borough of West Lawn, and
providing for the fixing of compensation of
members thereof
11/18/1958
272
An Ordinance of the Borough of West Lawn,
Pennsylvania, providing for the adoption of a
pension plan for full-time, uniformed
employees of the Borough
3/3/1981
300
An Ordinance of the Borough of West Lawn,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, abolishing the
police department of the Borough of West
Lawn and authorizing and empowering the
appropriate officials of the Borough to enter
into on behalf of the Borough an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement
with the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, pursuant to the terms of which
the Township of Spring will provide police
protection and services to the Borough
12/28/1989
A-3
A90010
374
An Ordinance of the Borough approving a
joint agreement to merge the Borough of West
Lawn, Berks County, Pennsylvania, into the
Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania; providing for the matter to be
decided by referendum by placing the
question on the official ballot or voting
machine ballot label at the municipal election
to be held November 2, 2004; providing that if
the merger is approved the Borough will
continue to operate under the Borough Code
and be governed by a Mayor and Borough
Council, whole term shall expire and cease to
exist on the First Monday of January, 2006
7/ 20/ 2004
A90010
APPENDIX B
Agreements
Ordinance No. Description Date
1
An Ordinance granting the Berkshire Electric
Company, its successors and assigns, a
franchise to erect and maintain poles, wires,
cables, conduits and fixtures along the streets
and alleys of the Borough for the purpose of
supplying light, heat and power, by means of
electricity
12/22/1923
2
An Ordinance creating a franchise tax for
providing for the erection and maintenance of
poles used in the transmitting of electric
current for any purpose
2/6/1935
7
An Ordinance authorizing The Bell Telephone
Company of Pennsylvania, its successors and
assigns, to construct, maintain and operate its
posts, poles, cables, wires, and all other
necessary overhead apparatus and
underground appliances, on, over, along, in
under and through the streets, alleys and
highways of the Borough
5/21/1924
97
An Ordinance providing for the furnishing of
electric street lighting service to the Borough
by PPL
4/17/1937
105
An Ordinance providing for the furnishing of
electric street lighting service to the Borough
by PPL
8/15/40
173
An Ordinance of the Borough of West Lawn
providing for the furnishing of electric street
lighting service to the Borough by PPL
8/2/1960
175
An Ordinance accepting the report of
Southwestern Berks County Joint Water
Authority regarding the acquisition of the
Sinking Spring Water Company
8/16/1960
184
An Ordinance repealed No. 175 accepting the
report of Southwestern Berks County Joint 3/7/1961
A-5
A90010
Water Authority regarding the acquisition of
the Sinking Spring Water Company
211
An Ordinance regulating and providing for
licensing of community television antenna
systems with the Borough
4/5/1966
278
An Ordinance regulating and providing for
licensing of community television antenna
systems within the Borough
8/2/1982
354
An Ordinance authorizing intergovernmental
cooperation by establishing membership in the
Western Berks Council of Governments and
establishing the condition of said membership
pursuant to the requirements of the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law
12/5/2000
362
An Ordinance authorizing the Borough to
enter into an agreement with the County of
Berks and other political subdivisions within
the County of Berks to provide reciprocal
emergency assistance by and between the
parties to that Agreement
9/4/2001
364
An Ordinance authorizing the Borough to
enter into an intermunicipal agreement with
the Township of Spring, Berks County,
Pennsylvania for the provision of fire fighting
and related services in the Township and in
the Borough and other areas as may be
requested or as needed
2/6/1935
365
An Ordinance adopting and approving a cable
franchise agreement between the Borough and
Comcast Cablevision of New
Mexico/ Pennsylvania, Inc.
9/3/2002
A90010
APPENDIX C
Bond Issues and Loans
Ordinance No. Bond/Loan Description Date
10
An Ordinance to create and incur a bonded
indebtedness for the Borough of West Lawn in
the Sum of $10,000.00 for the purpose of
improving the highways of the Borough, and
the payment of damages necessarily arising
therefrom, and the purchase of necessary
equipment therefore, to approve a form of
bond, to provide for the assessment, levy and
collection of an annual tax to pay the interest
and state tax thereon, and to create a sinking
fund for the payment of the principal thereof
9/20/1924
16
An Ordinance signifying the desire of the
corporate authorities of the Borough of West
Lawn to increase, and, authorizing the
increase of the bonded indebtedness of the
Borough to the amount of $40,000.00 or 4.6943
per cent of the assessed valuation of the
taxable property therein, by issuing a series of
bonds therefore, for the purpose of improving
the highways of the Borough and the payment
of damages necessarily arising therefrom, and
providing for a election to be held to obtain
the assent of the electors
3/18/1925
24
An Ordinance to create and incur a bonded
indebtedness for the Borough of West Lawn in
the sum of $40,000.00 for the purpose of
improving the highways of the Borough and
the payment of damages necessarily arising
therefrom; to approve a form of bond; to
provide for the assessment, levy and collection
of an annual tax to pay the interest and state
and national tax thereon, and to create a
sinking fund for the payment of the principal
thereof
7/ 14/ 1925
A-7
A90010
51
An Ordinance signifying and expressing the
desire of the corporate authorities of the
Borough of West Lawn, County of Berks, and
State of Pennsylvania, to increase the
indebtedness of said Borough by the amount
of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00),
for the purposed of grading, curbing, paving,
macadamizing, guttering, and otherwise
improving the streets of the Borough,
providing for the holding of an election
therefore, and authorizing and directing the
corporate authorities to make the necessary
announcements of said election and do all
other acts and things incident thereto
4/6/1927
59
An Ordinance providing for the issuance of
bonds and the increase of indebtedness of the
Borough of West Lawn, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, in the sum of Twenty-Five
Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) for the purpose
of grading, curbing, paving, macadamizing,
guttering, or otherwise improving the streets
of the Borough of West Lawn; approving the
form of bond and coupon; levying a tax for the
payment of the principal of said bonds at
maturity and the interest and state tax thereon
meanwhile, and repealing all ordinances
inconsistent therewith
11/10/1927
99
An Ordinance to create and incur an increase
of indebtedness of the Borough of West Lawn,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, in the sum of
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for the
purpose of providing funds for highway
improvements in the Borough; to approve the
form of bond and coupon; and to levy a tax for
the payment of the principal of said bonds at
maturity and the interest and state tax thereon
meanwhile
8/23/1937
119
An Ordinance to authorize and direct the
issuance of general obligation bonds of the
Borough of West Lawn, Berks County,
Pennsylvania in the maximum amount of
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for the
purpose of providing funds for the
11/5/1947
A-8
A90010
construction of storm sewers and the making
of other improvements to the drainage system
of the Borough; providing for the rate of
interest on said bonds and fixing the maturity
dates thereof; approving the form of bond and
coupon; stating the estimated period of
usefulness of the improvements for which said
bonds are to be issued; providing for the
assessment, levy and collection of a tax to pay
the interest covenanted to be paid thereon and
the principal thereof at maturity; establishing
a sinking fund; directing Earl Rothermel and
George W. Wert ley, being respectively the
President and the Secretary of Borough
Council, to prepare, verify and file the
required statement; and authorizing and
directing the secretary to certify and file with
the Department of Internal Affairs certified
copies of the necessary proceedings
A90010
APPENDIX D
Miscellaneous
Ordinance No. Description Date
48 Authorization to Advertise and Award Bids
for Crushed Stone
2/14/1927
50 Placing of 10 Fire Hydrants 3/16/1927
165 Paving of Water Course, North Side of
Fairview Street Between Woodside and Riegel
8/4/1959
266 Paving of Water Course between Berks Place
and Fairview Street
4/3/1979
A-12
APPENDIX E
Real Estate
Ordinance No. Description Date
49 Sale of Property to Jeremiah M. Mengel due to
abandonment of Plan for Street
3/14/1927
60 Annexation of David D. Sternbergh land into
the Borough of West Lawn
11/10/1927
A-19
APPENDIX F
Sewers
Ordinance No. Description Date
101
An Ordinance Authorizing the construction of
an eighteen inch terra cotta storm water sewer
on Riegel Avenue
9/ 9/ 1937
118
An Ordinance authorizing the construction of
storm sewer on Wyomissing Boulevard 9/13/1947
134
An Ordinance authorizing the Authority to
construct sanitary sewers 4/23/1954
135
An Ordinance authorizing the Authority to
construct sanitary sewers 6/1/1954
136
An Ordinance authorizing the execution and
delivery of a lease of the sewer system with
the Authority
6/15/1954
144
An Ordinance authorizing the execution and
delivery of a supplemental lease of the sewer
system with the Authority
2/7/1956
A-16
APPENDIX G
Streets and Roads
Ordinance No. Description Date
9 An Ordinance adopting the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
9/6/1924
13 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
11/5/1924
14 An Ordinance authorizing the opening,
grading and improving of Noble Street, Penn
Avenue, Morwood Avenue, Perkasie Avenue,
Telford Avenue, Woodside Avenue, Riegel
Avenue, Intervilla Avenue and Cecil Avenue
4/11/1925
15 An Ordinance authorizing the advertising of
bids and awarding of contract for the
construction of curbing, pavement and gutters
5/5/1925
19 An Ordinance amending the topographical
survey of the Borough of West Lawn
5/18/1925
27 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
9/16/1925
28 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
9/16/1925
29 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
9/16/1925
34 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
5/14/1926
36 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
6/2/1926
41 An Ordinance authorizing the laying of
concrete curbs and gutters and authorizing the
advertising of bids and awarding of contract
10/20/1926
42 An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 41
authorizing the laying of concrete curbs and
gutters and authorizing the advertising of bids
and awarding of contract
12/15/1926
43 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
12/15/1926
45 An Ordinance amending the Topographical 1/19/1927
A-17
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
46 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
1/19/1927
55 An Ordinance repealing the opening, grading
and improving of Noble Street, Penn Avenue,
Morwood Avenue, Perkasie Avenue, Telford
Avenue, Woodside Avenue, Riegel Avenue,
Intervilla Avenue and Cecil Avenue
8/3/1927
56 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
8/3/1927
58 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
9/ 21/1927
64 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
6/20/1928
65 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
7/30/1928
69 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
3/6/1929
70 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
5/15/1929
80 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
6/3/1931
83 An Ordinance authorizing the grading,
opening and improving of Fairview Street
12/ 21/1933
84 An Ordinance authorizing the grading,
opening and improving of Cecil Avenue
12/21/1933
85 An Ordinance authorizing the opening,
grading and improving of Westfield Avenue
12/21/1933
86 An Ordinance authorizing the grading,
opening and improving of Perkasie Avenue
12/ 21/1933
95 An Ordinance approving the lines, grades and
drainage structures for Penn Dot for Penn
Avenue
2/15/1937
98 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
8/12/1937
100 An Ordinance authorizing the construction of
certain curbs and sidewalks, paving the
shoulders, and paving and grading the
approach along Penn Avenue
8/23/1937
115 An Ordinance authorizing PennDot for the
opening and tearing of all streets
8/13/1946
116 An Ordinance amending the Topographical 12/13/1946
A-18
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
128 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
10/21/1952
139 An Ordinance opening the Alley between
Perkasie and Woodside
2/15/1955
143 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
12/20/1955
148 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
10/16/1956
153 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
removing portions of Fairview Street, Noble
Street and Riegel Avenue
9/2/1958
174 An Ordinance laying out and opening a street
North of Penn Avenue between Telford
Avenue and Perkasie Avenue
8/2/1960
177 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
9/20/1960
197 An Ordinance approving the grades and
structures for Penn Dot for the improvement
of Penn Avenue
6/10/1963
228 An Ordinance amending the Topographical
Survey of the Borough of West Lawn
6/1/1971
240 An Ordinance amending the description of the
opened unnamed alley south of Penn Avenue
between Woodside Avenue and Perkasie
Avenue
4/2/1974
247 An Ordinance closing a portion of Westfield
Avenue for Park purposes
3/4/1975
A -20
APPENDIX H
Taxes
Ordinance No. Description Date
6 Real Estate Mills for 1924 5/7/1924
25 Real Estate Mills for 1925 7/15/1925
35 Real Estate Mills for 1926 5/19/1926
47 Real Estate Mills for 1927 2/2/1927
62 Real Estate Mills for 1928 2/15/1928
68A Real Estate Mills for 1929 2/6/1929
78 Real Estate Mills for 1930 2/5/1930
79 Real Estate Mills for 1931 2/4/1931
81 Real Estate Mills for 1932 3/2/1932
82 Real Estate Mills for 1933 2/1/1933
87 Real Estate Mills for 1934 2/1.3/1934
92 Real Estate Mills for 1935 2/6/1935
93 Real Estate Mills for 1936 2/27/1936
96 Real Estate Mills for 1937 / /
102 Real Estate Mills for 1938 2/3/1938
103 Real Estate Mills for 1939 2/7/1939
104 Real Estate Mills for 1940 2/5/1940
106 Real Estate Mills for 1941 3/5/1941
107 Real Estate Mills for 1942 2/3/1942
A-21
108 Real Estate Mills for 1943 2/23/1943
111 Real Estate Mills for 1944 3/16/1944
112 Real Estate Mills for 1945 2/6/1945
113 Real Estate Mills for 1946 3/5/1946
117 Real Estate Mills for 1947 2/14/1947
120 Real Estate Mills for 1948 2/14/1948
122 Real Estate Mills for 1949 2/1/1949
124 Real Estate Mills for 1950 3/14/1960
126 Real Estate Mills & Per Capita for 1951 4/3/1951
127 Real Estate Mills & Per Capita for 1952 3/4/1952
131 Real Estate Mills & Per Capita for 1953 3/17/1953
133 Real Estate Mills & Per Capita for 1954 3/2/1954
140 Real Estate Mills & Per Capita for 1955 4/5/1955
145 Real Estate Mills & Per Capita for 1956 3/20/1956
149 Real Estate Mills & Per Capita for 1957 4/2/1957
152 Real Estate Mills & Per Capita for 1958 2/18/1958
161 Real Estate Mills & Per Capita for 1959 3/2/1959
169 Real Estate Mills for 1960 3/1/1960
170 Per Capita for 1960 3/1/1960
171 Real Estate Transfer Tax for 1960 4/8/1960
181 Real Estate Mills for 1961 2/7/1961
182 Per Capita for 1961 2/7/1961
183 Real Estate Transfer tax for 1961 2/7/1961
187 Real Estate Mills for 1962 2/6/1962
188 Per Capita for 1962 2/6/1962
189 Real Estate Transfer Tax for 1962 2/6/1962
192 Real Estate Mills for 1963 3/18/1963
193 Per Capita for 1963 3/18/1963
194 Real Estate Transfer Tax for 1963 3/18/1963
200 Real Estate Transfer Tax for 1964 2/4/1964
A-22
201 Per Capita for 1964 2/4/1964
202 Real Estate Mills for 1964 3/3/1964
203 Real Estate Mills for 1965 3/4/1965
204 Real Estate Transfer Tax for 1965 3/2/1965
205 Per Capita for 1965 3/4/1965
206 Real Estate Transfer Tax for 1966 11/ 22/1965
207 Per Capita for 1966 11/22/1965
208 Real Estate Mills for 1966 3/1/1966
209 Per Capita for 1966 3/1/1966
210 Real Estate Transfer Tax for 1966 3/1/1966
213 Per Capita for 1967 12/6/1966
214 Real Estate Transfer Tax for 1967 12/6/1966
216 Real Estate Mills for 1967 3/7/1967
221 Real Estate Mills for 1968 12/5/1967
223 Real Estate Mills for 1969 12/30/1968
224 Real Estate Mills for 1970 12/30/1969
227 Real Estate Mills for 1971 11/3/1970
231 Real Estate Mills for 1972 12/7/1971
236 Real Estate Mills for 1973 12/19/1972
238 Real Estate Mills for 1974 12/27/1973
244A Real Estate Mills for 1975 12/26/1974
250 Real Estate Mills for 1976 12/30/1975
254 Real Estate Mills for 1978 12/27/1977
262 Real Estate Mills for 1977 12/7/1976
264 Real Estate Mills for 1979 12/5/1978
268 Real Estate Mills for 1980 12/27/1979
270 Real Estate Mills for 1981 12/29/1980
277 Real Estate Mills for 1982 12/ /1981
279 Real Estate Mills for 1983 12/27/1982
282 Real Estate Mills for 1984 12/29/1983
A -23
287 Real Estate Mills for 1985 12/27/1984
291 Real Estate Mills for 1986 2/3/1986
293 Real Estate Mills for 1987 12/1/1986
294 Real Estate Mills for 1988 12/28/1987
297 Real Estate Mills for 1989 12/29/1988
301 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1990 12/28/1989
302 Real Estate Mills for 1990 12/28/1989
304 Real Estate Mills for 1991 12/27/1990
305 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1991 12/27/1990
311 Real Estate Mills for 1992 12/30/1991
312 Recycling Tax for 1992 3/3/1992
314 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1992 3/3/1992
315 Real Estate Mills for 1993 12/28/1992
316 Recycling Tax for 1993 12/28/1992
317 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1993 12/28/1992
320 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1994 12/7/1993
321 Recycling Tax for 1994 12/7/1993
322 Real Estate Mills for 1994 12/27/1993
327 Real Estate Mills for 1995 12/28/1994
328 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1995 12/28/1994
329 Recycling Tax for 1995 12/28/1994
336 Real Estate Mills for 1996 12/28/1995
337 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1996 12/28/1995
338 Recycling Tax for 1996 12/2/1995
339 Real Estate Mills for 1997 12/30/1996
340 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1997 12/30/1996
341 Recycling Tax for 1997 12/30/1996
344 Real Estate Mills for 1998 12/30/1997
345 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1998 12/30/1997
346 Recycling Tax for 1998 12/30/1997
A -24
347 Real Estate Mills for 1999 12/30/1998
348 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 1999 12/30/1998
349 Recycling Tax for 1999 12/30/1998
350 Real Estate Mills for 2000 12/30/1999
351 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 2000 12/ 30/1999
352 Recycling Tax for 2000 12/30/1999
356 Garbage and Refuse Tax for 2001 12/ 28/ 2000
357 Recycling Tax for 2001 12/ 28/ 2000
358 Real Estate Mills for 2001 12/ 28/ 2000
363 Real Estate Mills, Per Capita, Real Estate
Transfer Tax, Occupational Privilege and
Trash for 2002
12/ 27/ 2001
366 Real Estate Mills, Fire Protection Services,
Emergency Medical Services, Per Capita,
Real Estate Transfer Tax, Occupational
Privilege and Trash for 2003
12/30/2002
370 Real Estate Mills, Fire Protection Services,
Emergency Medical Services, Per Capita,
Real Estate Transfer Tax, Occupational
Privilege and Trash for 2004
Real Estate Mills, Fire Protection Services,
Emergency Medical Services, Per Capital,
Real Estate Transfer Tax, Occupational
Privilege and Trash for 2005
12/ 30/ 2003
375 12/30/2004