Municipal Code
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
1:1

ARTICLE I
Elected Officials
DIVISION 1
Township Supervisors
§ 1-101. Compensation of Township Supervisors. [Ord. No.
128-1986, § 1, 1/11/1986]
Beginning on the first day of January 1986 the compensation of all Township
Supervisors of the Township of South Hanover shall be the maximum
amount permitted as the general assembly may from time to time
determine, except as restricted by provisions of Section 515 of the Second
Class Township Code.
§ 1-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-101
1:3

DIVISION 2
Tax Collector
§ 1-111. Tax Collector's compensation. [Ord. No. 2-1997, §§ 1, 2, 2/
11/1997]
1. The elected Tax Collector of the Township of South Hanover shall be
entitled to receive as compensation for the collection of Township taxes
and assessments a commission on all such taxes and assessments
collected by said Tax Collector in an amount equal to 5% of the amount
collected with regard to the following taxes and assessments:
A. Real estate tax for general Township purposes.
B. Real estate assessment for fire protection purposes.
C. Real estate assessment for fire hydrant service.
D. Per capita tax.
E. Real estate assessment for streetlight service.
2. This section shall be effective commencing with the first day of the term
of the Tax Collector elected at the November, 1997, general municipal
election and shall continue in full force and effect thereafter.
§ 1-111 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-111
1:5

ARTICLE II
Appointed Officials
DIVISION 1
Township Manager
§ 1-201. Creation of the office. [Ord. No. 88-1978, § 1, 9/12/1978]
The office of Township Manager is hereby created.
§ 1-202. Appointment and removal. [Ord. No. 88-1978, § 1, 9/12/
1978]
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all
the members of the Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board of Supervisors and he may be removed at any time
by a majority vote of all its members. At least 30 days before such removal
becomes effective, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the Manager with
notice of its intention to remove him.
§ 1-203. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 88-1978, § 3, 9/12/1978; Ord. No.
126-1984, § 1, 9/25/1984]
The Manager shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience in or
his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office as
herein outlined.
§ 1-204. Manager's bond. [Ord. No. 88-1978, § 4, 9/12/1978]
Before entering upon his duties the Manager shall give a bond to the
Township with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Board
of Supervisors in such sum as it may require, as fixed by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors from time to time, condition for the faithful
performance of his duties. The premium shall be paid by the Township.
§ 1-205. Manager's compensation. [Ord. No. 88-1978, § 5, 9/12/
1978]
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Board.
§ 1-206. Powers and duties of the Manager. [Ord. No. 88-1978, § 6,
9/12/1978; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and he shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a whole for
the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township.
His powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all
Township business not expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon
other Township officers.
§ 1-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-206
1:7
2. Subject to recall by ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, the powers
and duties of the Township Manager shall include the following:
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
Township departments.
B. He shall make recommendations to hire and, when necessary for
the good of the service, shall recommend suspension or discharge
of all employees under his supervision, provided that persons
covered by any civil service provisions of the Second Class
Township Code shall be hired, suspended or discharged in
accordance with such provisions.
C. He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors 45 days
before the close of the fiscal year, or on such alternate date as the
Board of Supervisors shall determine, a budget for the next fiscal
year and an explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget
the Manager shall obtain from the head of each department,
agency, board or officer, estimates of revenue and expenditures and
other supporting data as he requests. The Manager shall review
such estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget
to the Board of Supervisors. He shall also be responsible to
administer the affairs of the Township within the budget after its
adoption by the Board of Supervisors.
D. He shall hold such other Township offices or head one or more of
the Township departments as the Board of Supervisors may from
time to time direct, including, if appointed, but not limited to,
Township Secretary and Township Treasurer, Township sanitary
sewer system manager and Zoning Officer.
E. He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors and its
committees with the right to take part in the discussion and he
shall receive notice of all special meetings of the Board of
Supervisors or its committees.
F. He shall prepare the agenda of each meeting of the Board of
Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
G. He shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the conduct
of Township affairs; submit monthly reports on the condition of the
Township finances and such other reports as the Board of
supervisor's requests; and make such recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors as he deems necessary.
H. He shall submit to the Board of Supervisors, as soon as possible
after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the financial
and administrative activities of the Township for the preceding
year.
I. He shall see the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Township are observed.
§ 1-206 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 1-206
1:8
§ 1-207. Disability or absence of the Manager. [Ord. No. 88-1978,
§ 7, 9/12/1978]
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Township, the
Board of Supervisors shall designate one of their members to be secretarytreasurer
of the Township, if the Township Manager has also been
appointed secretary-treasurer by resolution of the Board. The other duties
of the Township Manager shall be performed by another employee of the
Township designated by the Township Manager, if able, but the person so
designated shall not perform these duties for a period longer than two
weeks without the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
J. He may employ, by and with approval of the Board of Supervisors,
experts and consultants to perform work and to advise in
connection with any of the functions of the Township.
K. He shall attend to the letting of contracts, with prior approval of
the majority of the Board of Supervisors, in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some
other Township officer by statute.
L. He shall see that all money owed the Township is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all the Township's claims.
M. He shall be the purchasing officer of the Township and he shall
purchase, subject to prior approval of a majority of the Board of
Supervisors and in accordance with the provisions of the Second
Class Township Code, all supplies and equipment for the various
agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the Township.
He shall keep an account of all purchases and shall, from time to
time, or when directed by the Board of Supervisors, make a full
written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and regulations,
subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors for the use of
Township buildings and equipment. Notwithstanding anything
herein contained to the contrary, the Township Manager shall not
have the power and authority to make purchases or to enter into
contracts except with the prior approval of the majority of the
Board of Supervisors.
N. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township
shall be referred to the office of the manager. He, or an officer
designated by him, shall investigate and dispose of such
complaints, and the manager shall report thereon to the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 1-206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-207
1:9

ARTICLE III
Planning Commission
§ 1-301. Planning Commission established. [Ord. No. 7-1972, 3/13/
1972]
A Township Planning Commission, composed of five members, appointed in
the manner provided by law, is hereby created and established in and for the
Township of South Hanover. The said Planning Commission may exercise all
powers and shall perform all the duties vested by law in planning agencies
in Townships of the second class. Provided, the persons constituting the
Township Planning Commission now functioning in the Township shall
constitute the Planning Commission hereby created, and nothing in this
article shall affect the tenure of any member of the said present Planning
Commission but all vacancies hereafter occurring in the said Planning
Commission, regardless of the cause thereof, shall be filled according to the
provisions of the law governing planning agencies in Townships at the time
of the occurrence of such vacancy.
§ 1-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-301
1:11

ARTICLE IV
Sewer Authority
§ 1-401. Intent to organize authority. [Ord. No. 60-1976, § 1, 9/28/
1976]
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies the intention and desire
to organize an authority under the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and supplemented (the "Act"), for
the purpose of acquiring, holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and
operating, owning, leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers,
sewer systems or parts thereof, and sewage treatment works, including
works for treating and disposing of industrial waste, and exercising any and
all powers conferred by said Act which are necessary to accomplish such
purpose.
§ 1-402. Execution of Articles of Incorporation. [Ord. No. 60-1976,
§ 2, 9/28/1976]
The Chairman or vice Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the
secretary, respectively, of this Township are authorized and directed to
execute, on behalf of this Township, Articles of Incorporation for said
authority, in substantially the following form:
Articles of Incorporation
To: The Secretary of The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Act of May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as
amended and supplemented, and pursuant to an ordinance enacted by the
municipal authorities of the Township of South Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, expressing the intention and desire of such municipal
authorities to organize an authority under said Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented, the incorporating municipality
does certify:
A. The name of the Authority is "South Hanover Township Municipal
Authority."
B. The Authority is formed under said Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, as amended and supplemented.
C. No other Authority has been organized under said Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented, or under
the Pennsylvania Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended and
supplemented, and is in existence in or for the incorporating
municipality.
D. The name of the incorporating municipality is:
Township of South Hanover
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania
§ 1-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-402
1:13
E. The names and addresses of the municipal authorities of said
incorporating municipality are: [Here followed the names and
addresses of the municipal authorities.]
F. The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members
of the Board of the Authority, each of whom is a resident and citizen
of said incorporating municipality, are as follows: [Here followed the
names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board
of the Authority.]
G. The Authority is formed for the purpose of acquiring, holding,
constructing, improving, maintaining and operating, owning, leasing,
either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or
parts thereof, and sewage treatment works, including works for
treating and disposing of industrial waste, and exercising any and all
powers conferred by said Act which are necessary to accomplish such
purpose.
§ 1-403. Notice. [Ord. No. 60-1976, § 3, 9/28/1976]
The Chairman or vice Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the
secretary, respectively, of this Township further are directed to cause notice
of the substance of this article, including the substance of the foregoing
Articles of Incorporation, and of the proposed filing of such Articles of
Incorporation to be published as required by the Act.
§ 1-404. Filing responsibilities. [Ord. No. 60-1976, § 4, 9/28/1976]
The Chairman or vice Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the
secretary, respectively, of this Township further are directed to cause such
Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of publication,
to be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
to do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the
incorporation of such authority, including payment of any filing fees
required in connection therewith.
§ 1-405. Composition and appointment. [Ord. No. 60-1976, § 5, 9/
28/1976]
The following named persons, each of whom is a resident and citizen of
this Township, shall be and they are appointed as the first members of the
Board of the authority, for the following terms of office: [Here followed the
names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board of
the authority.]
§ 1-406. Justification. [Ord. No. 60-1976, § 6, 9/28/1976]
The enactment of this article is deemed necessary for the benefit and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of and
will increase the prosperity of the citizens of this Township.
§ 1-402 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 1-406
1:14
ARTICLE V
Park And Recreation Board
§ 1-501. Short title. [Ord. No. 56-1976, 3/9/1976]
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "South Hanover
Township Park and Recreation Board Ordinance."
§ 1-502. Creation of Park and Recreation Board. [Ord. No. 56-1976,
3/9/1976]
There is hereby created a Park and Recreation Board for the Township of
South Hanover.
§ 1-503. Board membership. [Ord. No. 56-1976, 3/9/1976; Ord. No.
5-2008, § 1, 5/13/2008]
The Board shall be composed of seven members to be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors of South Hanover Township.
§ 1-504. Term of office. [Ord. No. 56-1976, 3/9/1976; Ord. No.
5-2008, § 2, 5/13/2008]
The members so appointed shall serve for terms of five years or until their
successors are appointed, except that the members first appointed shall
be appointed so that the terms of not more than two members expire
annually. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of term shall be
for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments.
§ 1-505. Powers of Board. [Ord. No. 56-1976, 3/9/1976]
The Board shall have the power to provide, conduct, operate, equip and
maintain public park and recreation areas, facilities, and centers subject
to the provisions of this article and the Second Class Township Code,
and any amendments or supplements thereto, and subject to the budget
appropriations made by the Board of Supervisors for the Park and
Recreation Board.
§ 1-506. Service without compensation. [Ord. No. 56-1976, 3/9/
1976]
Members shall serve without pay.
§ 1-507. Rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 56-1976, 3/9/1976]
The Park and Recreation Board have the power to adopt rules and
regulations for the conduct of all business within their jurisdiction, it shall
appoint from its membership a Chairman and such other officers as it may
deem necessary for the orderly procedure of its business, and it may adopt
by-laws, rules and regulations covering its procedure not inconsistent with
§ 1-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-507
1:15
the provisions of the state laws. The Park and Recreation Board shall,
from time to time, make rules governing the operation and conduct of the
recreational facilities operated by the Board. The Board shall hold regular
meetings at such time and place as it may designate.
§ 1-508. Maintenance of Township recreation facilities. [Ord. No.
56-1976, 3/9/1976]
The recreation board shall maintain, operate and supervise the public
parks, playfields and all outdoor and indoor recreation areas and facilities
owned or controlled by the Township of South Hanover.
§ 1-509. Acceptance of gifts; execution of contracts. [Ord. No.
56-1976, 3/9/1976]
The recreation board may accept any grant, gift, bequest or donation of
services, equipment, real estate, or money from any individual or group,
to be used as specified by the donor, or by the terms of acceptance. The
recreation board shall have no authority to enter into any contract or incur
any obligation binding upon the Township of South Hanover, other than
current obligations or contracts to be fully executed within the then current
fiscal year, and all within the budget appropriations made by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 1-510. Appointment of parks and recreation program coordinator.
[Ord. No. 56-1976, 3/9/1976; Ord. No. 5-2008, § 3, 5/13/2008]
The recreation board shall have the power to appoint a parks and recreation
program coordinator who shall possess the necessary qualifications and
who shall have demonstrated by actual work his/her ability to organize and
direct a community recreation system. The recreation board shall also have
the power to appoint such other personnel as may be deemed necessary and
as are recommended by the parks and recreation program coordinator, such
positions and salaries to be approved by the Board of Supervisors of South
Hanover Township.
§ 1-511. Receipt and disbursement of funds. [Ord. No. 56-1976, 3/9/
1976; Ord. No. 5-2008, § 4, 5/13/2008]
Funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors and budgeted to the Park
and Recreation Board shall be disbursed by the fiscal disbursing officer
of the Township of South Hanover upon vouchers issued by the Park and
Recreation Board and within the budget appropriations made by the
Township. All vouchers shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors of
South Hanover Township. Funds received by the recreation board from
sources other than appropriations budgeted by the Township shall be
deposited by the Township Treasurer to the credit and for the use of
the Park and Recreation Board and may be disbursed as the budgeted
appropriations are disbursed, except that funds received by gift, bequest
§ 1-507 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 1-511
1:16
or otherwise shall be disbursed in accordance with the terms of the
acceptance thereof.
§ 1-512. Reports to supervisors required. [Ord. No. 56-1976, 3/9/
1976]
The recreation board shall make full and complete reports to the Board of
Supervisors at least annually and at such other times as may be designated
or requested by the Board of Supervisors. Said report to include an analysis
of the community recreation areas, facilities and leadership, with particular
reference to the extent and adequacy of the program, and its effectiveness
in view of the public expenditure involved and the public needs to be met.
The fiscal year of said recreation board shall conform to that of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 1-513. Power to enforce related laws and ordinances. [Ord. No.
56-1976, 3/9/1976]
That such powers that are now or may hereafter be provided by statute
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or by ordinances of the Township
of South Hanover relating to the development and operation of recreation
systems, public parks, and playgrounds, are hereby vested in the Park and
Recreation Board, to be exercised by it subject to any and all restrictions
contained in such powers and ordinances.
§ 1-514. Penalties. [Ord. No. 94-1979, § 2, 1/16/1979; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-511 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-514
1:17

ARTICLE VI
Emergencies
§ 1-601. Declaration of emergencies. [Ord. No. 73-1977, § 1, 5/24/
1977]
Whenever the Board of Supervisors of the Township of South Hanover
determines that there has been an act of violence; flagrant and substantial
defiance of or resistance to a lawful exercise of public authority; or the
occurrence of a natural disaster and there is therefore good and probable
cause to believe there exists a clear and present danger of a riot, civil
disorder or other general public disorder, widespread disobedience of law
and/or substantial injury to persons or property all of which constitute
a threat to public peace or order and/or to the general welfare of the
Township or a part or parts thereof, the Board of Supervisors may declare
that a state of emergency exists within the Township or any part or parts
thereof.
§ 1-602. Filing, publishing and notification. [Ord. No. 73-1977, § 2,
5/24/1977]
Any state of emergency or emergency measure declared or ordered and
promulgated by virtue of the terms of this article shall, as promptly as
practicable, be filed in the office of the Township Secretary and shall be
delivered to appropriate news media for publication and broadcast. To
the extent practicable, the state of emergency shall also be publicized by
other appropriate means, such as by posting, loudspeakers, etc. Such notice
shall announce the declaration of emergency and specifically specify the
emergency measures being taken and to be taken.
§ 1-603. Duration and termination of emergency. [Ord. No. 73-1977,
§ 3, 5/24/1977]
A state of emergency established hereunder shall commence upon
declaration of same by the Board of Supervisors and shall terminate at the
end of the period of three days thereafter unless prior to the end of such
three-day period the Board of Supervisors shall either terminate such state
of emergency or shall declare an additional period of the state of emergency
which shall be specific in its duration and may not exceed the maximum
three days provided originally but may be continued by reissuance so long
as necessary.
§ 1-604. Emergency measures. [Ord. No. 73-1977, § 4, 5/24/1977]
1. Whenever the Board of Supervisors declares that a state of emergency
exists, it may order and promulgate any and all of the emergency
measures provided herein in whole or in part with such limitations and
conditions as it may deem appropriate and upon proper filing,
publishing and notification of such measures by specific
pronouncement thereof and any and all such emergency measures so
§ 1-601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-604
1:19
ordered shall be in effect during the period of the emergency in the
area or areas for which the emergency has been declared.
2. Said emergency measures which may be ordered and promulgated are
as follows:
A. The establishment of curfews, including, but not limited to, the
prohibition of or restrictions on pedestrian and vehicular
movement, standing and parking, except for the provision of
designated essential services, such as, fire, police, hospital
services, utility emergency repairs, calls by physicians, civil
defense, etc.
B. The closing of places of public assemblage with designated
exceptions.
C. The limitation of the number of persons who may gather and/or
congregate upon public highways, public sidewalks or in any other
place with exception for persons awaiting transportation,
peaceably entering or leaving buildings, or engaged in permissible
activities.
D. The prohibition of entry into certain streets and/or areas of the
Township except for those persons living or having business within
said areas or by nature of their positions being therein. Said areas
to be posted and announced with specificity as required under this
article.
E. Prohibitions of possession in public places of weapons, including
but not limited to firearms, rifles, shot guns, bows and arrows, air
rifles, knives, razors, blackjacks, billy clubs, or missiles of any kind,
except by duly authorized law enforcement personnel or persons in
the official performance of duty.
F. Control of vehicular traffic including the necessity to restrict travel
and set up and establish detours or changes in traffic patterns
necessitated by the emergency.
G. The prohibition of the sale of any alcoholic beverage. "Alcoholic
beverage" includes all those beverages for which the right to sell
requires a permit or license from the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board.
H. The prohibition against possession of alcoholic beverages in any
public place, or on public highways or sidewalks.
I. The prohibition against possession of any container containing
gasoline and/or any other flammable or combustible liquid.
J. The prohibition against sale, transfer or distribution, with or
without consideration, of any gasoline and/or flammable or
combustible liquid except by delivery into a tank properly offered to
§ 1-604 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 1-604
1:20
§ 1-605. Penalties. [Ord. No. 73-1977, § 5, 5/24/1977; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
an operative motor driven vehicle which is for necessary propulsion
thereof.
K. The prohibition against the sale, transfer or distribution, with or
without consideration, of any guns, firearms, ammunition, or the
offer to sell, transfer or distribute same.
§ 1-604 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-605
1:21

ARTICLE VII
Firemen's Relief Association
§ 1-701. Recognition of firemen's relief association. [Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 1-702. Certification to auditor general. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
The Board of Supervisors shall annually certify to the auditor general of the
Commonwealth, the name of the active association and the percentage of
service they contribute to the protection of the Township. Such certification
shall be on forms prescribed by the auditor general.
§ 1-703. Annual appropriation. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
There is annually appropriated from the Township treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Township treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of the Act of
December 18, 1984, No. 205, Section 701 et seq., as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. Such monies received by the Township Treasurer from the
state treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association within
60 days of receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the
percentage of service established in the certification to the auditor general
and with other provisions of the Act.
1. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Township:
Union Deposit Firemen's Relief Association.
The above named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
2. The above named association of the Township is designated the proper
association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the
Township Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from
the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 1-701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-703
1:23

ARTICLE VIII
Attorneys' Fees For Collection Of Municipal Claims And Liens
§ 1-801. Attorneys' fees. [Ord. No. 3-2003, § 1, 4/8/2003; as
amended by Ord. No. 3-2018, 4/24/2018]
§ 1-802. Notification of collection of fees. [Ord. No. 3-2003, § 2, 4/8/
2003]
At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney's fees in the
connection with the collection of a delinquent account under this article, the
Township shall, by United States certified mail, return receipt requested,
postage prepaid, mail to the owner the notice required by Subsection
(a.1)(4) of 53 P.S. § 7106.
1. Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Lien Act as set forth in 53
P.S. § 7106(a.1), the Township of South Hanover hereby adopts the
following schedule of attorneys' fees where attorneys' fees are sought
to be collected in connection with the collection of a delinquent account
involving a municipal claim or lien:
A. Fee for the preparation and filing of a municipal lien with the
Prothonotary: $350.
B. Fee for the preparation of the writ of scire facias and arranging for
service of the same by the County Sheriff: $350.
C. Preparation of the advertisement for service by publication and
filing proof of the same: $350.
D. Fee for entry of judgment: $350.
E. Fee for preparation and service of the writ of execution: $350 or
10% of the amount of the claim, whichever is greater.
§ 1-801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-802
1:25

ARTICLE IX
Open Records Policy
§ 1-901. Requests for public records. [Res. No. 3-2003, 1/21/2003]
§ 1-902. Fees for copies and other media. [Res. No. 3-2003, 1/21/
2003]
§ 1-903. Response to record requests. [Res. No. 3-2003, 1/21/2003]
1. Public records will be available for inspection and copying at the
Township Municipal Building during normal business hours, Monday
through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., prevailing time, with the
exception of Township holidays.
2. All requests for public records shall be in writing and directed to the
Township Secretary at the South Hanover Township Municipal
Building, 111 West Third Street, Union Deposit, Hershey, PA 17033.
3. Written requests shall be on a form provided by the Township and shall
include the date of the request, the name and address of the requester
and a clear and specific description of the records requested.
1. Paper copies will be $0.10 per page per side with the first 10 copies free
of charge.
2. If mailing is requested, the actual cost of postage will be charged.
3. If a diskette is requested, the Township at the cost of $1 per diskette
will provide it. A new diskette will be provided for each record request.
4. Fax copies will be available at the cost of $0.50 per page.
5. If "true and correct certification" is requested, an additional charge of
$10 will be added.
6. If additional costs in complying with any request are incurred, other
reasonable fees may be assessed, such as custodial responsibilities
during review of the records to assure that the records are not
tampered with or removed from Township files. The custodial fees will
be charged at 1 1/2 times the record custodian's normal rate of pay,
calculated on an hourly basis, at 15 minute intervals rounded to the
next higher interval.
7. The Township will review the request and estimate the fees for the
requester and will require a deposit in the amount of the estimated fees
are expected to exceed $100. The Township will refund any excess
deposit upon completion of the records request.
1. The Township staff will make a good-faith effort to provide the
requested public records as promptly as feasible.
§ 1-901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-903
1:27
§ 1-904. Denial of a request and appeals process. [Res. No. 3-2003,
1/21/2003]
A. Township employees shall cooperate with those requesting to
review and/or duplicate original Township documents while taking
reasonable measures to protect Township documents from the
possibility of theft and/or modification.
B. The Township Secretary shall review all written requests for access
to public records.
C. As soon as possible, but no later than five business days after
receiving a written request to access public records, the Township
Secretary shall respond to all such requests in accordance with the
requirements of Act 100 of 2002, the Open Records Law.
D. The Township Secretary will consult the Township Solicitor if it is
believed that the release of a requested record or portions thereof
are not public records.
E. The Township Secretary will not create a record that does not exist
or put a document into a format that does not exist.
F. If part of a record or document is public and part of it is not, the
Township may remove portions of a record that are not public
information and the Township Secretary will provide a written
denial in accordance with § 1-904 below for any removed portions
of the document.
G. South Hanover Township may have up to 30 additional days to
respond to a request if it must remove portions of a record that are
not public, retrieve records not stored on site, obtain a legal review
of the records requested, is experiencing a bona fide staffing
shortage or if the requester has not complied with municipal
policies for records access. If the additional days are needed, the
Township must notify the requester of the delay in writing within
the first five business days of receiving the request.
1. The Township will deny a request for a document if that document is not
a public document. All denials will be provided in writing, even if only a
portion of the document is denied or removed. The written denial must
include the following:
A. A description of the record;
B. The specific reasons for the denial, including legal citations and, if
applicable, reasons from a legal opinion of why a record is not
public;
C. The typed or printed name, title, business address, business
telephone number and signature of the Township official denying
the request;
§ 1-903 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 1-904
1:28
D. The date of the denial; and
E. The appeal procedure for filing exceptions and taking an appeal as
provided in Act 100 of 2002 (Sections 3.5 and 4).
2. If a written request is denied or deemed denied, the requester may file
written exceptions with the Board of Supervisors within 15 business
days of the mailing date of the Township's denial. The exceptions shall
state grounds on which the requester asserts that the record is a public
record and shall address any grounds stated by the Township for
denying the request.
3. Upon receipt of an exception of denial from a requestor in accordance
with the requirements above, the Board of Supervisors will address the
exception at a regularly scheduled meeting. The Board of Supervisors
shall make a final determination on the exceptions within 30 days of the
mailing date of the exceptions. The Board of Supervisors may hold a
hearing on the issue during the 30 days. If the Board determines that
the denial was correct, it must provide a written explanation to the
requester.
4. The requester may appeal a final determination to the Court of Common
Pleas Court of Dauphin County or may bring an action in the local
magisterial district within 30 days of the mailing date of a final
determination.
§ 1-904 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1-904
1:29
Chapter 2
ANIMALS
§ 1-904 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 1-904
1:30
ARTICLE I
Noise Disturbances
§ 2-101. Unlawful noise. [Ord. No. 3-1994, § 1, 8/9/1994]
Pursuant to Article 7, § 702, Clause LXII, of the Second Class Township
Code, it shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, custodian or keeper
of any dog or other animal to permit said animal to make any loud or
harsh noise or other disturbance which shall interfere with or result in
deprivation of the peace, quiet, rest or sleep of any reasonable person of
normal sensitivities, if said noise or disturbance is continuous or incessant
during a period in excess of 10 minutes or is made intermittently for onehalf
hour or more or is continuous or incessant during a period in excess of
five minutes on more than two occasions during an eight-hour period.
§ 2-102. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 3-1994, § 2, 8/9/1994]
§ 2-103. Penalties. [Ord. No. 3-1994, § 3, 8/9/1994; Ord. No. 3-1995,
9/12/1995]
Every person who violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $600, plus costs
of prosecution for each offense. Each and every calendar day upon which
any person permits the violation of this article to occur shall constitute a
separate offense; provided, however, that the minimum fine shall be no less
than $25 for a second offense, $50 for a third offense and $100 for the
fourth and each subsequent offense. In addition, if the owner, possessor,
custodian or keeper of said animal has been advised of the disturbance and
fails to take adequate measures within 10 minutes of receipt of said notice
to bring said disturbance under control for an uninterrupted period of at
least eight hours, an additional fine of $50 shall be added to the minimal fine
otherwise required herein, the total of any such fines not to exceed $600.
1. This article shall not apply to the following situations:
A. Where, at the time the animal is making such noise or disturbance,
a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private
property in or upon which the animal is situated.
B. Where a neighbor or other person has intentionally incited said
animal to make such noise or other disturbance.
C. Where such animal is situated more than 500 feet from the person
who claims to be so disturbed.
§ 2-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 2-103
1:31
Chapter 3
(RESERVED)
Chapter 4
(RESERVED)
Chapter 5
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 2-103 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 2-103
1:32
ARTICLE I
Code Enforcement
§ 5-101. Title, purpose and scope. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § I, 1/26/1999]
1. Title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Code
Enforcement Ordinance of South Hanover Township."
2. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter, the technical codes and any other
codes and ordinances adopted by South Hanover Township.
3. Scope. The provisions of this article shall serve as the administrative,
organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical
codes which regulate the site preparation and construction, alteration,
moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures
and building service equipment and any other codes and ordinances
within South Hanover Township.
4. Definitions. For the purpose of this article, certain terms, phrases,
words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this
section where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily
accepted meanings within the context with which they are used.
Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language,
Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing
ordinarily accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the
plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender
include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure.
ALTER or ALTERATION — Any change or modification in construction
or building service equipment.
APPROVED AGENCY — An established and recognized agency
regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services,
when such agency has been approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
APPROVED AS TO MATERIALS, TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION,
EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS — Refers to approval by the Code
Enforcement Officer as the result of investigation and tests conducted
by him, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized
authorities, technical or scientific organizations.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING CODE — The National Building Code published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., as
adopted by South Hanover Township [Article II].
BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT — Refers to the plumbing,
mechanical, electrical and elevator equipment including piping, wiring,
§ 5-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-101
1:33
fixtures and other accessories which provide sanitation, lighting,
heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, fire fighting and
transportation facilities essential for the habitable occupancy of the
building or structure for its designated use and occupancy.
BUILDING, EXISTING — A building erected prior to the adoption of this
Code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or other designated
authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this
article, or his duly authorized representative.
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS — All of the written graphic and
pictorial documents prepared or assembled for describing the design,
location, and physical characteristics of the elements of the project
necessary for obtaining a building permit. The construction drawings
shall be drawn to an appropriate scale.
ELECTRICAL CODE — The National Electrical Code published by the
National Fire Protection Association, as adopted by South Hanover
Township [Article III].
FIRE PREVENTION CODE — The National Fire Prevention Code
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., as adopted by South Hanover Township [Article V].
JURISDICTION — As used in this article is the political subdivision of
South Hanover Township which adopts this article for administrative
regulations within its sphere of authority.
LISTED AND LISTING TERMS — Refer to equipment and materials
which are shown in a list published by an approved testing agency,
qualified and equipped for experimental testing and maintaining an
adequate periodic inspection of current productions and whose listing
states that the equipment complies with recognized safety standards.
MECHANICAL CODE — The National Mechanical Code published by
the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., as
adopted by South Hanover Township.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is
used or intended to be used.
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property.
PERMIT — An official document or certificate issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer authorizing performance of a specified activity.
PERSON — A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PLUMBING CODE — The National Plumbing Code published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., as
adopted by South Hanover Township [Article IV].
§ 5-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-101
1:34
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE — The National Property
Maintenance Code published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., as adopted by South Hanover
Township [Article VI].
REPAIR — The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
building, structure or building service equipment for the purpose of its
maintenance.
SHALL — As used in this article, is mandatory.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For purposes of implementation of this
article and of those other applicable technical codes and ordinances,
construction shall be considered to have started with first placement
of permanent construction on the site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, an edifice or
building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
TECHNICAL CODES — Those codes adopted by South Hanover
Township containing the provisions for design, construction, alteration,
addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
maintenance of all buildings and structures and building service
equipment as herein defined.
VALUATION or VALUE — As applied to a building and its building
service equipment, shall be the estimated cost to replace the building
and its building service equipment in kind, based on current
replacement costs.
5. Application to existing buildings and building service equipment.
A. General. Buildings, structures and their building service equipment
to which additions, alterations or repairs are made shall comply
with all the requirements of the technical codes for new facilities,
except as specifically provided in this section.
B. Additions, alterations or repairs.
(1) Additions, alterations or repairs may be made to any building
or its building service equipment without requiring the existing
building or its building service equipment to comply with all
the requirements of the technical codes, provided the addition,
alteration or repair conforms to that required for a new
building or building service equipment, and the entire existing
building complies with all the requirements for means of
egress and fire protection systems in the latest edition of the
Township's Building Code [Article II] for new buildings.
Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing
building or building service equipment which will cause the
existing building or building service equipment to be in
violation of any of the provisions of the technical codes nor
§ 5-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-101
1:35
shall such additions or alterations cause the existing building
or building service equipment to become unsafe. An unsafe
condition shall be deemed to have been created if an addition
or alteration will cause the existing building or building service
equipment to become structurally unsafe or overloaded; will
not provide adequate egress in compliance with the provisions
of the building code or will obstruct existing exits; will create
a fire hazard; will reduce required fire resistance; will cause
building service equipment to become overloaded or exceed
their rated capacities; will create a health hazard or will
otherwise create conditions dangerous to human life. Any
building so altered, which involves a change in use or
occupancy, shall not exceed the height, number of stories and
area permitted, and shall comply with all the requirements for
means of egress and fire protection systems of the building
code for new buildings. Any building plus new additions shall
not exceed the height, number of stories and area specified by
the building code for new buildings. Additions or alterations
shall not be made to an existing building or structure when
such existing building or structure is not in full compliance
with the provisions of the building code except when such
addition or alteration will result in the existing building or
structure being no more hazardous based on life safety, fire
safety and sanitation, than before such additions or alterations
are undertaken.
(2) Alterations or repairs to an existing building or structure which
are nonstructural and do not adversely affect any structural
member or any part of the building or structure having
required fire resistance may be made with the same materials
of which the building or structure is constructed, subject to
approval by the Code Enforcement Officer. The installation or
replacement of glass shall be as required for new installations.
(3) Minor additions, alterations and repairs to existing building
service equipment installations may be made in accordance
with the technical code in effect at the time the original
installations was made, subject to approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer and provided such additions, alterations
and repairs will not cause the existing building service
equipment to become unsafe, insanitary or overloaded.
C. Existing installations. Building service equipment lawfully in
existence at the time of the adoption of the technical codes may
have their use, maintenance or repair continued if the use,
maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and
no hazard to life, health or property has been created by such
building service equipment.
D. Existing occupancy.
§ 5-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-101
1:36
(1) Buildings in existence at the time of the adoption of the
building code may have their existing use or occupancy
continued if such use or occupancy was legal at the time of the
adoption of the building code, provided the building is
occupied and such continued use is not dangerous to life,
health and safety.
(2) Any change in the use or occupancy of any existing building or
structure shall comply with the provisions of § 1-511,
Subsection 2, of this article and the building code [Article II].
E. Maintenance. All buildings, structures and building service
equipment, existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or
safeguards which are required by the technical codes shall be
maintained in conformance with the technical code under which
installed. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible
for the maintenance of buildings, structures and their building
service equipment. To determine compliance with this subsection,
the Code Enforcement Officer may cause any structure to be
reinspected.
F. Moved buildings and temporary buildings.
(1) Buildings, structures and their building service equipment
moved into or within South Hanover Township shall comply
with the provisions of the technical codes for new buildings or
structures and their building service equipment.
(2) Temporary structures such as reviewing stands and other
miscellaneous structures, sheds, canopies or fences used for
the protection of the public around and in conjunction with
construction work may be erected by special permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer for a limited period of time.
Temporary buildings or structures shall be completely
removed upon the expiration of the time limit stated in the
permit.
G. Historic buildings. Repairs, alterations and additions necessary for
the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation or continued use of a
building, structure or its building service equipment may be made
without conformance to all the requirements of the technical codes
when authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer provided:
(1) The building or structure has been designated by of official
action of the legally constituted authority of this jurisdiction as
having special historical or architectural significance.
(2) Any unsafe conditions as described in this article are
corrected.
§ 5-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-101
1:37
§ 5-102. Establishment of the Department of Code Enforcement.
[Ord. No. 2-1999, § II, 1/26/1999]
(3) The restored building or structure and its building service
equipment will be no more hazardous based on life safety, fire
safety and sanitation than the existing building.
H. Vacant building. Buildings or structures vacant for one year or
more shall comply with the adopted edition of the Township's
building code [Article II] for fire protection systems, means of
egress requirements and electrical wiring equipment and systems
before being re-occupied.
1. Creation of the Department of Code Enforcement. There is hereby
created by the Board of Supervisors, a department of South Hanover
Township, to be known as the "Department of Code Enforcement,"
which shall be under the administrative and operational control of the
Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
responsibility for administrating and enforcing the provisions of this
article, the technical codes and those other codes and/or ordinances of
the Township herein referred to as the "applicable codes and
ordinances," which designate said Department of Code Enforcement as
their official administrative and enforcement authority.
2. General. Whenever the term or title "administrative authority,"
"responsible officer," "officer," "Building Official," "code official," "Chief
Inspector," "Code Enforcement Officer" or other similar designation is
used herein or in any of the technical codes, it shall be construed to
mean the Code Enforcement Officer appointed by the Board of
Supervisors of South Hanover Township.
3. Department records. An official record shall be kept of all business and
activities of the Department of Code Enforcement and all such records
shall be open to the public for inspection at all appropriate times,
except that no individual, owner, operator, occupant or other person
shall be subject to unwarranted invasion of privacy, and except that all
evidence or information obtained in the course of any inspection shall
be considered privileged information and shall be kept confidential in
order to maintain the integrity and security of such records. Such
evidence or information shall not be disclosed except as may be
necessary in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer for the
proper and effective administration and enforcement of the provisions
of this article and shall not otherwise, be made public without the
consent of the owner, occupant, operator or other person in charge of
the unit, structure or premises inspected. Such records shall be
retained in the official records so long as the building or structure to
which they relate remains in existence unless otherwise provided by
other regulations.
§ 5-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-102
1:38
§ 5-103. Enforcement authority. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § III, 1/26/1999]
4. Annual report. At least annually, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
submit to the Board of Supervisors a written statement of operations in
the form and content as shall be prescribed by the Board.
1. Appointment of Code Enforcement Officer. There shall be appointed, by
the Board of Supervisors of South Hanover Township, a Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall be in charge of the Department of Code
Enforcement of South Hanover Township. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall supervise such other employees or assistants as shall be
necessary for the administration and execution of the responsibilities of
said department, as appointed and approved by the Board of
Supervisors of South Hanover Township. Said Code Enforcement
Officer and other personnel shall consist of employees directly hired
and compensated by South Hanover Township. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full
opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before
the Board of Supervisors.
2. Relief from personal liability.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer, other official or employee charged
with the administration and enforcement of this article and
technical codes and those other codes and/or ordinances of the
Township who acts in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of duties shall not thereby be rendered liable personally,
and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage
accruing to persons or property as a result of any act required or
omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted
against the Code Enforcement Officer or employee because of such
act or omission performed by that Code Enforcement Officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions
of this article shall be defended by the legal representative of South
Hanover Township until the final termination of the proceedings,
and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by South
Hanover Township. The Code Enforcement Officer or any
subordinate shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or
proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this
article, the technical codes and those other codes and/or
ordinances which designate said Department of Code Enforcement
as their official administration and enforcement authority. Any
officer of the Department of Code Enforcement, acting in good faith
and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed
under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in
the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
B. This article and the technical codes shall not be construed to
relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning,
operating, or controlling a building, structure or building service
equipment therein for damages to persons or property caused by
§ 5-102 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-103
1:39
§ 5-104. Duties and powers of Code Enforcement Officer. [Ord. No.
2-1999, § IV, 1/26/1999]
defects, nor shall the Code Enforcement Officer of South Hanover
Township be held as assuming such liability by reason of the
inspections authorized by this article or technical codes or permits
or certificates issued under said codes.
3. Deputy. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to designate an
employee as deputy who shall exercise all the powers of the Code
Enforcement Officer during the temporary absence or disability of the
Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with prescribed procedures
and with the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
4. Restriction of employees. An official or employee with the Department
of Code Enforcement shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly
connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the
construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the
preparation of plans or of specifications thereof, unless that person is
the owner of the building; nor shall such officer or employee engage in
any work which conflicts with official duties or with interests in the
department.
5. Fire Marshal. In accordance with the fire prevention code of South
Hanover Township [Article V], the Fire Marshal of the Township has
been established as the authorized code official representative from the
Department of Code Enforcement of South Hanover Township having
all of the duties of enforcement of the fire prevention code of the
Township, provided for in this article.
1. Enforcement of codes. The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce and
administer all of the provisions of this article and of those other
applicable technical codes and ordinances which establish the
Department of Code Enforcement as their official administration and
enforcement authority. For such purposes, he shall have the powers of a
law enforcement officer.
2. Duties. The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include: the
receipt of application and issuance of permits for the construction,
erection, addition to, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, installation
of service equipment (plumbing, electrical, mechanical) and the
location, change, use, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and
structures located within or moved into South Hanover Township; the
issuance of all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal or unsafe
condition to insure compliance with this article, and those other
applicable codes and/or ordinances for the safety, health and general
welfare of the public; the making of inspections to determine
compliance with the applicable codes and ordinances; the undertaking
and investigations, and such other activities as may be required.
§ 5-103 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-104
1:40
3. Credentials. The Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized
representative shall disclose proper credentials of their respective
department for the purpose of inspecting any and all buildings and
premises in the performance of duties under the applicable technical
code and/or ordinance where requested.
4. Coordination of enforcement. Whenever in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer, initiating an inspection under the applicable
technical codes and/or ordinances, it is deemed necessary or desirable
to have inspections by any other department, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of
such inspections so as to minimize the number of visitors by Township
officials and to confer with the other departments for the purpose of
eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued. The assistance and
cooperation of all other officials, including police and fire departments,
shall be available to the Code Enforcement Officer to assist in the
performance of his duties.
5. Right of entry. Except in case of an emergency or a mutually convenient
time agreed to by the Code Enforcement Officer and the owner, the
Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative in
discharging his duties has reasonable cause to believe that there exists
in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation
which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous
to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants or the public, upon
showing proper identification where requested, is hereby authorized to
enter and inspect between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., subject
to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures,
any structure or premises in South Hanover Township to enforce the
provisions of this article and of those other applicable codes and
ordinances. Every occupant, owner or operator, of a structure or
premises or their agent or employee, shall give access to any part of
such structure or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of
making such inspection, maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are
necessary to comply with the provisions of this article.
6. Access entry refused. If any owner, operator, occupant or other person
in charge of a structure refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
restricts or obstructs entry and free access to the structure or premises
under his control or to any part thereof, with respect to any authorized
inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer may, upon showing that
probable cause exists for the inspection, file a complaint and may
petition for and obtain an order directing compliance with the
inspection requirements of this article from a court of competent
jurisdiction. Any person who refuses to comply with such an order
issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to such penalties as may
be authorized by law for violation of a court order.
7. Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of the technical codes, the Code
Enforcement Officer may grant modifications for individual cases,
§ 5-104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-104
1:41
provided he shall first find that a special individual reason makes the
strict letter of the technical code impractical and the modification
is in conformity with the intent and purpose of the technical code,
and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety
requirements or any degree of structural integrity. The details of
actions granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the
files of the code enforcement department. If additional nonconforming
conditions are encountered during the course of any approved
alteration or repair which were not considered or known initially, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to require
compliance with this article and other technical codes and/or
ordinances of the Township.
8. Tests.
A. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with any of
the provisions of the technical codes or evidence that materials or
construction do not conform to the requirements of the technical
codes, the Code Enforcement Officer may require tests as evidence
of compliance to be made at no expense to South Hanover
Township.
B. Test methods shall be as specified by the technical codes or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and
accepted test methods for the proposed alternate, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine test procedures.
C. All tests shall be made by an approved agency. Reports of such tests
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer for the period
required for the retention of public records.
9. Alternate materials and methods of construction.
A. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent
the use of any material or to prohibit any method of design or
construction not specifically prescribed by the technical codes,
provided that any such alternative has been approved and its use
authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer may approve an alternate, provided
the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the provisions of the technical codes
and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose
intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical
codes in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability, safety and sanitation.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require that sufficient evidence
or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made
regarding its use. The details of any action granting approval of an
alternate shall be recorded and entered in the files of the code
enforcement department.
§ 5-104 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-104
1:42
§ 5-105. Applications for permits. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § V, 1/26/1999]
10. Approved inspection agencies. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
make all the required inspections or may accept reports of inspections
by authoritative and recognized services or individuals, which satisfy
requirements as to qualifications and reliability. All inspection reports
shall be in writing and shall be certified by the approved authority or
responsible office of the agency or the individual when expert
inspection services are accepted. The Code Enforcement Officer may
engage such expert opinion as may be deemed necessary to report upon
unusual technical issues that may arise subject to the approval of the
appointing authority. When required by the provisions of the code or by
the approved rules, materials or assemblies shall be inspected at the
point of manufacture or fabrication.
11. Third party review. The Code Enforcement Officer may require
electrical drawings and specifications and fire suppression plans and
specifications be reviewed by an approved third party for compliance
with the Township's technical codes and ordinances. A copy of the
review and comments shall be sent to the code enforcement
department upon completion of the review.
1. Permits required.
A. An application for a permit shall be filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer and no work shall be commenced until a
permit has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Except as specified in this article, no building, structure or building
service equipment regulated by this article and the technical codes
shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved,
improved, removed, converted, demolished or changed in use or
occupancy unless a separate, appropriate permit for each building,
structure or building service equipment has first been obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer.
2. Permits not required. A permit shall not be required for the types of
work in each of the separate classes of permit as listed below.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this article shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of
the provisions of the technical codes or any other laws or ordinances of
South Hanover Township.
A. Building permits. A building permit shall not be required for the
following:
(1) Replace or refinish woodwork and trim.
(2) Replace kitchen cabinets/bathroom vanity — Electrical and/or
plumbing required.
(3) Repair or replace vinyl flooring tile and/or carpet.
§ 5-104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-105
1:43
(4) Install vent fans (electrical permit required).
(5) Add built-in bookcases, cabinets or other small storage.
(6) Add closets or shelves.
(7) Paint and/or wallpaper on interior.
(8) Repair plaster or drywall (single-family only).
(9) Scrape and paint exterior.
(10) Any landscaping — Lawns, shrubs, plants.
(11)Window boxes.
(12) Minor repairs or replace porches, decks and steps without
changing size or enclosing.
(13) Repair/replace siding.
(14) Replace gutters and downspouts.
(15) Install storm doors and storm windows.
(16) Install awnings.
(17) Insulation and weatherstrip.
(18) Repair, replace or add window shutters.
(19) Repoint existing masonry.
(20) Replace garage doors.
(21) Install, repair or replace private sidewalks.
(22) Add central air conditioning (electrical permit required).
(23) Private radio and television antennas when less than 12 feet in
height.
(24) Reroofing.
(25) Installation of window blinds.
(26) Private swimming pools less than 24 inches in depth.
(27) Replacement windows of same size with no structural
alterations.
B. Plumbing permits. A plumbing permit shall not be required for the
following:
(1) The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe,
provided, however, that should any concealed trap, drainpipe,
soil, waste or vent pipe become defective and it becomes
§ 5-105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-105
1:44
necessary to remove and replace the same with new material,
the same shall be considered as new work and a permit shall
be procured and inspection made as provided in this Code.
(2) The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves or fixtures, nor for the removal and reinstallation of
water closets, lavatory or bathtub and shower, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
C. Electrical permits. An electrical permit shall not be required for the
following:
(1) Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by
means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be
connected to an approved receptacle when that cord or cable is
permitted by the electrical code.
(2) Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers or fixed
approved appliances of the same type and rating in the same
location.
(3) Temporary decorative lighting.
(4) Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch,
contractor or control device.
(5) Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the
outlets therefor.
(6) Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the
required capacity in the same location.
(7) Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the
same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.
(8) Taping joints.
(9) Removal of electrical wiring.
(10) Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable
experimental laboratories.
(11) The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television
stage sets.
(12) Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying
more than 50 watts of energy.
(13) A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or
repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment or the
generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical
energy or in the operation of signals or the transmission of
§ 5-105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-105
1:45
intelligence by a public or private utility in the exercise of its
function as a serving utility.
D. Mechanical permits. A mechanical permit shall not be required for
the following:
(1) Any portable heating appliance.
(2) Any portable ventilating equipment.
(3) Any portable cooling unit.
(4) Any portable evaporative cooler.
(5) Any closed system of steam, hot or chilled water piping within
any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the mechanical
code.
(6) Replacement of any component part of assembly of an
appliance which does not alter its original approval and
complies with other applicable requirements of the technical
codes.
(7) Any refrigerating equipment which is part of the equipment for
which a permit has been issued pursuant to the requirements
of the technical codes.
(8) Any unit refrigerating system as defined in the mechanical
code.
E. Fire prevention permits. A fire prevention permit shall not be
required for the following:
(1) Airports, heliports, helistops.
(2) Explosives and blasting agents.
3. Application for permit. To obtain a permit, an application for the permit
shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer by the owner or
lessee of the building or structure, or agent of either, or by the
registered design professional employed in connection with the
proposed work in writing on a form furnished by the code enforcement
department for that purpose. If the application is made by a person
other than the owner in fee, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of
the owner or the qualified applicant or a signed statement of the
qualified applicant witnessed by the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee to the effect that the proposed work is authorized by the
owner in fee and that the applicant is authorized to make such
application. The full names and addresses of the owner, lessee,
applicant and the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee is a
corporate body, shall be stated in the application. Every such
application shall:
§ 5-105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-105
1:46
A. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made.
B. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by
legal description, street address or similar description that will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
C. Indicate the use or occupancy of all parts of the building or
structure for which the proposed work is intended and of all
portions of the site or lot not covered by the building or structure.
D. Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and
specifications and other data as required in Subsection 5 of this
section.
E. State the valuation of any new building or structure or any
addition, remodeling or alteration to an existing building.
F. Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent.
G. Include provisions for special inspections required by the
Township's building code [Article II].
H. Give such other data and information as may be required by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
4. Permit responsibility. The responsibility for applying for and obtaining a
required permit rests jointly with the owner or occupant and the person
or persons doing the work. The full name and address of the owner,
lessee, applicant, and/or the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee
is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
5. Construction documents.
A. Plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams, soil
investigation reports, special inspections and other data shall
constitute the construction documents and shall be submitted in
one or more sets with each application for a permit. All
construction documents required for a building permit application
shall be prepared by a registered design professional consistent
with the professional registration laws of the State of Pennsylvania.
The construction documents shall include the name and address of
the registered design professional and shall be signed, sealed and
dated by the registered design professional in accordance with the
professional registration laws of the State of Pennsylvania. When
the quality of the materials is essential for conformity to the
technical codes, specific information shall be given to establish
such quality, and the technical codes shall not be cited, or the term
"legal" or its equivalent used as a substitute for specific
information.
B. Exception. The Code Enforcement Officer may waive the
submission of plans, calculations, construction inspection
§ 5-105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-105
1:47
requirements and other data if it is found that the nature of the
work applied for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this Code.
6. Architect or engineer of record.
A. General.
(1) When it is required that documents be prepared by an
architect or engineer, the Code Enforcement Officer may
require the owner to engage and designate on the building
permit application an architect or engineer who shall act as the
architect or engineer of record. If the circumstances require,
the owner may designate a substitute architect or engineer of
record who shall perform all of the duties required of the
original architect or engineer of record. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be notified in writing by the owner if the architect
or engineer of record is changed or is unable to continue to
perform the duties.
(2) The architect or engineer of record shall be responsible for
reviewing and coordinating all construction documents
prepared by others, including deferred construction items, for
compatibility with the design of the building.
B. Deferred submittals.
(1) For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are
defined as construction documents for those portions of the
design which are not submitted at the time of the application
and which are to be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer
within a specified period.
(2) Deferral of any submittal items shall have prior approval of the
Code Enforcement Officer. The architect or engineer of record
shall list the deferred submittals on the plans and shall submit
the deferred construction documents for review by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(3) Submittal documents for deferred submittal items shall be
submitted to the architect or engineer of record who shall
review them and forward them to the Code Enforcement
Officer with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal
documents have been reviewed and that they have been found
to be in general conformance with the design of the building.
The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until their
design and submittal documents have been approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
7. Site plan. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a site
plan showing to scale the size and location of all the new construction
and all existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the
§ 5-105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-105
1:48
established street grades and the proposed finished grades; and it shall
be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In case
of demolition, the site plan shall show all construction to be demolished
and the location and size of all existing structures and construction
that are to remain on the site or plot. Also, the site plan shall show
the location of water service and sewer connections with respect to
any building in which a plumbing system is to be installed. Vent stack
terminations shall be shown with respect to building ventilation
openings which could allow introduction of sewer gases into the
building or any adjacent building.
8. Amended plans. If in the course of the work, it is found necessary to
make any change from the approved plans and specifications on which
a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be
submitted and if approved, a supplementary permit shall be issued to
cover the change after the same conditions required to secure the
original permit have been satisfied.
9. Engineering details. The Code Enforcement Officer may require
adequate details of structural, mechanical, plumbing and electrical
work to be filed, including computations, stress diagrams and other
essential technical data. All engineering plans and computations shall
bear the signature and seal of the engineer or architect responsible for
the design. Plans for buildings more than two stories in height shall
indicate where penetrations will be made for electrical, mechanical,
plumbing and communications conduits, pipes and systems and the
materials and methods for maintaining the required structural integrity,
fire resistance rating and fire stopping.
10. Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned two months
after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently
prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; except that the Code
Enforcement Officer shall grant one or more extensions of time for
addition periods not exceeding 30 days each if there is reasonable
cause. An application shall not be extended if this article, the technical
codes or any other pertinent laws or ordinances have been amended
subsequent to the date of original application.
11. Other permits required. At the time of filing an application for a permit,
the applicant shall present to the Code Enforcement Officer, evidence
that he has obtained all necessary permits; licenses, approvals and/or
variances as may be required by the laws of the Township, state and
federal governments. Individuals, agencies, boards, and commissions
issuing aforesaid permits, licenses, approvals and/or variances shall
include, but not be limited to, the code hearing board, the Zoning
Officer or Zoning Hearing Board, Township sewer authority, county
Planning Commission, sewage enforcement officer, Fire Chief, state
police Fire Marshal, Township Fire Marshal, Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Pennsylvania
§ 5-105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-105
1:49
§ 5-106. Permit issuance. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § VI, 1/26/1999]
Department of Public Welfare, Pennsylvania Department of
Cosmetology and the public utility companies.
12. Requirement for payment of other fees. No building permit shall be
issued for any new construction, any addition to any current structure,
or any repairs or maintenance of any structure in the Township to the
applicant or any related party, or to any parent company or a subsidiary
company where the applicant is a business or corporation until all
applicable building, plumbing, electrical, zoning, sewer connections,
tapping or inspection fees that are prescribed by law or ordinance with
regards to any other construction by the applicant or any related party
or company within the Township are paid in full at the time of
application for additional permits.
1. Action on application. The application, construction documents,
including plans, specifications, computations and other data, filed by an
applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the Code Enforcement Officer
to determine compliance with this article, the applicable technical
codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances of South Hanover
Township and shall, within 30 days after filing, either approve or reject
said application. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the work
described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications
and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this
article and the technical codes and other pertinent laws and
ordinances, and that the fees specified in § 5-108, Subsection 1, have
been paid, he shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant as soon as
practicable. If the application for the permit is rejected, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inform the applicant in writing, stating the
reason or reasons for such rejection. Such plans may be reviewed by
other departments of South Hanover Township to verify compliance
with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction.
2. Signature to permit. The Code Enforcement Officer's signature shall be
attached to every permit; or the Code Enforcement Officer may
authorize a subordinate to affix such signature thereto.
3. Approved construction documents. When a permit is issued where
plans are required the Code Enforcement Officer shall endorse in
writing or stamp the construction documents "APPROVED." Such
approved construction documents shall not be changed, modified or
altered without authorization from the Code Enforcement Officer, and
all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. One set
of the approved construction documents shall be retained by the code
enforcement department for the life of the building or structure and the
other set shall be kept at the building site, open to inspection of the
Code Enforcement Officer or an authorized representative at all
reasonable times.
§ 5-105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-106
1:50
§ 5-107. Conditions of permit. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § VII, 1/26/1999]
4. Approval of article. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a permit
for the construction of part of a building, structure or building service
equipment before the entire construction documents for the whole
building, structure or building service equipment have been submitted
or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements
have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of the
technical codes. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other
parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk
with the building operation and without assurance that the permit for
the entire building, structure or building service will be granted.
5. Preliminary inspections. Before issuing a permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer may, if deemed necessary, examine or cause to be examined all
buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed
for a permit to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove,
demolish or change the use or occupancy thereof.
6. Payment of fees. A permit to begin work for new construction,
alteration, removal, demolition or other building operation shall not be
issued until the permit fees prescribed in § 5-108, Subsection 1, of this
article have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit
necessitating an additional fee because of the additional work involved
be issued until the additional fee shall have been paid. Applicant shall
have 30 days upon notification from code enforcement department to
pay all permit fees and sign permit.
7. Suspension of permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the
authorized work is not commenced within six months after issuance of
the permit, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a
period of six months after the time of commencing the work.
8. Validity of permit.
A. The issuance of a permit or approval of construction document,
including plans, specifications and computations shall not be
construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any
of the provisions of this article or the technical codes, or of any
other ordinance of South Hanover Township. Permits presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this article or of
other ordinances of South Hanover Township shall not be valid.
B. The issuance of a permit based upon construction documents,
including plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the
Code Enforcement Officer from thereafter requiring the correction
of errors in said construction document, including plans,
specifications and other data, or from preventing building
operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of the
technical codes or of any other ordinance of South Hanover
Township.
§ 5-106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-107
1:51
1. Compliance with codes. The permit shall be a license to proceed with
the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set
aside any of the provisions of this article and the technical codes,
except as specifically stipulated by modification or legally granted
variation as described in the application.
2. Compliance with permit. All work shall conform to the approved
application and the approved construction documents for which the
permit has been issued and any approved amendments to the approved
application or the approved construction documents.
3. Compliance with plot plan. All new work shall be located strictly in
accordance with the approved plot plan.
4. Compliance with site plan. A lot shall not be changed, increased or
diminished in area from that shown on the official plot site plan, unless
a revised plan showing such changes accompanied by the necessary
affidavit of the owner or applicant shall have been filed and approved;
except that revised plan will not be required if the change is caused by
reason of an official street opening, street widening or other public
improvement.
5. Previous approvals. This article or the applicable technical codes shall
not require changes in the construction documents, the plumbing,
electrical or mechanical systems or the construction or designated use
of a building for which a lawful permit has been issued or otherwise
lawfully authorized and the construction of which has been actively
prosecuted within 90 days after the effective date of this article and is
completed with dispatch.
6. Permit expiration. Every permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
under the provisions of the technical codes and ordinances shall expire
by limitation and become null and void, in accordance with the
following schedule:
A. New construction: one year.
B. Repairs, remodeling, alterations, additions: six months.
C. Demolition: three months.
D. Fire prevention: one day to 30 days.
7. Suspension of permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the
authorized work is not commenced with six months after issuance of the
permit, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a
period of three months after the time of commencing the work.
8. Permit extension. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply
for an extension of the time within which he may commence work under
that permit when he is unable to commence work within the time
required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Code
Enforcement Officer may extend the time for action by the permittee for
§ 5-107 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-107
1:52
§ 5-108. Permit fees. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § VIII, 1/26/1999]
a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee
showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have
prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more
than once. No additional permit fee is required.
9. Permit renewal. A permit which has expired for six months or less may
be renewed provided no changes have been made in the original
construction documents for such work. The renewal fee shall be based
on the estimated value of the work to be completed. Permits which have
been expired for greater than six months require a new application and
payment of the full permit.
10. Revocation of permit. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, in writing,
revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this article and the
technical codes whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of
incorrect information supplied, returned checks for insufficient funds,
any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on
the construction documents, or in violation of any ordinance or
regulation, or any of the provisions of the technical codes.
11. Stop-work order. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this article and the technical codes, the Code Enforcement
Officer may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the
owner of the property involved, or the owner's agent, or any persons
engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such
persons shall forth with stop such work until authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer to proceed with the work. Notice shall state the
conditions under which work will be permitted to resume. Any person
who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been
served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
subject to the penalties provided by this article. Where an emergency
exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall not be required to give a
written notice prior to stopping the work.
1. Required fees.
A. Applicants for permits required by any of the applicable codes and
ordinances of the Township shall pay at the time of application to
the Code Enforcement Officer for use by the Township, permit fees,
as designated from time to time by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors of South Hanover Township.
B. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions
of these codes shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer. The
value to be used in computing the permit or permits shall be the
total value of all construction work for which the permit or permits
are issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical,
§ 5-107 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-108
1:53
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing
systems and any other permanent equipment.
2. Special inspection fees and costs. All fees and costs related to the
performance of special professional services in accordance with the
"special inspections" section of the Township's building code [Article
II], shall be borne by the owner.
3. Double fees.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall commence any work for
which a permit is required by the applicable codes and ordinances,
or has a check returned for insufficient funds, without first having
obtained a permit, therefor, shall, if subsequently permitted to
obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee required by Subsection 1
of this section for such work, provided that this provision shall not
apply to emergency work and first-time offenders.
B. The payment of such double fee shall not exempt any person from
compliance with all other provisions of either this article or the
technical codes, nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
4. Renewals. Before work suspended or abandoned can be resumed, a
new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee, therefore, shall
be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work,
provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original
construction documents, including plans and specifications for such
work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has
not exceeded 180 days. In order to review action on a permit after
expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. If required,
any bond posted by the applicant for demolition work not completed
shall be forfeited.
5. Other fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition for all work done in connection with or
concurrently with the work contemplated by a building permit shall not
relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other
fees that are prescribed by law or ordinance for zoning permit, water
taps, sewer connections, plumbing, electrical and fire prevention
permits, erection of signs and display structures, marquees or other
appurtenant structures, or fees of inspections, certificates of use and
occupancy or other privileges or requirements, both within and without
the jurisdiction of the code enforcement department.
6. Fee refunds. Refunds of any permit fees paid may be authorized by the
Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the following:
A. The Code Enforcement Officer may authorize the refunding of any
fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer may authorize the refunding of not
more than 50% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done
§ 5-108 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-108
1:54
§ 5-109. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § IX, 1/26/1999]
under a permit issued to defray costs incurred by the Code
Enforcement Officer in reviewing and processing the application
and construction documents, including the preliminary review of
the site location identified in the application and issuing and
processing the permit.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer may authorize the refunding of not
more than 80% of the fee paid when an application for permit for
which a fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan
reviewing is done.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not authorize the refunding of
any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original
permittee not later than 30 days after the date of fee payment.
7. Re-inspection fee.
A. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection
when such portion of work for which inspection is called
is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. This
section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the
first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the
requirements of the technical codes, but as controlling the practice
of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection
or re-inspection.
B. Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record
card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the
approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure
to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or
for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
C. In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed,
additional inspection of the work will not be performed until the
required fees have been paid.
8. Accounting. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep an accurate
account of all fees collected; and such collected fees shall be deposited
monthly in the Township treasury or otherwise disposed of as required
by law.
1. General.
A. All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer and all such
construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for
inspection purposes until approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer. In addition, certain types of construction shall have special
inspections, as specified in Subsection 8.
§ 5-108 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-109
1:55
B. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an
approval of a violation of the provisions of this article or of the
technical codes of South Hanover Township. Inspection presuming
to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this article or
of the technical codes of South Hanover Township shall not be
valid.
C. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to
remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither
the Code Enforcement Officer nor South Hanover Township shall
be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any
material required to allow inspection.
D. A survey of the lot may be required by the Code Enforcement
Officer to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the
approved construction documents.
2. Inspection record card. Work requiring a permit shall not be
commenced until the permit holder or his agent shall have posted or
otherwise made available an inspection record card such as to allow the
Code Enforcement Officer conveniently to make the required entries
thereon regarding inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained
available by the permit holder until final approval has been granted by
the Code Enforcement Officer. A record of all such examinations and
inspections and of all violations of this article or of the technical codes
shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer.
3. Inspection requests.
A. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a
permit to notify the Code Enforcement Officer that such work is
ready for inspection. The Code Enforcement Officer may require
that every request for inspection be filed at least 24 hours before
such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by
telephone at the option of the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections
required either by this article or the technical codes to provide
access to and means for inspection of such work.
4. Approval required.
A. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each
successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the
Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer, upon
notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either
indicate that portion of the construction is satisfactory as
completed or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the
same fails to comply with this article or the technical codes.
§ 5-109 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-109
1:56
B. Any portions which do not comply shall be corrected and such
portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
C. There shall be a final inspection and approval of all buildings and
structures when completed and ready for occupancy and use.
5. Required building inspections. For on-site construction, from time to
time the Code Enforcement Officer, upon notification from the permit
holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections or cause to be
made any necessary inspections and shall either approve that portion of
the construction as completed: or shall notify the permit holder or his
agent wherein the same fails to comply with this Code.
A. Footing. Setback inspection to be made after the trenches or
basement area are excavated and forms are erected and any
required reinforcing steel is in place prior to the placing of
concrete.
B. Foundation wall inspection. To be made after poles, piers, concrete
block wall, precast or poured concrete walls are complete with
parging, damp proofing and water proofing is in place prior to
backfilling. Any required reinforcing steel shall be set in place and
inspected prior to the placing of concrete. The foundation
inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended
for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural supports, or
equipment and special requirements for wood foundations. Where
the foundation is to be constructed of approved treated wood,
additional inspections may be required by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
C. Concrete slab or under floor inspection. To be made after all in slab
or under floor building service equipment, conduit, piping
accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place but
before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including
the subfloor.
D. Building service equipment rough inspections. All building service
equipment for which a permit is required by this article shall be
inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer. No portion of any
building service equipment intended to be concealed by any
permanent portion of the building shall be concealed until
inspected and approved. When the installation of any building
service equipment is complete, an additional and final inspection
shall be made. Building service equipment regulated by the
technical codes shall not be connected to the water, fuel or power
supply or sewer system until authorized by the Code Enforcement
Officer. The requirement of this section shall not be considered to
prohibit the operation of any building service equipment installed
to replace existing building service equipment serving an occupied
portion of the building, provided a request for inspection of such
§ 5-109 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-109
1:57
§ 5-110. Connection to utilities. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § X, 1/26/1999]
building service equipment has been filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer not more than 48 hours after such
replacement work is completed, and before any portion of such
building service equipment is concealed by any permanent portion
of the building.
E. Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire stops,
draft stopping and bracing are in place, before insulation and all
pipes, chimneys and vents are complete and the rough electrical,
plumbing and heating wires, pipes, and ducts are approved.
F. Lath and/or wallboard inspection. To be made after all lathing and
wallboard, interior and exterior, is in place but before any
plastering is applied or before wallboard joints and fasteners are
taped and finished.
G. Final inspection. Upon completion of the building or structure, and
before issuance of the certificate of use and occupancy required by
the Township's building code [Article II], a final inspection shall be
made. All violations of the approved construction documents and
permit shall be noted and the holder of the permit shall be notified
of the discrepancies.
6. Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections specified above,
the Code Enforcement Officer may make or require other inspections of
any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of
this article or technical and other laws which are enforced by the code
enforcement department.
7. Reinspection. Reinspections shall be made when such portion of work
for which an inspection is called for is not complete or when corrections
called for are complete.
8. Special inspection. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection 5, the owner or the engineer or architect of record acting as
the owner's agent shall employ one or more special inspectors who
shall provide inspections during construction in compliance with the
Township's building code [Article II].
9. Waiver of special inspection. The Code Enforcement Officer may waive
the requirement for the employment of a special inspector if he finds
that the construction is of minor nature in accordance with the
Township's building code [Article II].
10. Approved inspection agencies. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies
satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability.
1. Energy connections. No person shall make connections from a source of
energy, fuel or power to any building service equipment which is
§ 5-109 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-110
1:58
§ 5-111. Certificate of use and occupancy. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § XI, 1/
26/1999]
regulated by the technical codes and for which a permit is required by
this article until approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
2. Temporary connections. The Code Enforcement Officer may authorize
the temporary connection of the building service equipment to the
source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building
service equipment, or for use under a temporary certificate of use and
occupancy.
1. Use or occupancy.
A. Buildings or structures shall not be used or occupied, in whole or in
part, nor shall a change in the existing occupancy classification of a
building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the
Code Enforcement Officer has issued a certificate of use and
occupancy required by the Township's building code [Article II].
B. Issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy shall not be
construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this
article or of the technical codes of South Hanover Township.
Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this article or of the technical codes of South Hanover
Township shall not be valid.
2. Change in use. A change of occupancy shall not be made to any
structure which will subject the structure to any special provisions of
this article or the technical codes without approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall certify that
such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing
building construction for the proposed new occupancy, and that such
change of occupancy does not result in any greater hazard to the public
health, safety or welfare.
3. Certificate issued. After the Code Enforcement Officer inspects the
building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this
article or the technical codes and/or other regulations, including but
not limited to driveway access, on and off site improvements,
subdivision or land development, etc., which are enforced by the code
enforcement department, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
use and occupancy certificate in accordance with the Township's
building code [Article II].
4. Contents of certificate. After the Code Enforcement Officer inspects the
building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of the
article, the technical codes, or other laws which are enforced by the
code enforcement department, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following:
A. The building permit number;
§ 5-110 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-111
1:59
B. The address of the building;
C. The name and address of the owner;
D. A description of that portion of the building for which the
certificate is issued;
E. The edition of the code under which the permit was issued;
F. The use group and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of
the Township building code [Article II];
G. The type of construction as defined in the Township building code
[Article II];
H. If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler
system is required;
I. The hazard classification or storage configuration, including aisle
widths, for which the automatic sprinkler system is designed;
J. The automatic sprinkler and standpipe system demand at the base
of the riser;
K. Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit; and
L. The name of the Code Enforcement Officer.
5. Temporary certificate.
A. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that substantial hazard will
not result from occupancy of a building or portion thereof before
the same is completed, a temporary certificate of occupancy for the
use of a portion or portions of a building or structure may be issued
prior to the completion of the entire building or structure in
accordance with the Township's building code [Article II].
B. A letter shall be attached to the temporary use and occupancy
certificate that includes the conditions under which the temporary
use and occupancy certificate is issued and include a signed
statement that the contractor and owner of the building or
structure accepts and is in agreement with the conditions under
which the temporary use and occupancy certificate is issued.
6. Posting. The certificate of use and occupancy shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
7. Revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer may, in writing, suspend or
revoke a certificate of use and occupancy issued under the provisions of
this article whenever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of
incorrect information supplied, or when it is determined that the
building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of this article,
regulation or the technical codes.
§ 5-111 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-112
1:60
§ 5-112. Notice/orders procedure. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § XII, 1/26/
1999]
1. Notice to responsible owner, operator, occupant or other person in
charge. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this article, the technical codes, or of the other applicable
codes and ordinances or whenever the Code Enforcement Officer issues
a stop-work order or has condemned and placards any structure or
equipment or whenever the Code Enforcement Officer orders a
dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation structure to be closedup
and secured, vacated, repaired and/or demolished a notice and order
shall be given to the responsible owner, operator, occupant or person in
charge of the structure or premises.
2. Form. Notice and order to the responsible owner, operator, occupant or
person in charge shall include the following:
A. Be in writing, signed by the Code Enforcement Officer or his
authorized representative;
B. Include the street address and a legal description of the real estate
sufficient for identification of the premises;
C. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the notice is
being issued, the sections of the code and/or ordinances which
have been violated;
D. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time not to exceed
120 days, for the initiation and correction of the violation alleged or
of the remedial actions required to bring the dwelling unit, building
or structure into compliance, except where emergency conditions
exist which require immediate corrective action:
(1) If the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that the
building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require
that all required permits be secured therefore and the work
physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days
from the date of the order) and completed within such time as
the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine is reasonable
under all of the circumstances.
(2) If the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that the
building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require
that the building or structure shall be vacated within a certain
time from the date of the order as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be reasonable.
(3) If the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that the
building or structure must be demolished, the order shall
require that the building be vacated within such time as the
Code Enforcement Officer shall determine reasonable (not to
§ 5-112 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-112
1:61
exceed 60 days from the date of the order); that all required
permits be secured therefore within 10 days from the date
of the order, and that the demolition be completed within
such time as the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine is
reasonable.
E. Include a statement advising that if any required repair or
demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not
commenced with the time specified, the Code Enforcement Officer
(1) will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further
occupancy until the work is completed, and (2) may proceed to
cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the
property or its owner; and
F. Include a statement indicating that the notice will become an order
if no request and approval for an extension of time is made to the
Code Enforcement Officer or if no petition for an appeal or hearing
is requested by the owner to seek modification or withdrawal of the
notice by petition before the code hearing board within 10 days
from the receipt of said notice.
3. Method of service.
A. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and
order, shall be served personally on the responsible owner,
operator, occupant or other person in charge or served by certified
mail with a return receipt requested, or where such responsible
person in charge cannot be found, the notice shall be served by
posting a notice on the main entrance of the structure or premises
and taking a picture of said notice, or by publishing such notice in a
newspaper for general circulation for a period of three consecutive
days.
B. One copy thereof shall be served on each of the following, if known
to the Code Enforcement Officer or disclosed from official public
records: the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record;
and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to
the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the
Code Enforcement Officer to serve any person required herein to
be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any
other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty
or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this article.
Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's
agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall
constitute service of notification upon the owner.
4. Proof of service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be
certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty
of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time,
date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together
§ 5-112 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-112
1:62
§ 5-113. Emergency measures. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § XIII, 1/26/1999]
with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by
certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order
retained by the Code Enforcement Officer.
5. Service on occupant. When a condemnation order is served on an
occupant other than the owner or person responsible for such
compliance, a reasonable time to vacate the property after
noncompliance shall be stated. Owners or persons responsible for
compliance shall vacate at the time set for correction of defects if there
is failure to comply.
1. Vacating structures. When, in the judgment of the Code Enforcement
Officer, there is actual and imminent danger of failure or collapse of a
structure which would endanger life, or when any structure or part of a
structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupancy of the
structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building
occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of fire,
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes,
gases or materials, or use of defective or dangerous equipment, the
Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to
order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall cause to be posted at the main entrance
to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This structure is unsafe
and its use or occupancy has been prohibited by the Code Enforcement
Officer." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure
except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required
repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the
structure.
2. Authority to disconnect utilities. The Code Enforcement Officer or his
authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect any
utility service or energy supplied to the building, structure or building
service equipment therein regulated by this article or the technical
codes in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate
hazard to life, health or property. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
whenever possible notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of
the building, structure or building service equipment of the decision to
disconnect prior to taking such action, and shall notify such serving
utility, owner and occupant of the building, structure or building service
equipment, in writing, of such disconnection immediately thereafter.
3. Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make
connections from any energy, fuel or power supply nor supply energy or
fuel to any building service equipment which has been disconnected or
ordered to be disconnected, or ordered to be disconnected by the Code
Enforcement Officer or the use of which has been ordered to be
discontinued by the Code Enforcement Officer until the Code
Enforcement Officer authorizes the reconnection and use of such
equipment.
§ 5-112 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-113
1:63
§ 5-114. Condemnation. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § XIV, 1/26/1999]
4. Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this article,
whenever, in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer, there is
actual and imminent danger of collapse or failure of a structure or other
hazardous condition due to an unsafe condition which would endanger
life, the Code Enforcement Officer shall order the necessary work to be
done including the Boarding up of accessible openings, to render such
structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein
described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be
taken as the Code Enforcement Officer deems necessary to meet such
emergency.
5. Closing streets. When necessary for the public safety, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall temporarily close structures, and close, or
order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets,
public ways, places and premises adjacent to unsafe structures, and
prohibit the same from being used.
6. Emergency work. For the purpose of this section, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall employ the necessary labor and materials to
perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
7. Costs of emergency work. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid from the treasury of South Hanover
Township on approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. The legal
counsel of South Hanover Township shall institute appropriate action
against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was
located for the recovery of such costs.
8. Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon
petition directed to the code hearing board, be afforded a hearing as
described in this article.
1. General.
A. When a structure or equipment or part thereof regulated by
ordinance and the technical codes is found by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be unsafe, or when a structure or part
thereof is found unfit for human occupancy or use, or is found
unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the
provisions of this article and shall be placarded, vacated and shall
not be reoccupied without the approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
B. All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages and building
service equipment are hereby declared to be public nuisances and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this article.
§ 5-113 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-114
1:64
C. When any building service equipment is maintained in violation of
the technical codes and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to
the provisions of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
institute any appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
D. When such equipment or installation is to be disconnected, a
written notice of such disconnection and causes therefore shall be
given within 24 hours to the serving utility, the owner and occupant
of such building, structure or premises.
2. Unsafe structure.
A. Any structure in which all or part thereof is found to be dangerous
to life, health, property or the safety of the public or the occupants
of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of a fire, for means of egress, or which
constitute a fire hazard, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally
inadequate, or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation
that partial or complete collapse is likely, is for the purpose of this
section, unsafe.
B. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other
appendages or structural members which are supported by,
attached to, or a part of a building and which are in deteriorated
condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are
specified in the building code are hereby designated as unsafe
building appendages. A vacant building or structure unguarded or
open at a door or window shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe.
3. Unsafe equipment. Building service equipment or other equipment on
the premises or within the structure regulated by this article or the
technical codes which constitutes a fire, electrical or health hazard or
unsanitary condition, or is otherwise dangerous to life, health, property
or safety of the public or occupant of the premises or structure is, for
the purpose of this section unsafe.
4. Authority to condemn building service equipment. Whenever the Code
Enforcement Officer ascertains that any building service equipment
regulated in the technical codes has become hazardous to life, health,
property or becomes unsanitary, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
order in writing that such equipment either be removed or restored to a
safe or sanitary condition, whichever is appropriate. The written notice
itself shall fix a time limit for compliance with such order. No person
shall use or maintain defective building service equipment after
receiving such notice. Unsafe equipment shall be placarded and placed
out of service.
5. Unsafe use. Any use of buildings, structures or building service
equipment or parts thereof constituting a hazard to safety, health or
public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
§ 5-114 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-114
1:65
§ 5-115. Placarding. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § XV, 1/26/1999]
obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the
purpose of this section, an unsafe use.
6. Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in
part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this article
or the technical codes, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to
law.
7. Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy or use whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds that
such structure is unsafe, unlawful, an unsafe use, contains unsafe
equipment, or because of the degree in which the structure is in
disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested,
contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by
this article or the technical codes, or because the location of the
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to
the public.
8. Restoration of unsafe structure. A building or structure condemned by
the Code Enforcement Officer may be restored to safe condition
provided change of use or occupancy is not contemplated nor
compelled by reason of such reconstruction or restoration; except that
if the damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of
50% of its replacement value, exclusive of foundations, such structure
shall be made to comply with the Township's technical codes in all
respects with the requirements for materials and methods of
construction of structures.
9. Closing of vacant structures. If the structure or part thereof is vacant
and unfit for human occupancy or use and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to post a
placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure
closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. The windows and doors
are to be closed up from the exterior with one-half inch exterior grade
plywood, finished on one side with the finished side out. The plywood
shall be painted with two coats of exterior paint, the same color as
exterior structure. The exterior of the structure must be maintained in
compliance with the Township's property maintenance code [Article
VI]. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the
premises to be closed though any available public agency or by contract
or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and
shall be a lien upon such real estate. If the building or structure that is
closed up or vacant is not restored in compliance with this article and
the technical codes within two years from when the structure was
closed up, the structure shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be
demolished.
§ 5-114 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-115
1:66
§ 5-116. Repair/demolition order. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § XVI, 1/26/
1999]
1. Vacation of structure. If the responsible owner, operator, occupant or
person in charge of the structure or premises fails to comply with an
order to repair or rehabilitate a structure condemned as unfit for
human habitation, within the time given, the owner or the person or
persons responsible for the correction of violations shall have removed
themselves from the property on failure to comply with the correction
order in the time specified, but other occupants shall be given a
reasonable time thereafter to vacate, as ordered by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
2. Placarding of structure. Upon issuance of an order to vacate, after the
condemnation notice required under the provisions of this article and
the technical codes has resulted in an order by virtue of failure to
comply within the time given, the Code Enforcement Officer shall post
on the premises or structure or parts thereof, or on defective building
service equipment, a placard bearing the words: "Condemned as unfit
for human occupancy or use," and a statement of the penalties provided
for any occupancy or use or for removing the placard.
3. Removal of placard. The Code Enforcement Officer shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without
the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be subject to the
penalties provided by this article.
4. Prohibited use. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or
structure or part thereof, or shall use placarded equipment, and any
owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone
occupy a placarded premises shall be liable for the penalties provided
by this article.
1. General. The Code Enforcement Officer shall make periodic inspection
of any structure vacated as unfit for human habitation or any other
vacant structure. The Code Enforcement Officer shall order the owner
of any premises upon which is located any structure or part thereof,
which in the Code Enforcement Officer's judgment is so old, dilapidated
or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or
otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, and so that
such structure would be unreasonable to repair the same, to raze and
remove such structure or part thereof; or if such structure can be made
safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to raze and
remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of
normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two
years, to raze and remove such structure or part thereof.
2. Option by owner. If a structure is so old, deteriorated or has become so
out of repair as to be unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, but can
§ 5-115 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-116
1:67
be made safe by repairs, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
notice requiring the owner to make the necessary repairs to bring the
structure into compliance with the Township's codes and/or ordinances
or to demolish and remove the structure at the owner's option. Such
notice shall require the person thus notified to immediately disclose to
the Code Enforcement Officer his acceptance or rejection of the terms
of the order.
3. Unreasonable repairs. Whenever an inspection of a structure reveals
that the structure is so old, dilapidated, damaged by fire, explosion,
windstorm or other natural or criminal acts or has become so out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use and so that it would be
unreasonable to repair, in that the cost of such repairs would exceed
100% of the current value of such structure, the structure shall be
declared a public nuisance. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
notice to the responsible owner, ordering that the structure be removed
or demolished without option on the part of the owner to repair. All the
rubbish and refuse shall be removed from the premises and the cellar/
basement shall be filled in with clean fill graded to adjacent ground
level.
4. Service connections. Before a structure is demolished or removed, the
owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections
within the structure such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other
connections. A permit to demolish or remove a structure shall not be
issued until a release is obtained from the utilities, stating that their
respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as
meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a
safe manner.
5. Notice to adjoining owners. Only when written notice has been given by
the applicant to the owners of adjoining lots and to the owners of wired
or other facilities, of which the temporary removal is necessitated by
the proposed work, shall a permit be granted for removal of a building
or structure.
6. Lot regulations. Whenever a structure is demolished or removed, the
premises shall be maintained free from all unsafe or hazardous
conditions by the proper regulation of the lot, restoration of established
grades and the erection of the necessary retaining walls and fences in
accordance with the provisions of the Township's building code [Article
II].
7. Determination by Code Enforcement Officer. In the event that the
owner or agent is unable to obtain the releases, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall inspect the premises for which application has been made,
to determine that the utility service connections and appurtenant
equipment have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner.
§ 5-116 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-117
1:68
§ 5-117. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § XVII, 1/26/
1999]
1. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, change the use and occupancy, alter, extend, repair,
remove, demolish, maintain, fail to maintain, provide, fail to provide,
use or occupy, let to another for use or occupy or permit another person
to use or occupy any structure or equipment regulated by this article or
the technical codes or cause same to be done, contrary to or in conflict
with or in violation of any of the provisions of this article and the
technical codes, or to fail to obey a lawful order of the Code
Enforcement Officer, or to remove or deface a placard or notice posted
under the provisions of this article.
2. Occupancy violations. Whenever any building or structure or building
service equipment therein regulated by this article and the technical
codes is being used contrary to the provisions of such codes, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall order such use discontinued by written notice
served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person
shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the Code
Enforcement Officer after receipt of such notice to make the structure,
or portion thereof, comply with the requirement of such codes.
3. Occupancy without use and occupancy certificate. Any change in use or
occupancy of an existing building or structure and/or any new building
hereafter erected for which a building permit was issued, shall not be
used or occupied in whole or in part until a certificate of use and
occupancy shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Failure to secure a use and occupancy certificate before use or
occupancy of a building is subject to immediate fine and costs as
prescribed in this article. No further notification as required under
§ 1-512 et seq. of this article shall be required. The building owner by
signing the building permit and acknowledgment agrees not to violate
any provision of the Township's codes and/or ordinances and is so
notified. The use and occupancy certificate is a "license" to occupy and
use the building.
4. Failure to comply. Whenever an order to vacate, secure, repair, and/or
demolish a structure which is a public nuisance because it is unsafe,
dangerous or unfit for human habitation has not been complied with,
the Code Enforcement Officer may, in accordance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, proceed to cause the structure to be
vacated, closed-up and secured, repaired and/or demolished or take
such other action as is necessary to abate the nuisance. Abatement
under this subsection shall not commence until at least 10 days after
the service of the order, except that the Code Enforcement Officer may
determine that more immediate action is required because of the
special emergency or dangerous conditions which exist.
5. Recover of expenses. The expenses incurred pursuant to Subsection 4
of this section and other applicable codes and ordinances shall be paid
§ 5-117 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-117
1:69
by the responsible owner, operator, or occupant or by the persons who
caused or maintained such a public nuisance. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall file on his records an affidavit stating with fairness and
accuracy the items and date of the expenses incurred. The Board of
Supervisors of South Hanover Township may institute a suit to recover
such expenses to be charged against the property as a lien.
6. Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of to another until the provisions of the
compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or
until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee
or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the Code
Enforcement Officer a signed and notarized statement for the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs
required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
7. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provisions of this article or the technical codes or fails to correct a
violation or institute a remedial action as ordered by the Code
Enforcement Officer, or who shall erect, construct, change the use or
occupancy, install, alter or repair a building/structure or any plumbing,
electrical and mechanical equipment or systems in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the Code Enforcement Officer or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Township's
codes shall upon conviction in a summary proceeding, before any
district justice, be sentenced for each such violation to pay a fine of not
less than $50 plus costs and not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in
default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a period
not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues, after a
service of notice as provided for in this article, shall be deemed a
separate offense. Payment of a fine does not relieve any person, firm or
corporation of their responsibility to comply with this article and the
technical codes.
8. Prosecution. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the solicitor representing the Township from initiating, and he
is hereby ordered to initiate, appropriate actions or proceedings at law
or in equity against the person responsible for the violation for the
purpose of ordering that person:
A. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work;
B. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure;
§ 5-117 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-117
1:70
§ 5-118. Code hearing board; means of appeal. [Ord. No. 2-1999,
§ XIX, 1/26/1999]
C. To require the removal of work in violation; and
D. To prevent the occupation or use of the structure or part thereof
erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in
compliance with, the provisions of this article and the technical
codes, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an
approval, permit or certificate was issued.
1. Code hearing board. In order to protect buildings, structures and
premises in South Hanover Township by vigorous enforcement of the
provisions of this article, the technical codes and other applicable
ordinances, there shall be and is hereby created a code hearing board,
hereafter referred to as the "board."
2. Membership of board. The code hearing board shall consist of three
members appointed by the Board of Supervisors designated by
resolution as follows: one for three years, one for two years and one for
one year. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for three years or
until a successor has been appointed.
A. Qualifications. Each member shall have been a resident of South
Hanover Township for at least one year prior to appointment. Not
more than one member shall be from the same profession or
occupation. Members shall be qualified by experience and training
to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and
building service equipment and who are not employees of South
Hanover Township.
B. Alternate members. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint two
alternate members who shall be called by the Board Chairman to
hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member.
Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for
board membership, and shall be appointed for three years or until a
successor has been appointed.
C. Chairman. The Board shall select one of its members to serve as
Chairman.
D. Secretary. The Chairman shall designate a board member to serve
as secretary to the Board. The secretary of the Board shall keep a
record of all proceedings so that the record clearly shows the basis
for each decision made by the Board.
E. Disqualification of a member. A member shall not hear an appeal in
which that member has any personal, professional or financial
interest.
F. Quorum. A quorum of the code hearing board shall exist when any
two members of the code hearing board are present.
§ 5-117 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-118
1:71
G. Compensation of members. Compensation of members shall be
determined from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
H. Limitations of authority. The code hearing board shall have no
authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions
of this article or the technical codes nor shall the Board be
empowered to waive requirements of either this article or the
technical codes.
3. Powers and duties of the code hearing board. The code hearing board
shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Appeals. Any person affected by any decision, notice or order of the
Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right to appeal. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this article and/or the technical codes
are adequately satisfied by equivalent form of construction and/or
better method of fire prevention. The code hearing board shall hear
all appeals made to it and, depending on its findings, shall decide
whether such appeals shall be granted.
B. Interpretation. The code hearing board shall decide any questions
involving the interpretation of any provision of this article, the
technical codes, or of those other applicable codes and ordinances.
C. Modification. The code hearing board may grant a modification
from the strict application of this article, the technical codes, or of
those other applicable codes and ordinances. Such modification
may be granted only in those cases which would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship and where the public health and
safety shall not be jeopardized.
D. Procedure. The Board shall adopt, and make available to the public
through the secretary, procedures under which a hearing will be
conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict
rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information
be received. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
E. Board decisions.
(1) A vote to reverse, affirm, or modify, wholly or partly, the
decision, notice or order of the Code Enforcement Officer shall
be made by a majority of those present and sitting as the code
hearing board in any specific case. All decisions of the Board
shall be in writing. Certified copies shall be furnished to the
appellant and to the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 5-118 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-118
1:72
(2) The code hearing board shall also retain in its files a copy of
each decision, which files shall be available for inspection by
the public. Each decision shall set forth fully the reason or
reasons for the decision of the code hearing board and the
findings of fact on which the opinions and conclusions of law
were based.
F. Enforcement of decision. The code hearing board shall make an
order on its decision, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall take
immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board, to
carry out said order.
G. Reports by the code hearing board. The code hearing board shall
report to the Board of Supervisors periodically, at intervals of not
later than 12 months. The report shall summarize all applications
and appeals made to it since the last report and shall contain a
summary of the Board's decision on each case. A copy of the report
shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer. The code hearing
board may also submit to the Board of Supervisors advisory reports
recommending changes and modifications in this article, the
technical codes, or in those other applicable codes or ordinances.
4. Appeal for interpretation or modification.
A. Petition.
(1) Any person requesting an interpretation or modification of a
decision, notice or order made by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by any other employee or official charged with the
administration and enforcement of this article, the technical
codes, and of those other applicable codes or ordinances may,
upon petition, appeal to the code hearing board.
(2) All appeals shall be made in writing, stating the grounds upon
which the appeal is based and shall be filed with the
Department of Code Enforcement. An appeal must be filed
within 10 days of the action or of the receipt of written notice
of any decision, notice or order served.
B. Notice of hearing. The code hearing board shall meet and conduct
a hearing upon notice from the Chairman, within 30 days of the
receipt of a petition for an appeal.
C. Open hearing. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the
public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Code
Enforcement Officer and any person whose interests are affected
shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A record shall be kept of
all evidence and testimony presented at the hearing.
D. Postponed hearing. When three members are not present to hear
an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative
§ 5-118 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-118
1:73
§ 5-119. General provisions. [Ord. No. 2-1999, § XIX, 1/26/1999]
shall have the right to request and receive a postponement of the
hearing. A new hearing shall be held within 10 days.
E. Court review. Any person or persons aggrieved by any final order or
decision from the code hearing board may appeal such order or
decision within 30 days to the Court of Common Pleas in
accordance with, as far as practicable, the Rules of Civil Procedure
of the Supreme Court regarding appeals from administrative
agencies.
F. Cost of appeal. Costs of an appeal shall be borne by the appellant.
The fee shall be paid with the filing of the appeal in writing. Appeal
fees shall be designated from time to time by resolution by the
Board of Supervisors of South Hanover Township.
1. Conflicting provisions.
A. Whenever conflicting provisions or requirements occur between
this article, the technical codes and any other codes or laws
adopted by South Hanover Township, the most restrictive shall
govern.
B. Where conflicts occur between the technical codes, those
provisions providing the greater safety to life shall govern. In other
conflicts where sanitation, life safety or fire safety are not involved,
the most restrictive provisions shall govern.
C. Where in any specific case different section within any of the
technical codes specify different materials, methods of
construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement
and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.
D. Where conflicts occur between any specific provisions of this
article and any administrative provisions in any technical code
which is then applicable within South Hanover Township, those
provisions are hereby repealed to the extent of any such conflict.
2. Partial validity. In the event any part of provision of this article is held to
be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal
any of the other parts or provisions thereof, which are determined to be
legal; and it shall be presumed that this article would have been passed
without such illegal or invalid parts or provisions.
3. Segregation of invalid provisions. Any invalid part of this article shall be
segregated from the remainder of this article by the court holding such
part invalid, and the remainder shall remain effective.
§ 5-118 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-119
1:74
4. Saving clause. Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any
suit or proceeding new pending in any court, any rights acquired,
liability incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing
under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any
character shall be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 5-119 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-119
1:75

ARTICLE II
Building Code
DIVISION 1
BOCA National Building Code1
§ 5-201. Title. [Ord. No. 3-1999, § I, 1/26/1999]
This article, together with the "BOCA National Building Code, Thirteenth
Edition, 1996" as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., adopted herein, shall be known and may
be cited as the "Building Code of South Hanover Township."
§ 5-202. Adoption of standards. [Ord. No. 3-1999, § II, 1/26/1999]
§ 5-203. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. No. 3-1999, § III, 1/
26/1999]
All the provisions of South Hanover Township's Code Enforcement
Ordinance [Article I] are hereby adopted with this article. The
administration and enforcement of this article and the "BOCA National
Building Code, Thirteenth Edition, 1996" herein adopted shall be carried
out by the Code Enforcement Department in accordance with the
procedures established by South Hanover Township's Code Enforcement
Ordinance [Article I] and by the "BOCA National Building Code, Thirteenth
Edition, 1996" adopted herein. Said Code Enforcement Ordinance [Article
I] provides for certain powers and duties of a Code Enforcement Officer,
for the creation of a code hearing board and for procedure relative to
applications, fees, permits, inspections, appeals, penalties and other
matters.
§ 5-204. Deletions, amendments and additions. [Ord. No. 3-1999,
§ IV, 1/26/1999]
1. BOCA National Building Code. There is hereby adopted in its entirety
by South Hanover Township, copies of which are on file in the code
enforcement department, that certain building code known as the
"BOCA National Building Code, Thirteenth Edition, 1996" published by
the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.,
through the effective date of adoption of this article save and except
portions as are hereinafter deleted, amended or added.
2. Application. The provisions set forth in this article and in the "BOCA
National Building Code, Thirteenth Edition, 1996" adopted herein shall
take effect 35 days from the date of the enactment of this article or any
amendment thereto and shall apply throughout the entire Township.
1. Editor's Note: Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7 of Ord. No. 3-1999 were repealed by Ord. No. 3-2004,
which provided for administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code.
See now Art. VII of this chapter.
§ 5-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:77
1. Deletions. The following sections and subsections of the "BOCA
National Building Code, Thirteenth Edition, 1996," herein adopted, are
hereby deleted in their entirety:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section 104.0. Department of Building Inspection.
(2) Section 105.0. Duties and Powers of the Code Official.
(3) Section 107.0. Application for Permit.
(4) Section 108.0. Permits.
(5) Section 111.0. Conditions of Permit.
(6) Section 112.0. Fees.
(7) Section 113.0. Inspections.
(8) Section 116.0. Violations.
(9) Section 117.0. Stop-work order.
(10) Section 119.0. Unsafe Structures and Equipment.
(11) Section 120.0. Emergency Measures.
(12) Section 121.0. Means of Appeal.
B. Chapter 4.
(1) Section 403.2. Sprinkler system: Exception No. 1 and 2.
(2) Section 412.6. Automatic sprinkler system: Exceptions No. 1
and 2.
(3) Section 413.4. Automatic sprinklers: Exception.
C. Chapter 5.
(1) Section 507.1. One-story buildings: Exceptions No. 2 and 4.
D. Chapter 9.
(1) Section 904.1. Where required. Exception No. 1.
(2) Section 904.2. Use Groups: A-1, A-3 and A-4: Exceptions No. 1,
2 and 3.
(3) Section 904.8. Use Group R-1: Exception.
(4) Section 904.9. Use Group R-2: Exception.
(5) Section 906.5. Sprinkler alarms: Exceptions No. 1 and 2.
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:78
(6) Section 915.3.1. Type of system required: Exceptions No. 1 and
2.
(7) Section 916.1. Required exception: No. 2.
(8) Section 919.5. Sprinklered building exception.
(9) Section 924.1. Fire suppression systems: Exception No. 6.
(10) Section 924.2. Fire alarm systems: Exceptions No. 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5.
E. Chapter 10.
(1) Section 1013.2.2. Automatic sprinklers: Exception.
(2) Section 1020.3. Lobby: Exception.
F. Chapter 27.
(1) Section 2703.3. Annual permit.
(2) Section 2703.4. Annual records.
G. Chapter 29.
(1) Section 2906.0. Private Sewage Disposal.
2. Amendments. The following sections and subsections of the "BOCA
National Building Code, Thirteenth Edition, 1996" herein adopted are
hereby amended to read as follows:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"Building Code of South Hanover Township," hereinafter
referred to as "this code."
(2) Section 118.4. Contents of Certificate. After the Code
Enforcement Officer inspects the building or structure and
finds no violations of the provisions of this article, the technical
codes, or other laws which are enforced by the Code
Enforcement Department, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the
following:
(a) The building permit number.
(b) The address of the building.
(c) The name and address of the owner.
(d) A description of that portion of the building for which the
certificate is issued.
(e) The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:79
(f) The use group and occupancy, in accordance with the
provisions of the Township Building Code.
(g) The type of construction as defined in the Township
Building Code.
(h) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the
sprinkler system is required.
(i) The hazard classification or storage configuration,
including aisle widths, for which the automatic sprinkler
system is designed.
(j) The automatic sprinkler and standpipe system demand at
the base of the user.
(k) Any special stipulations and conditions of the building
permit. The name of the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Chapter 3.
(1) Section 308.2. Use Group I-1. This use group shall include
buildings and structures which house three or more individuals
who, because of age, mental disability or other reasons, must
live in a supervised environment but who are physically
capable of responding to an emergency situation without
personnel assistance. Where accommodating persons of the
above description, the following types of facilities shall be
classified as I-1 facilities: board and care facilities, half-way
houses, group homes, social rehabilitation facilities, alcohol
and drug centers and convalescent facilities. A facility such as
the above with two or less occupants shall be classified as a
residential use group.
(2) Section 308.3. Use Group I-2. This use group shall include
buildings and structures used for medical, surgical,
psychiatric, nursing or custodial care on a twenty-four-hour
basis of three or more persons who are not capable of selfpreservation.
Where accommodating persons of the above
description, the following types of facilities shall be classified
as I-2 facilities: hospitals, nursing homes (both intermediate
care facilities and skilled nursing facilities), mental hospitals
and detoxification facilities. A facility such as the above with
two or less occupants shall be classified as a residential use
group.
C. Chapter 4.
(1) Section 403.1. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall
apply to all buildings when three or more stories in height.
(2) Section 408.3.1. Sprinkler System. All public garages shall be
equipped throughout each story with an automatic sprinkler
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:80
system in accordance with § 906.2.1. For the purpose of this
section, a roof occupied for the parking or storage of motor
vehicles shall not constitute a story.
(3) Section 409.1. General. All occupancies in Use Group I-2 shall
comply with the provisions of this section and all other
applicable provisions of this code.
(4) Section 421.4. Locations. Private swimming pools shall not
encroach on any front or side yard required by this code or by
the governing zoning law, unless in accordance with specific
rules of the jurisdiction in which the pool is located. A wall of a
swimming pool shall not be located less than 15 feet from any
rear or side property line, or 15 feet from any street property
line, unless in accordance with specific rules of the jurisdiction
in which the pool is located.
D. Chapter 5.
(1) Section 507.1. One story buildings:
(a) Exception No. 1. Buildings and structures of special
industrial occupancies in accordance with § 503.1.1 shall
be exempt from the above height limitations and fire
separation distance requirements, and the automatic fire
suppression system shall not be provided where such
installations will be detrimental or dangerous to the
specific occupancy as approved by the Code Hearing
Board. Where located with a fire separation distance of
less than 30 feet, the exterior walls of such buildings shall
be protected or constructed to provide a fire resistance
rating of not less than two hours.
E. Chapter 9.
(1) Section 901.5. Threads. All threads provided for Fire
Department connections to sprinkler systems, standpipes, yard
hydrants or any other fire hose connection shall be compatible
with the connections used by the Township Fire Department.
One or more five inch, self-locking Storz connection(s) shall be
provided for Fire Department connections to sprinkler and/or
standpipe systems.
(2) Section 901.6. Signs. All signs required to identify fire
protection equipment and equipment location shall be
constructed of durable materials, be permanently installed and
be readily visible. Signs shall have blue letters with an
appropriate width-to-height ratio on a white background,
outlined with a red border. Letters, numbers, and border shall
be reflective scotch-lite or equivalent. Proposed wording shall
be submitted to the Township Fire Marshall for review and
approval.
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:81
(3) Section 904.1. Where required. Automatic fire suppression
systems shall be installed where required by this code, and in
the locations indicated in §§ 904.2 through 904.17.
(4) Section 904.2. Use Groups A-1, A-3 and A-4. An automatic fire
suppression system shall be provided throughout all buildings
with a Use Group A-1, A-3 or A-4 fire area. Where an existing
building or portion of an existing building is changed to an A-1,
A-3 or A-4 Use Group classification, or an addition or alteration
to an existing building with an A-1, A-3, or A-4 Use Group, the
entire building shall comply with this section.
Exception. Where a portion of the building is changed to an
A-1, A-3 or A-4 Use Group classification fire area, and that
portion is separated from the remainder of the building with
fire walls having a fire resistance rating specified in Table
602 for the type of construction, but not less than the fire
resistance rating of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the
portion changed shall comply with this section.
(5) Section 904.3. Use Group A-2. An automatic fire suppression
system shall be provided throughout all buildings with an Use
Group A-2 fire area. Where an existing building or portion of an
existing building is changed to an A-2 Use Group classification,
or an addition or alteration to an existing building with an A-2
Use Group, the entire building shall comply with this section.
Exception. Where a portion of the building is changed to an
A-2 Use Group classification fire area, and that portion is
separated from the remainder of the building with fire walls
having a fire resistance rating specified in Table 602 for the
type of construction, but not less than the fire resistance rating
of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the portion changed
shall comply with this section.
(6) Section 904.4. Use Group E. An automatic fire suppression
system shall be provided throughout all buildings with an Use
Group E fire area. Where an existing building or portion of an
existing building is changed to an E Use Group classification,
or an addition or alteration to an existing building with an E
Use Group, the entire building shall comply with this section.
Exception. Where a portion of the building is changed to an
E Use Group classification fire area, and that portion is
separated from the remainder of the building with fire walls
having a fire resistance rating specified in Table 602 for the
type of construction, but not less than the fire resistance rating
of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the portion changed
shall comply with this section.
(7) Section 904.5. Use Groups H-1, H-2, H-3 and H-4. An
automatic fire suppression system shall be provided
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:82
throughout all buildings with an Use Group H fire area. Where
an existing building or portion of an existing building is
changed to an H-1, H-2, H-3 or H-4 Use Group classification,
or an addition or alteration to an existing building with an H-1,
H-2, H-3 or H-4 Use Group, the entire building shall comply
with this section.
Exceptions:
(a) Where a portion of the building is changed to an H-1, H-2,
H-3 or H-4 Use Group classification fire area, and that
portion is separated from the remainder of the building
with fire walls having a fire resistance rating specified in
Table 602 for the type of construction, but not less than the
fire resistance rating of the use group specified in Table
707.1, the portion changed shall comply with this section.
(b) An automatic fire suppression system shall not be required
for magazines used for the storage of Use Group H-1
materials and which are constructed and located in
accordance with NFPA 495 and the fire prevention code
listed in Chapter 35.
(8) Section 904.6. Use Group I-1, I-2, and I-3. An automatic fire
suppression system shall be provided throughout all buildings
with an Use Group I-1, I-2 and I-3 fire area. Where an existing
building or portion of an existing building is changed to an I-1,
I-2, or I-3 Use Group classification, or an addition or alteration
to an existing building with an I-1, I-2, or I-3 Use Group, the
entire building shall comply with this section.
Exception. Where a portion of the building is changed to an I-1,
I-2, or I-3 Use Group classification fire area, and that portion
is separated from the remainder of the building with fire walls
having a fire resistance rating specified in Table 602 for the
type of construction, but not less than the fire resistance rating
of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the portion changed
shall comply with this section.
(9) Section 904.7. Use Group M. An automatic fire suppression
system shall be provided throughout all buildings with an Use
Group M fire area. Where an existing building or portion of an
existing building is changed to an M Use Group classification,
or an addition or alteration to an existing building with an M
Use Group, the entire building shall comply with this section.
Exception. Where a portion of the building is changed to an
M Use Group classification fire area, and that portion is
separated from the remainder of the building with fire walls
having a fire resistance rating specified in Table 602 for the
type of construction, but not less than the fire resistance rating
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:83
of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the portion changed
shall comply with this section.
(10) Section 904.8. Use Group R-1. An automatic fire suppression
system shall be provided throughout all buildings with an Use
Group R-1 fire area. Where an existing building or portion of an
existing building is changed to an R-1 Use Group classification,
or an addition or alteration to an existing building with an R-1
Use Group, the entire building shall comply with this section.
Exception. Where a portion of the building is changed to an
R-1 Use Group classification fire area, and that portion is
separated from the remainder of the building with fire walls
having a fire resistance rating specified in Table 602 for the
type of construction, but not less than the fire resistance rating
of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the portion changed
shall comply with this section.
(11) Section 904.9. Use Group R-2. An automatic fire suppression
system shall be provided throughout all buildings with an Use
Group R-2 fire area. Where an existing building or portion of an
existing building is changed to an R-2, Use Group
classification, or an addition or alteration to an existing
building with an R-2 Use Group, the entire building shall
comply with this section.
Exception. Where a portion of the building is changed to an
R-2 Use Group classification fire area, and that portion is
separated from the remainder of the building with fire walls
having a fire resistance rating specified in Table 602 for the
type of construction, but not less than the fire resistance rating
of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the portion changed
shall comply with this section.
(12) Section 906.2. Equipped Throughout. Where the provisions of
this code require that a building or portion thereof be equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system, the systems
shall be designed and installed in accordance with §§ 906.2.1,
906.2.2, 906.2.3, 906.2.4 or 906.2.5. All sprinkler systems shall
be designed with a ten-pound safety factor to the lowest head
pressure from the public water company. A letter on intent
from the water company stating the water company can
provide adequate flow and pressure to a project site shall be
submitted to the Township Code Enforcement Officer.
(13) Section 906.5. Sprinkler Alarms. An approved white strobe
visual alarm appliance shall be connected to every water
sprinkler system riser. Such alarm device shall be activated by
water flow and shall be located in an approved location on the
exterior of the building at each riser. Each riser shall be
numbered with a sign/placard mounted on the exterior of the
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:84
building above the white strobe light. Sign/placard lettering
shall be a minimum of eight inches high by one inch in width.
In addition, the audible and visual alarm notification
appliances installed within the building shall be connected to
the water sprinkler system and shall be activated by water
flow.
(14) Section 915.2.1. Building Height. Standpipe systems shall be
installed throughout all buildings when three or more stories in
height or when any story is more than 50% below grade.
(15) Section 915.2.2. Building Area. Standpipe systems shall be
installed in unlimited area building if deemed necessary by the
Township Fire Chief or where any portion of the building floor
area is more than 250 feet of travel from the nearest point of
Fire Department vehicle access. Number and location of 2 1/2
inch hose connections shall be specified by the Township Fire
Chief.
(16) Section 915.3.1. Type of System Required. Buildings required
by § 915.2 to be equipped with standpipe systems shall be
provided with a wet Class I standpipe system for use by the
Fire Department and those trained in handling heavy fire
streams. A pressure regulating device shall not be installed on
a Class I standpipe system, unless approved by the Township
Fire Chief.
(17) Section 915.7. Hose Connection. A standpipe Class I hose
connection shall be located at each floor level, at every exit,
stairway, and on each side of the wall adjacent to the exit
opening of a horizontal exit.
(18) Section 915.7.2. Roof Hydrants. Where standpipes are
installed in buildings four stories or more in height, at least one
riser shall extend through the roof and terminate in a two way,
2 1/2 inch hose connection. The main control valve on a roof
hydrant or manifolded hose connection shall be located in an
area that is not subject to freezing, is as close to the roof
access as practical and is plainly marked.
(19) Section 916.6. Hose Thread. All required water fire
extinguishing sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be
provided with one or more five inch, self-locking Storz Fire
Department connection in accordance with the applicable
standards. Storz connection shall be installed so the locking
pin release is located at the top. Fire department access shall
be provided and maintained to all Fire Department
connections and fire hydrants. Fire Marshall shall require and
designate public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for
the efficient use of fire apparatus. Designated fire lanes shall
be maintained free of obstructions and vehicles and shall be
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:85
marked in an approved manner. All designated fire lane signs
or markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible
condition at all times and replaced when necessary to insure
adequate visibility. The access roadways shall provide a
minimum turning radii capable of accommodating the largest
fire apparatus the Township's Fire Department and/or mutual
aid companies with a minimum vertical clearance of 13 1/2
feet.
(20) Section 916.8. Signs. A metal sign with raised letters at least
one inch in height shall be mounted on all Fire Department
connections serving sprinklers or standpipes. Such signs shall
read "Automatic Sprinklers" or "Standpipe," or both, as
applicable. Where these systems are pressurized from a fire
pump, an additional sign shall be mounted above the Fire
Department connection. Sign shall state: "Fire Pump
Equipped. Do Not Pump At An Engine Discharge Pressure of
Less Than XXX* PSI." "Where XXX is the installed fire pump
discharge pressure. This sign shall have blue letters with an
appropriate width-to-height ratio on a white background
outlined with a red border. Letters, numbers and border shall
be reflective scotch-lite or equivalent.
(21) Section 917.1. Fire Hydrants. In order to insure that adequate
fire protection is available for the safety and welfare of the
residents of South Hanover Township, fire hydrants shall be
provided as follows:
(a) Location of public and private fire hydrants shall be
determined by the Township Code Enforcement Officer as
recommended by the Township Fire Chief.
(b) Maximum distance between public fire hydrants along the
street main shall not exceed the limits in Table B for each
zoning district.
(c) All fire flow rates shall not be less than the figures in Table
B for each zoning district.
(d) Public fire hydrants should be located as close to a street
intersection as possible with intermediate fire hydrants
installed to meet the required maximum distance between
fire hydrants.
(e) All fire hydrants shall be placed with the pumper outlet
facing toward and perpendicular to the street or parking
lot and shall be located so that they are accessible to
within 10 feet by fire apparatus. Fire hydrants to support a
Fire Department connection shall be installed a minimum
of 10 feet, maximum of 20 feet to the left of the Fire
Department connection.
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:86
(f) Fire hydrants shall be a 5 1/4 inches main base valve with
a six inch shoe inlet, dry barrel type, open counter
clockwise to the left, and shall provide two 2 1/2 inch hose
outlets and one 4 1/2 inch pumper outlet. National
standard threads in the fire hydrant shall be uniform with
that used by South Hanover Township Fire Department.
(g) Water system supplying the hydrants shall be capable of
meeting maximum domestic consumption at all times plus
required fire flow for a minimum duration of two hours at
20 PSI residual pressure.
(h) All fire hydrants shall be classified in accordance with
their rated capacities and color coded in accordance with
the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 291) Fire
Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants. Flow tests shall be
submitted to the Township Code Enforcement Officer for
review and approval before painting. The developer and/or
owner of the building for which the hydrant(s) were
installed shall be responsible for painting of the required
hydrants.
(i) Fire hydrants shall not be installed on a street main less
than eight inches in diameter.
(j) All fire hydrants shall be immediately accessible at all
times and shall not be obstructed by fences, snow and ice,
bushes, flowers, trees, walls or any other object. Changing
the grade by filling in or removing fill within 20 feet of an
existing and/or new hydrant shall be prohibited unless the
hydrant is adjusted to the new grade so that the flange is a
minimum of two inches above finish grade and the center
of the 4 1/2 inch steamer/pumpers 20 inches above finish
grade.
(k) A sufficient number of private fire hydrants shall be
installed to concentrate the required fire flow demand
established by the construction type, size, use group
classification, and exposure of any building shall be
installed with no hose line exceeding 300 feet in length.
Fire hydrants shall be installed on a looped water main in
accordance with the "National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA 24) Installation of Private Service Mains and Their
Appurtenances" around buildings 50,000 square feet and
larger in total area, or when more than three stories in
height.
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:87
Table B
Zoning District
Maximum
Distance
Between
Hydrants
(feet)
Minimum Fire
Flow Demand
(GPM)
R-A 1,200 750
R-S 1,200 750
R-U 1,200 750
R-M 800 1,000
R-MH 600 1,000
V 800 1,000
I-P 400 1,500
R-C 600 1,000
O-P 400 1,500
C-H 400 1,500
F-P 1,200 750
(22) Section 918.4. Where Required. A fire alarm system shall be
installed and maintained in fill operating condition in the
locations described in §§ 918.4.1 through 918.4.11.
(23) Section 918.4.1. Use Group A-1, A-2 or A-3. A fire alarm system
shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing
occupancies in Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3 where any fire area
exceeds 2,800 square feet in area. Where an existing building
or portion of an existing building is changed to an A-1, A-2 or
A-3 Use Group classification, or an addition or alteration to an
existing building with an A-1, A-2 or A-3 Use Group, the use
group fire area shall comply with this section. Activation of the
fire alarm in an A-2 Use Group shall disconnect any strobe
lights, rotating flashing lights, smoke generating machine,
sound system or any other similar type of system that would
interfere with the operation of the fire alarm system.
(24) Section 918.4.2. Use Group A-4. A fire alarm system shall be
installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group A-4.
Where an existing building or portion of an existing building is
changed to an A-4 Use Group classification, or an addition or
alteration to an existing building with an A-4 Use Group, the
use group fire area shall comply with this section.
(25) Section 918.4.3. Use Group B. A fire alarm system shall be
installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group B
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:88
where any fire area exceeds 2,800 square feet in area. Where
an existing building or portion of an existing building is
changed to an B Use Group classification, or an addition or
alteration to an existing building with a B Use Group, the use
group fire area shall comply with this section.
(26) Section 918.4.4. Use Group E. A fire alarm system shall be
installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies in
Use Group E. Where an existing building or portion of an
existing building is changed to an E Use Group classification,
or an addition or alteration to an existing building with an E
Use Group, the use group fire area shall comply with this
section.
(27) Section 918.4.5. Use Group F-1, F-2. A fire alarm system shall
be installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Groups
F-1 or F-2 where any fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet in
area. Where an existing building or portion of an existing
building is changed to an F-1 or F-2 Use Group classification,
or an addition or alteration to an existing building with an F-1
or F-2 Use Group, the use group fire area shall comply with this
section.
(28) Section 918.4.6. Use Group H. A fire alarm system shall be
installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group H-2,
H-3 or H-4. Where an existing building or portion of an existing
building is changed to an H-2, H-3 or H-4 Use Group
classification, or an addition or alteration to an existing
building with an H Use Group, the use group fire area shall
comply with this section.
(29) Section 918.4.7. Use Group I. A fire alarm system shall be
installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group I.
Where an existing building or portion of an existing building is
changed to an I Use Group classification, or an addition or
alteration to an existing building with an I Use Group, the use
group fire area shall comply with this section.
(30) Section 918.4.8. Use Group M. A fire alarm system shall be
installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group M
where any fire area exceeds 2,800 square feet in area. Where
an existing building or portion of an existing building is
changed to an M Use Group classification, or an addition or
alteration to an existing building with an M Use Group, the use
group fire area shall comply with this section.
(31) Section 918.4.9. Use Group R-1. A fire alarm system shall be
installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group R-1.
Where an existing building or portion of an existing building is
changed to an R-1 Use Group classification or an addition or
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:89
alteration to an existing building with a R-1 Use Group, the use
group fire area shall comply with this section.
(32) Section 918.4.10. Use Group R-2. A fire alarm system shall be
installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group R-2.
Where an existing building or portion of an existing building is
changed to an R-2 Use Group classification or an addition or
alteration to an existing building with an R-2 Use Group, the
use group fire area shall comply with this section.
(33) Section 918.4.11. Use Group S-1, S-2. A fire alarm system shall
be installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Groups
S-1 or S-2 where any fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet in
area where an existing building or portion of an existing
building is changed to an S-1 or S-2 Use Group classification,
or an addition or alteration to an existing building with an S-1
or S-2 Use Group, the use group fire area shall comply with this
section.
(34) Section 918.7.3. Zones. Each floor shall be zoned separately
and a zone shall not exceed 20,000 square feet. The length of
any zone shall not exceed 300 feet in any direction. A zoning
indicator panel and the associated controls shall be provided in
an approved location. The visual zone indication shall lock in
until the system is reset and shall not be canceled by the
operation of an audible alarm silencing switch. In buildings two
or more stories in height which are occupied for human
occupancy, a separate zone by floor shall be provided for the
following types of alarm notification devices where provided:
(a) Smoke detectors.
(b) Sprinkler water flow devices.
(c) Manual fire alarm boxes.
(d) Other approved types of automatic fire detection devices
or suppression systems
All alarm initiating and alarm notification appliances shall
be individually numbered. Schematic 8 1/2 inch by 11
inch copies of the fire alarm zones shall be forwarded to
the Fire Chief by the contractor/owner.
Exception. Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not
exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 listed in Chapter
35.
(35) Section 918.8. Alarm Notification Appliances. Visible and
audible alarm notification appliances of the approved type
shall be provided in all occupancies.
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:90
(36) Section 923.1. General. Where required by § 507.3 for
unlimited area buildings, smoke and heat vents shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with this section.
(37) Section 923.2.1. Releasing Devices. Smoke and heat vents
shall open automatically by activation of a heat-responsive
device rated a minimum of one increment above the
temperature rating of the ceiling sprinklers. The releasing
mechanism shall be capable of operation such that the vent
shall fully open when the vent is exposed to a time temperature
gradient that reaches an air temperature of 500° F. (260° C.)
within five minutes. Vents shall be capable of being opened by
an approved manual operation.
Exception: Manual smoke and heat vents shall be installed
when the building is protected by an ESFR automatic fire
suppression system. A minimum of one four feet by eight feet
vent shall be installed at the highest point of the roof within
each bay for each 8,000 square feet of floor area.
(38) Section 923.3. Curtain Board Construction. Curtain boards
shall be provided to subdivide a vented building where exit
access travel distance is increased in accordance with
§ 1006.5.1. Curtain boards shall be constructed of material
that will resist the passage of smoke and is consistent with the
building type of construction. Curtain board location and depth
shall comply with Table 923.2. The bottom of the curtain board
shall be level.
(39) Section 924.1. Fire Suppression Systems. All automatic fire
suppression systems required for occupancies in Use Group A,
B, E, F, H, I, M, R or S shall be supervised by an approved
central station system in accordance with NFPA 72 listed in
Chapter 35. In addition, if deemed necessary by the Township
Fire Marshall, all valves on connections to water supplies,
sectional control valves and other valves in supply pipes to fire
protection devices shall be locked in an open position.
(40) Section 924.2. Fire Alarm Systems. All required fire alarm
systems shall transmit alarm and trouble signals to an
approved central station system.
F. Chapter 10.
(1) Section 1015.2. Where Required. All exit stairways serving
occupants of a floor level six or more stories in height, or
located more than one story below the level of exit discharge,
shall be protected by a smoke proof enclosure.
(2) Section 1017.4.2. Panic Hardware. All exit doors equipped with
latching devices in buildings of Use Group A, B, E, F, H, I-1, I-2,
M, R-1, R-2 and S shall be equipped with approved panic
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:91
hardware. Acceptable panic hardware will be a door latching
assembly incorporating a device which causes the door latch to
release and the leaf to open when a force of $0.15 is applied in
the direction of egress to a bar or panel, the activating portion
of which extends not less than 1/2 the width of the door leaf,
and applied at a height greater than 30 inches but less than 44
inches above the floor. The force shall be applied at the lock
side of the door or 30 inches from the hinged side, whichever
is farther from the hinge. Where fire door assemblies are
required to have panic hardware, approved fire exit hardware
shall be used.
(3) Section 1023.3. Illumination. Each sign shall be internally
illuminated by a source providing not less than five footcandles
(54 lux) at the illuminated surface and shall have a contrast
ratio of not less than 0.5.
G. Chapter 24.
(1) Section 2405.3. Glass in Firefighter Access Panels. In cases
where tempered glass is required in firefighter access panels
or where tempered glass panels for natural ventilation is
provided for the management of products of combustion, both
panes in double glazing shall be tempered glass. These
tempered glass panels shall be clearly and permanently
marked by etching the glass with a fire-fighter's helmet
symbol.
H. Chapter 33.
(1) Section 3305.3.3. Fire Department Connections. For each
temporary or permanent standpipe installation, there shall be
provided, at the street level, one or more five inch, self-locking
Storz Fire Department connection(s). Storz connection shall be
installed so the locking pin release is located at the top. Access
shall be provided to Fire Department connections at all times,
and such connections shall be prominently identified in an
approved manner (See § 916.8).
I. Chapter 34.
(1) Section 3408.1. Compliance. The provisions of this section are
intended to maintain or increase the current degree of public
safety, health and general welfare in existing buildings while
permitting repair, alteration, addition and change of occupancy
without requiring full compliance with Chapters 2 through 33
or §§ 3403.0 through 3407.0, except where compliance with
other provisions of this code is specifically required in this
section. However, any change of use and occupancy of an
existing building shall made in full compliance with Chapter 9.
J. Chapter 35.
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:92
(1) Referenced Standards (NFPA):
(a) 13-96. Installation of Sprinkler Systems.
(b) 13D-96. Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One and Two-
Family Dwellings and Manufactured Houses.
(c) 13R-96. Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential
Occupancies Up to and Including Four Stories in Height.
(d) 30-96. Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code.
(e) 72-96. National Fire Alarm Code.
3. Additions. The following new sections and subsections are hereby
added to the "BOCA National Building Code, Thirteenth Edition 1996,"
herein adopted.
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section 102.5. Continuation of Unlawful Use. The continuation
of occupancy or use of a building or structure, or part thereof,
contrary to the provisions of this code, shall be deemed a
violation and be subject to the penalties prescribed in this
article.
(2) Section 102.6. Other Regulations. When the provisions herein
specified for health, safety and welfare are more restrictive
than other regulations, this code shall control; but in any case,
the most rigid requirements of either the building code or
other regulations shall apply whenever a conflict exists.
(3) Section 102.7. Repairs. Application or notice to the code
official is not required for permits in accordance with the Code
Enforcement Ordinance § 5-5(b). Repairs shall not include the
cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cuffing of any structural beam or bearing support,
or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or
rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exit
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to,
alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water
supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or
similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work
affecting public health or general safety.
(4) Section 118.5. Posting. The certificate of use and occupancy
shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and
shall not be removed except by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Exception. Use Groups R-3 and R-4
(5) Section 118.6. Revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer may,
in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of use and
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:93
occupancy issued under the provisions of this article whenever
the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect
information supplied, or when it is determined that the
building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of this
article regulation or the technical codes.
B. Chapter 4.
(1) Section 403.7.1. Size. The fire command station room shall be
a minimum of 100 square feet in area with a minimum width of
seven feet.
(2) Section 406.7. Fire Suppression System. An automatic fire
suppression system shall be provided throughout each story of
an open parking structure. For the purpose of this section, a
roof occupied for the parking or storage of motor vehicles shall
not constitute a story.
C. Chapter 5.
(1) Section 507.3. Roof Vents. The roof system of one story
buildings of unlimited area when of Type 1, 2, 3, or 4
construction shall be provided with smoke and heat vents in
accordance with § 923.0.
Exception. Manual smoke and heat vents shall be installed
when then building is protected by an ESFR automatic fire
suppression system. A minimum of one four foot by eight foot
vent shall be installed at the highest point of the roof within
each bay for 8,000 square feet of floor area.
(2) Section 507.4. Emergency Vehicle Access. Stabilized
emergency vehicle access shall be provided around all
buildings which are defined as "Unlimited Area Building" by
the BOCA National Building Code or as otherwise required by
Township fire safety authorities. Stabilized areas shall be
located as required by the Township and consist of paving in
accordance with Township standards, a minimum 18 feet in
width.
D. Chapter 7.
(1) Section 711.1.1. Use Group R-3 Structures. Single-family
dwelling units (Use Group R-3) located adjacent to other
single-family dwelling units (Use Group R-3) shall be
completely separated by a two hour, fire-resistance masonry
wall constructed in accordance with § 707.0 "Fire Walls and
Party Walls."
E. Chapter 9.
(1) Section 904.1.1. Separate Rooms. Alarm check valves are to be
located in separate rooms with direct access provided to the
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:94
Fire Department from an exterior door. Wall post indicator
valves may be installed in lieu of a separate room.
(2) Section 904.12. Use Group B. An automatic fire suppression
system shall be provided throughout all buildings with an Use
Group B fire area. Where an existing building or portion of an
existing building is changed to an B Use Group classification,
or an addition or alteration to an existing building with an B
Use Group, the entire building shall comply with this section.
Exception: Where a portion of the building is changed to a
B Use Group classification fire area, and that portion is
separated from the remainder of the building with fire walls
having a fire resistance rating specified in Table 602 for the
type of construction, but not less than the fire resistance rating
of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the portion changed
shall comply with this section.
(3) Section 904.13. Use Groups F-1, F-2. An automatic fire
suppression system shall be provided throughout all buildings
with an Use Group F-1 or F-2 fire area. Where an existing
building or portion of an existing building is changed to an F-1
or F-2 Use Group classification, or an addition or alteration to
an existing building with an F-1 or F-2 Use Group, the entire
building shall comply with this section.
Exception: Where a portion of the building is changed to an
F-1 or F-2 Use Group classification fire area, and that portion
is separated from the remainder of the building with fire walls
having a fire resistance rating specified in Table 602 for the
type of construction, but not less than the fire resistance rating
of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the portion changed
shall comply with this section.
(4) Section 904.14. Use Group R-3. An automatic fire suppression
system shall be provided throughout all buildings two stories in
height arranged for multiple single-family dwellings where
three or more single-family dwelling units are located above
the other and each unit has an independent means of egress.
(5) Section 904.15. Use Groups S-1, S-2. An automatic fire
suppression system shall be provided throughout all buildings
with a Use Group S-1 or S-2 fire area. Where an existing
building or portion of an existing building is changed to an S-1
or S-2 Use Group classification, or an addition or alteration to
an existing building with an S-1 or S-2 Use Group, the entire
building shall comply with this section.
Exception. Where a portion of the building is changed to an
S-1 or S-2 Use Group classification fire area, and that portion
is separated from the remainder of the building with fire walls
having a fire resistance rating specified in Table 602 for the;
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:95
type of construction, but not less than the fire resistance rating
of the use group specified in Table 707.1, the portion changed
shall comply with this section.
(6) Section 904.16. Change in Use Group. Where an existing
building is changed to a new use group classification, this
§ 904.0 "Fire Suppression Systems," is applicable and the
provisions of this section for the new use group shall be used
for compliance with this code.
(7) Section 904.17. Part Change in Use Group. Where a portion of
the building is changed to a new use group classification, and
that portion is separated from the remainder of the building
with fire separation assemblies having a fire resistance rating
as required by Table 313.1.2 for the separate use groups, the
portion changed shall be made to conform to the provisions of
this section.
Where a portion of the building is changed to a new use
group classification, and that portion is not separated from
the remainder of the building with fire separation assemblies
having a fire resistance rating as required by Table 313.1.2 for
the separate use groups, the provisions of this section which
apply to each use group shall apply to the entire building.
Where there are conflicting provisions, those requirements
which secure the greater public safety shall apply to the entire
building or structure.
(8) Section 906.2.4. NFPA 231 — General Storage. This standard
applies to storage of materials representing the broad range of
combustibles up to 30 feet in height; storage of plastics (Group
B and C - all configurations; Group A - free flowing only) up to
30 feet in height or storage of Group A plastics (except free
flowing) up to 25 feet in height in new buildings and existing
buildings that are converted to storage occupancies.
(9) Section 906.2.5. NFPA 231C — Rack Storage of Materials. This
standard applies to storage of materials representing the
broad range of combustibles stored over 12 feet in height on
racks. For storage height of 12 feet or less see NFPA 13,
"Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems."
(10) Section 915.3.2. Jump Cabinets. If deemed necessary by the
Fire Chief, a jump cabinet shall be provided at grade entrance
in each stair tower of buildings four or more stories in height.
The jump cabinet shall be equipped as follows:
(a) Two hundred feet of 1 3/4 inch double jacketed hose.
(b) One task force tip (TFT) nozzle.
(c) One 2 1/2 inch gated wye with 1 1/2 inch valves.
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:96
(d) One axe.
(e) One pike pole.
(11) Section 916.9. Existing Fire Department Connections. All
existing 2 1/2 inch siamese Fire Department connections shall
be changed to a single, five inch, self-locking Storz connection
on or before July 1, 2000.
(12) Section 917.2. R-1 and R-2 Use Groups. A duplicate room
number shall be installed in the center and within six inches
from the bottom of the entrance door. Sign shall be a minimum
of 1 1/2 inches by five inches with white reflective numbers on
a red background.
(13) Section 918.11. Fire Alarm Control Unit (Panel). The fire alarm
control panel and/or remote annunciator shall be located in a
location approved by the Township Fire Chief. Fire alarm zone
proposed wording shall be submitted to the Township Code
Enforcement Officer for review and approval. Alarm panel
wording shall be user friendly for the Fire Department
personnel.
(14) Section 918.12. Exterior Door Security. All exterior egress
doors which are equipped with an electrical controlled lock
from the exterior side shall be capable of being unlocked
simultaneously upon activation of the fire alarm system.
(15) Section 920.7. Improvements or Additions to Existing Dwelling
Units.
(a) A minimum of one U.L.-listed, hardwired with battery
back-up smoke detector and carbon monoxide detector
shall be installed in accordance with NFPA Standard No.
72 upon the installation of a wood and/or coal stove, gas
fireplace, or oil-fired appliance in an existing dwelling unit.
(b) A minimum of one approved, hardwired with battery backup
smoke detector shall be installed on every floor,
including basements, for any capital improvement addition
or remodeling, including repair, reconstruction or removal
of any part of an existing dwelling unit when the cost of
any such changes exceed $1,000.
(16) Section 920.8. Carbon Monoxide Detector. A minimum of one
U.L.-listed carbon monoxide detector shall be installed in all
new dwelling units where wood, coal, oil or gas heating
appliances are installed per manufacturer's installation
instructions.
(17) Section 924.3. No central station shall be eligible to monitor
any BOCA National Building Code required automatic fire
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:97
suppression systems or fire protective signaling systems,
unless the central station is U.L.-listed. A central station shall
provide documentation confirming their U.L. listing to the
Code Enforcement Department.
(18) Section 924.4. Fire Alarm Approvals. Upon completion of the
fire alarm installation the system shall be inspected by a third
party electrical inspection agency and the installation
contractor shall supply an installation completion form and
installation inspection sign-off form, along with a copy of the
electrical inspection to the Code Enforcement Department. For
Use Groups R-1 and R-2, the system shall be certified and
designated as a certified system.
(19) Section 924.5. Fire Department Rapid Entry System. To insure
immediate building entry by Fire Department personnel on all
buildings equipped throughout with an automatic fire
suppression system, an approved Knox-Box® shall be installed
in an approved location. Keys to the building, gates, security,
sprinkler, valves and fire alarm systems shall be installed in the
presence of the owner by the Township Fire Chief or Assistant
Chief keys shall be updated when locks are changed and/or
there is a change in occupancy. All Knox-Boxes® shall be
equipped with a tamper switch wired to sound an alarm at the
premises and shall be supervised in accordance with the
Township's Building Code for supervision of the fire
suppression and fire alarm systems. Where an existing building
or portion of an existing building is changed to a new Use
Group classification, or an addition or alteration to an existing
building required to be protected by an automatic fire
suppression system, an approved Knox-Box® shall be installed
in accordance with this section.
(20) Section 924.6. Flexspace Multiple Tenant Buildings. Flexspace
multiple tenant buildings shall comply with all the applicable
regulations of the 1996 BOCA National Building Code,
including the following:
(a) A fire protective signaling system shall be installed and
maintained in all flexspace multiple tenant use group
buildings in accordance with § 918.0 of the 1996 BOCA
National Building Code.
(b) Each tenant space shall be zoned separately. The length of
any zone shall not exceed 200 feet in any direction.
(c) Each zone shall contain smoke detectors connected to an
audible visible, alarm indicating appliance located above
an outside entrance door to that space. At least one
§ 5-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-204
1:98
additional audible visible, alarm indicating appliance shall
be installed within every tenant space in the building.
(d) A fire alarm panel with zoning indication and associated
controls shall be provided in an approved location. The fire
alarm panel shall be located in a separate room with direct
access provided to the Fire Department from an exterior
door.
(e) Alarms shall sound throughout every tenant space within
the building.
(f) The alarm notification appliance shall be automatically
activated in accordance with § 918.7.1 of the 1996 BOCA
National Building Code.
(g) A Knox-Box® shall be provided in accordance with § 924.5
of the 1996 BOCA National Building Code. Location of
Knox-Box® shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
F. Chapter 18.
(1) Section 1806.1. Frost Protection:
Exception. Storage sheds less than 250 square feet.
§ 5-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:99

DIVISION 2
(Reserved)2
2. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Div. 2, Flood Control Provisions, adopted 1/26/1999 by Ord.
No. 3-1999, was superseded 4/11/1995 by Ord. No. 2-1995. For current provisions, see Ch.
27, Zoning, Art. XIV, Floodplain District. F-P.
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-204
1:101

ARTICLE III
National Electrical Code3
§ 5-301. Title. [Ord. No. 5-1999, § I, 1/26/1999]
This article together with the "National Electrical Code, 1996 Edition"
(NFPA 70-1996) as published by the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) adopted herein, shall be known and may be cited as the "Electrical
Code of South Hanover Township."
§ 5-302. Adoption of standards. [Ord. No. 5-1999, § II, 1/26/1999]
§ 5-303. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5-1999, § III, 1/26/1999]
APPROVED ELECTRICAL INSPECTION AGENCY — An entity which
engages in the business of inspection of electrical construction work and
complies with provisions of this article.
CORPORATE COUNCIL — As used in the national electrical code shall mean
the solicitor for South Hanover Township.
CUSTOMER — A person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other entity which has engaged the services of an electrical inspection
agency.
ELECTRICAL CONSTRUCTION — Any installation of electric wiring,
appurtenances and structures, conduits and equipment within or on public,
private, residential, commercial or industrial premises, beyond the point
of connection to the lines of the utility furnishing electrical service. The
purpose of the installation is to result in the utilization of electric energy for
light, heat or power.
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR — An individual who performs inspection of
electrical construction work.
1. National electric code. There is hereby adopted in its entirety, by South
Hanover Township, copies of which are on file in the code enforcement
department that certain electrical code known as the "National
Electrical Code, 1996 Edition" (NFPA 70-1996) as published by the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) through the effective date
of adoption of this article save and except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, amended or added.
2. Application. The provision set forth in this article and the "National
Electrical Code, 1996 Edition," adopted herein, shall take effect 35 days
from the date of enactment of this article or any amendment thereto
and shall apply throughout the entire Township.
3. Editor's Note: Sections 1, 2, 3, 6 And 9 Of Ord. No. 5-1999 Were Repealed By Ord. No.
3-2004, Which Provided For Administration And Enforcement Of The Uniform
Construction Code. See Now Art. VII Of This Chapter.
§ 5-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-303
1:103
INSPECTION — The act of investigating electric construction for the
purpose of certifying conformance of such construction with the applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations of the Township.
MUNICIPALITY — As used in the national electrical code shall mean South
Hanover Township.
§ 5-304. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. No. 5-1999, § IV, 1/
26/1999]
1. Department of Code Enforcement. All the provisions of South Hanover
Township's Code Enforcement Ordinance [Article I] are hereby adopted
with this article. The administration and enforcement of this article and
of the "National Electrical Code, 1996 Edition" NFPA 70-1996) herein
adopted shall be carried out by the Township's code enforcement
department in accordance with the procedures established by the Code
Enforcement Ordinance [Article I] and by the "National Electrical Code,
1996 Edition" (NFPA 70-1996) adopted herein. Said Code Enforcement
Ordinance [Article I] provides for certain powers and duties of a Code
Enforcement Officer, for the creation of a code hearing board and for
procedures relative to applications, fees, permits, inspections, appeals,
penalties and other matters.
2. Inspections. No construction, installation, alteration or repair of any
electrical wiring, electrical machinery or other electrical apparatus
shall be done until the manner and method of installation, construction,
alteration or repair has been inspected and approved by an approved
electrical inspection agency. The payment of all electrical inspection
fees and charges by an approved electrical inspection agency shall be
borne by the applicant.
A. In addition to the inspections required by South Hanover Township
Code Enforcement Ordinance [Article I], the following electrical
inspections shall be made by an approved electrical inspection
agency:
(1) Service meter equipment, including feeders or power cord and
subpanels.
(2) Rough wiring inspections.
(3) Spa, hot tub, hydro massage tub, sauna, etc.
(4) Submersible well pumps.
(5) Water heaters, electric furnaces, central heating and air
conditioning.
(6) Fire protective signaling systems.
(7) Automatic fire detection systems.
(8) Single- and multiple-station smoke detectors.
§ 5-303 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-304
1:104
§ 5-305. Electrical inspection agencies. [Ord. No. 5-1999, § V, 1/26/
1999]
(9) CATV systems including TV satellite dish antenna.
(10) Swimming pool bonding and equipment.
(11) Signs, special service and/or conditions not provided for in this
list.
(12) Final inspection of all the above.
3. Electric plans. Electrical plans shall be submitted to an approved
electrical inspection agency for plan review with a copy of the plan
review comments submitted to the Township code enforcement
department.
4. Violations. Whenever the inspection by an approved electrical
inspection agency shows that the provisions of this article have not
been complied with, the approved electrical inspection agency shall
inform the Code Enforcement Officer of the violations. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall then notify the applicant of the violations and
how to abate the violations to achieve compliance with this article.
Failure to abate the violations after a reasonable length of time shall be
sufficient reason for notification of the electrical utility company to
disconnect or refuse to connect electrical power to the structure.
5. Concealing work. Work in connection with an electrical wiring system
shall not be covered or concealed until it has been inspected, approved
and permission to do so have been granted by the Code Enforcement
Officer. When such work has been covered or concealed before
inspection and approval, it shall be exposed for inspection.
6. Inspection of existing electrical wiring and apparatus. In order to
provide safety against existing hazards or defective electrical wiring
and apparatus the Code Enforcement Officer and/or his authorized
representative, including an approved electrical inspection agency,
shall when requested by proper authority or when public interest so
requires, cause inspections to be made of any structure in the Township
to insure that the existing electrical wiring and apparatus is not
defective or unsafe. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the
owner of the structure of any unsafe or defective conditions that are
found and shall require owner to abate/correct the unsafe or defective
condition in accordance with this article within a reasonable length of
time.
1. General. Electrical inspection agencies working in the business of
inspection of electrical construction work within South Hanover
Township shall comply with the requirements of this article in order to
be approved.
§ 5-304 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-305
1:105
2. Requirements for electrical inspection agencies. Electrical inspection
agencies working in South Hanover Township shall:
A. Submit a copy of letter of certification as an approved electrical
inspection agency from the local electric utility company to the
Township code enforcement department.
B. Submit the names of all the inspection personnel working for the
electrical inspection agency to the Township code enforcement
department along with a copy of their test modules for certification
as a:
(1) One- and two-family Electrical Inspector.
(2) Electrical Inspector.
(3) Electrical plan examiner offered by the Board of Governors of
the National Certification Program for Construction Code
Inspectors (NCPCCI).
C. Procure and keep in force at its own expense insurance coverage as
follows:
(1) General liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 per
occurrence.
(2) Automobile liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 per
occurrence.
D. Submit a copy of a "certificate of insurance" signed by an
authorized representative of the agency's insurance underwriter,
giving evidence of insurance coverage to the Township code
enforcement department.
E. Submit a duplicate municipal record card with the number and
type of fixtures and apparatus approved by the Electrical Inspector
to the Township code enforcement department not later than 15
days after the final inspection of the electrical construction work.
F. Notify the Township Code Enforcement Officer of all inspection
personnel changes within five days of any change.
3. Electrical Inspectors requirements.
A. Competency. All Electrical Inspectors employed by an approved
electrical inspection agency shall be qualified to inspect electrical
construction work in South Hanover Township provided they have
passed the test modules for certification as a:
(1) One- and two-family Electrical Inspector.
(2) Electrical Inspector.
§ 5-305 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-305
1:106
§ 5-306. (Reserved)4
§ 5-307. Flood control regulations. [Ord. No. 5-1999, § VII, 1/26/
1999]
(3) Electrical plan examiner offered by the Board of Governors of
the National Certification Program for Construction Code
Inspectors (NCPCCI).
B. Electrical code. All inspections by the agencies Electrical
Inspectors shall be made to insure compliance with the National
Electrical Code adopted by South Hanover Township.
C. Inspection stickers. All inspection stickers issued by the Electrical
Inspectors shall be signed and designate the type of inspection
made, i.e., service, rough-wire, final, swimming pool bonding, etc.
All approval stickers shall be placed on the electrical panel when
available.
4. Failure to comply. The Board of Supervisors may revoke or suspend the
approval granted to any electrical inspection agency upon complaint by
a customer or on the Township's own initiative. Suspension or
revocation of approval may be for (but not limited to) the following
reasons:
A. Obtained approval by misrepresentation.
B. Refused or failed to comply with the rules, regulations or
ordinances of the Township.
C. Engaged in fraudulent business activities or misleading practices.
D. Committed an act of gross negligence or condoned such an act by
its inspectors.
E. Failed to adequately and properly supervise the inspectors to
insure compliance with the national electrical code adopted by the
Township.
F. Failed to comply with the electrical inspection agencies
requirements listed in Subsection 2 of this section.
1. General. The following subsections shall apply to all construction of an
electrical system and to existing electrical systems when 50% or more
of the electric system is modified, altered, reconstructed or replaced,
occurring in any of the floodplain districts designated in the South
Hanover Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27], as amended.
2. Appliances. All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric air
conditioning and ventilating systems and other critical electrical
4. Editor's Note: Section 5-306 was repealed 1/26/1999 by Ord. No. 5-1999.
§ 5-305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-307
1:107
§ 5-308. Penalties. [Ord. No. 5-1999, § VIII, 1/26/1999]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article and/or the Township's electrical code shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding before any district justice, be sentenced for each such
violation to pay a fine of not less than $50 plus costs and not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms
and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 5-309. General provisions. [Ord. No. 5-1999, § 9, 1/26/1999]
installations shall be permitted only at elevations of 1 1/2 feet or more
above the regulatory flood elevation.
3. Electric panels. No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an
elevation less than three feet above the level of the one-hundred-year
flood elevation.
4. Circuits. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall
be dropped from above.
1. Conflicting provisions.
A. Where conflicts occur between the technical codes, those
provisions providing the greater safety to life shall govern. In other
conflicts where sanitation, life safety or fire safety are not involved,
the most restrictive provisions shall govern.
B. Where in any specific case different sections within any of the
technical codes specify different materials, methods of
construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement
and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.
2. Partial validity. In the event any part or provision of this article or the
"National Electrical Code, 1996 Edition" (NFPA 70-1996), herein
adopted, is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of
making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions thereof,
which are determined to be legal; and it shall be presumed that this
article and the "National Electrical Code, 1996 Edition" (NFPA 70-1996)
would have been passed without such illegal or invalid parts or
provisions.
3. Segregation. Any invalid part of this article or the "National Electrical
Code, 1996 Edition" (NFPA 70-1996) herein adopted, shall be
segregated from the remainder of this article and the "National
Electrical Code, 1996 Edition" (NFPA 70-1996) by the court holding
such part invalid and the remainder shall remain effective.
§ 5-307 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-309
1:108
4. Saving clause. Nothing in this article or the "National Electrical Code,
1996 Edition" (NFPA 70-1996) herein adopted, shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights
acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued
or existing under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or
remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or affected by this
article.
§ 5-309 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-309
1:109

ARTICLE IV
BOCA National Plumbing Code5
§ 5-401. Title. [Ord. No. 4-1999, § I, 1/26/1999]
This article together with the "International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition,"
Inc., adopted herein, shall be known and may be cited as the "Plumbing
Code of South Hanover Township."
§ 5-402. Adoption of standards. [Ord. No. 4-1999, § II, 1/26/1999]
§ 5-403. Administration and government. [Ord. No. 4-1999, § III, 1/
26/1999]
All the provisions of South Hanover Township's Code Enforcement
Ordinance [Article I] are hereby adopted with this article. The
administration and enforcement of this article and the "International
Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," herein adopted shall be carried out by
the Township's code enforcement department in accordance with the
procedures established by the Code Enforcement Ordinance [Article I] and
by the "International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," adopted herein. Said
Code Enforcement Ordinance [Article I] provides for certain powers and
duties of a Code Enforcement Officer, for the creation of a code hearing
board and for procedures relative to applications, fees, permits, inspections,
appeals, penalties and other matters.
§ 5-404. Deletions, amendments and additions. [Ord. No. 4-1999,
§ IV, 1/26/1999]
1. International plumbing code. There is hereby adopted in its entirety, by
South Hanover Township, copies of which are on file in the code
enforcement department, that certain plumbing code known as the
"International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., (ICC), the Building Officials and Code
Administrators Inc. (BOCA), the International Conference of Building
Officials (ICBO) and the Southern Building Code Congress
International, Inc. (SBCCI), through the effective date of adoption of
this article, save and except portions as are hereinafter deleted,
amended, or added.
2. Application. The provisions set forth in this article and in the
"International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," adopted herein shall take
effect 35 days from the date of enactment of this article or any
amendment thereto and shall apply throughout the entire Township.
5. Editor's Note: Sections 1, 2, 3 And 7 Of Ord. No. 4-1999 Were Repealed By Ord. No.
3-2004, Which Provided For Administration And Enforcement Of The Uniform
Construction Code. See Now Art. VII Of This Chapter.
§ 5-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-404
1:111
1. Deletions. The following section and subsections of the "International
Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," herein adopted, are hereby deleted in
their entirety:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section 103. Department of Plumbing Inspection.
(2) Section 104. Duties and Powers of the Code Official.
(3) Section 106. Permits.
(4) Section 108. Violations.
(5) Section 109. Means of Appeal.
2. Amendments. The following sections and subsections of the
"International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," herein adopted, are
hereby attended to read as follows:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Plumbing Code of South Hanover Township, hereinafter
referred to as the plumbing code or "this code."
B. Chapter 3.
(1) Section 305.6. Freezing. Water service piping shall be installed
below recorded frost penetration but not less than three feet,
six inches below grade. In climates with freezing
temperatures, plumbing piping in exterior building walls or
area subjected to freezing temperatures shall be protected
against freezing by insulation or heat or both:
(2) Section 305.6.1. Sewer Depth. Building sewers that connect to
private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12
inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank
connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 36 inches
below grade.
C. Chapter 9.
(1) Section 903.1. Main Vent Required. Every sanitary drainage
system receiving the discharge of a water closet shall have a
main vent that is either a vent stack or a stack vent. Such vent
shall not be less than three inches in diameter, and shall run
undiminished in size and as directly as possible from the
building drain through to the open air above the roof.
(2) Section 904.1. Roof Extension. All open vent pipes that extend
through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches above the
roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose
§ 5-404 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-404
1:112
§ 5-405. Flood control regulations. [Ord. No. 4-1999, § V, 1/26/1999]
other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run
at least seven feet above the roof.
D. Article 14.
(1) Codes:
(a) BNBC - 96 BOCA National Building Code.
(b) NFPA 54-96 National Fuel Gas Code.
(c) ICC-96 International Mechanical Code.
3. Additions. The following sections and subsections are hereby added to
the "International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," herein adopted.
A. Chapter 3.
(1) Section 301.7. General. The water distribution and drainage
system of any building in which plumbing fixtures are installed
shall be connected to a public water main and sewer,
respectively, if available. Where a public water main is not
available, an individual water supply shall be provided. Where
a public sewer is not available, or under special circumstances
the Municipal Authority of South Hanover Township may waive
this requirement upon proper application to the Authority, an
individual sewage disposal system shall be provided in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act 537.
(2) Section 301.8. Public Systems Available. A public water main
or public sewer system shall be considered available to a
building when the building is located within 300 feet measured
along a street, alley, or easement of the public water main or
sewer system.
(3) Section 312.1. Required Tests:
(a) Exception 1. In any case which does not include, addition
to, replacement, alteration or relocation of any water
supply, drainage or vent piping.
(b) Exception 2. In any case where plumbing equipment is set
up temporarily for exhibition purposes.
(c) Exception 3. Above ground DWV in one and two-family
dwellings (R-3 use).
1. General. The following sections shall apply to all construction of a
plumbing system occurring in any of the floodplain districts designated
in South Hanover Township's Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27], as
amended.
§ 5-404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-405
1:113
§ 5-406. Penalties. [Ord. No. 4-1999, § VI, 1/26/1999]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
article and/or the Township's plumbing code shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding before any district justice, be sentenced for each such
violation to pay a fine of not less than $50 plus costs and not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues after the notice has been served in accordance with the terms and
provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 5-407. General provisions. [Ord. No. 4-1999, § VII, 1/26/1999]
2. Appliances. Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment
or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above the regulatory
flood.
3. Water supply systems. Water supply systems and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designated to preclude infiltration of floodwaters into
the systems and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
4. Gas and oil. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude
the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that the floodwater infiltration
occurs.
5. On-lot septic systems. No part of any on-site sewage disposal system
shall be construed within any designated floodplain districts.
1. Conflicting provisions.
A. Where conflicts occur between the technical codes, those
provisions providing the greater safety to life shall govern. In other
conflicts where sanitation, life safety or fire safety are not involved,
the most restrictive provisions shall govern.
B. Where in any specific case different sections within any of the
technical codes specify different materials, methods of
construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement
and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.
2. Partial validity. In the event any part or provision of this article or the
"International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," herein adopted, is held to
be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal
any of the other parts or provisions thereof, which are determined to be
legal; and it shall be presumed that this article and the "International
Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition" would have been passed without such
illegal or invalid parts or provisions.
§ 5-405 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-407
1:114
3. Segregation of invalid provisions. Any invalid part of this article or the
"International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," herein adopted, shall be
segregated from the remainder of this article and the "International
Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition" by the court holding such part invalid,
and the remainder shall remain effective.
4. Saving clause. Nothing in this article or in the International Plumbing
Code, 1997 Edition, herein adopted, shall be construed to affect any
suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights acquired or
liability incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing
under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any
character shall be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 5-407 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-407
1:115

ARTICLE V
BOCA National Fire Prevention Code6
§ 5-501. Title. [Ord. No. 7-1999, § I, 1/26/1999]
This article, together with the "BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth
Edition, 1996," as published by the Building Officials Code Administrators
International, Inc., adopted herein, shall be known and may be cited as the
"Fire Prevention Code of South Hanover Township."
§ 5-502. Adoption of standards. [Ord. No. 7-1999, § II, 1/26/1999]
§ 5-503. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. No. 7-1999, § III, 1/
26/1999]
§ 5-504. Deletions, amendments and additions. [Ord. No. 7-1999,
§ IV, 1/26/1999]
1. BOCA National Fire Prevention Code. There is hereby adopted in its
entirety, by South Hanover Township, copies of which are on file in the
code enforcement department that certain fire code known as the
"BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996," as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., through the effective date of adoption of this article,
save and except portions as are hereinafter deleted, amended or added.
2. Application. The provision set forth in this article and in the "BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996," adopted herein,
shall take effect 35 days from the date of enactment of this article or
any amendment thereto and shall apply throughout the entire
Township.
1. All the provisions of South Hanover Township's Code Enforcement
Ordinance [Article 1] are hereby adopted with this article. The
administration and enforcement of this article and the "BOCA National
Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996," herein adopted shall be
carried out by the Township's Fire Marshal and his/her assistant(s) with
the assistance of the Township's code enforcement department in
accordance with the procedures established by the Code Enforcement
Ordinance [Article I] and by the "BOCA National Fire Prevention Code,
Tenth Edition, 1996," adopted herein.
2. Said Code Enforcement Ordinance [Article I] provides for certain
powers and duties of a Code Enforcement Officer, for the creation of a
code hearing board and for procedures relative to applications, fees,
permits, inspections, appeals, penalties and other matters.
6. Editor's Note: Sections 1, 2, 3 And 7 Of Ord. No. 7-1999 Were Repealed By Ord. No.
3-2004, Which Provided For Administration And Enforcement Of The Uniform
Construction Code. See Now Art. VII Of This Chapter.
§ 5-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-504
1:117
1. Deletions. The following sections and subsections of "The BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996," herein adopted,
are hereby deleted in their entirety:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section F-107.2.3. Permits.
(2) Section F-112.0. Violations.
(3) Section F-113.0. Means of Appeal.
2. Amendments. The following sections and subsections of the "BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996," herein adopted,
are hereby amended to read as follows:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section F-101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"Fire Prevention Code of South Hanover Township" hereinafter
referred to as the fire prevention code or "this code."
(2) Section F-105.1. Enforcement Officer. The Board of
Supervisors shall appoint the Township Fire Marshall. It shall
be the duty and responsibility of the Fire Marshall under the
direction of the Fire Chief to enforce the provisions of this code
herein provided. The designated enforcement officer of this
code is herein referred to as the Code Official.
(3) Section F-107.2.2. Time Limitation of Application. An
application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed
to have been abandoned two months after the date of filing,
unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a
permit shall have been issued; except that the Code
Enforcement Officer shall grant one or more extensions of time
for additional periods not exceeding 30 days each, if there is
reasonable cause. An application shall not be extended if this
article, the technical codes, or any other pertinent laws or
ordinances have been amended subsequent to the date of
original application.
B. Chapter 4.
(1) Section F-403.3. Allowing Burning. Open burning shall be
allowed without prior notification to the code official for
highway safety flares, smudge pots and similar occupational
needs.
(2) Section F-403.4.1. Application. Applications for open burning
shall be submitted in writing at least 24 hours before the fire is
set and shall be in such form and contain such information as
required by the Code Official. Such applications shall contain,
as a minimum, information regarding the purpose of the
§ 5-504 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-504
1:118
proposed burning, the nature and quantities of material to
be burned, the date when such burning will take place, the
location of the burning site and the on-site fire extinguishing
equipment to be provided.
(3) Section F-403.4.3. General Regulations on all Outdoor
Burning.
(a) Burning is permitted only during hours of daylight from
sunrise to sunset.
(b) Burning is not permitted on Sundays.
(c) Burning is not recommended on the following holidays:
1) New Years Day.
2) Memorial Day.
3) July 4th.
4) Labor Day.
5) Veteran's Day.
6) Thanksgiving.
7) Christmas.
(d) Persons conducting the open burning shall notify Dauphin
County Fire Dispatch at 558-6900 one hour before burning
with the following information:
1) Permit number.
2) Name and address.
3) Date and time.
(e) Responsible person shall be present during burning at all
times and equipped to confine and control the fire.
(f) Burning garbage, rubber, wire, roofing shingles and felt,
tires and other similar material that causes noxious or
toxic emissions or smoke is prohibited.
(g) No person shall ignite, burn or set fire to any material on
the public right-of-way of any street or alley.
(h) No burning shall be permitted during weather which, in
the sole judgment of the fire official, is dangerously dry or
windy.
(i) The fire shall be extinguished completely before the last
person leaves the burning site, and no person has the
intention of returning thereto.
§ 5-504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-504
1:119
(4) The Code Official shall prohibit opening burning that will be
offensive or objectionable due to smoke or odor emissions
when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make
fires hazardous. The Code Official shall order the
extinguishment, by the permit holder or the Fire Department,
of any open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or
objectionable situation.
C. Chapter 44. Referenced Standards (NFPA).
(1) 13-96 Installation of Sprinkler Systems.
(2) 30-96 Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code.
(3) 54-96 National Fuel Gas Code.
(4) 72-96 National Fire Alarm Code.
(5) 99-96 Health Care Facilities.
3. Additions. The following new sections and subsections are hereby
added to the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996,
herein adopted.
A. Chapter 4.
(1) Section F-402.4. Cooking Device or Appliance. No portable
open flame type cooking device or appliance shall be operated
on, inside or within 15 feet of any building or structure of the
following Use Group Classifications. Such devices shall include
charcoal or gas type grills, broilers, hibachis and the like:
(a) Use Group A. Assembly Use.
(b) Use Group B. Business.
(c) Use Group E. Educational.
(d) Use Group I. Institutional.
(e) Use Group M. Mercantile.
(f) Use Group R-1. Residential, Hotels, Motels, Boarding
Houses, etc.
(g) Use Group R-2. Residential, Multiple-family dwellings.
Exception. Approved commercial cooking equipment
installed in accordance with NFPA 96.
B. Chapter 5.
(1) Section F-504.6. De-activation. It shall be unlawful for any
owner or occupant to silence, cancel, reset, disable or tamper
with the fire alarm control unit (panel). The Fire Chief or
§ 5-504 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-504
1:120
§ 5-505. Fire control measures and regulations. [Ord. No. 7-1999,
§ V, 1/26/1999]
officer in charge of the fire scene shall notify the owner or
owner's representative when the system shall be placed back
in service upon a fire alarm activation.
1. Adoption of fire control measures and regulations. There is hereby
adopted by South Hanover Township the fire control measures and
regulations as set forth herein for the purposes of controlling conditions
which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.
2. Authority at fires and other emergencies. The Fire Chief, assistant
chief, officer in charge, or duly authorized representatives, as may be in
charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the
protection of life and property, is empowered to direct such operations
as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported
fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations or to take
any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty.
The Fire Chief, assistant chief or officer in charge may prohibit any
person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove
or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle, or object
that may impede or interfere with the operations of the Fire
Department. The Fire Chief, assistant chief or officer in charge may
remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle, or object from
hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do
so immediately and shall not re-enter the area until authorized to do so
by the Fire Chief, assistant chief or officer in charge.
3. Interference with Fire Department operations. It shall be unlawful to
interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with,
obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any
Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with,
attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper
any Fire Department operation.
4. Compliance with orders. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief, assistant
chief or officer in charge or to interfere with the compliance attempts of
another individual.
5. Vehicles crossing fire hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled
over any unprotected fire hose of the Fire Department when laid down
on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway
without the consent of the Fire Chief, assistant chief or officer in charge
in command of said operation.
6. Definition of authorized emergency vehicle. Authorized emergency
vehicles shall be restricted to those that are defined and authorized
under the laws of the State of Pennsylvania.
§ 5-504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-505
1:121
7. Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible
and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately
drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the righthand
edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection
and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle or vehicles have passed, unless otherwise directed
by the Fire Chief, assistant chief or officer in charge or a police officer.
8. Vehicles following fire apparatus. It shall be unlawful for the operator of
any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than
300 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm or
to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire
apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
9. Unlawful boarding or tampering with Fire Department emergency
equipment. A person shall not, without proper authorization from the
Fire Chief, assistant chief or officer in charge of said Fire Department
emergency equipment, cling to, attach oneself to, climb upon or into,
board or swing upon any Fire Department emergency vehicle, whether
the same is in motion or at rest; or sound the siren, horn, bell or other
sound producing device thereon; or manipulate or tamper with or
attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches,
starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective
clothing on, or a part of any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
10. Damage, injury, Fire Department, equipment, personnel. It shall be
unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to
damage or deface, any Fire Department emergency vehicle at any time
or to injure, or attempt to conspire to injure, Fire Department personnel
while performing departmental duties.
11. Emergency vehicle operation. The driver of any emergency vehicle, as
defined in Subsection 6 of this section, shall not sound the siren thereon
or have the front red lights on or disobey any existing traffic regulation,
except when said vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when
responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire. Tactical strategies
such as, but not restricted to, "move-ups" do not constitute an
emergency call. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
A. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations.
B. Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
C. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not
endanger life or property.
D. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
§ 5-505 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-505
1:122
E. The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle in motion sounds an
audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be
reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at
least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
such vehicle.
12. Blocking fire hydrants and Fire Department connections. It shall be
unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the
access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection for the
pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and
Fire Department connections located on public or private streets and
access lanes or on private property.
13. Hydrant use approval. A person shall not use or operate any fire
hydrant intended for use of the Fire Department for fire suppression
purposes, unless such person first secures approval for such use from
the fire prevention code official and the water company having
jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a
person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water
company having jurisdiction.
14. Public water supply. The Fire Chief shall recommend to the Fire
Marshal the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and
the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon
public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow
and distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or
removed from service until approved by the Fire Marshal.
15. Yard systems. All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants, lumber
yards, amusement or exhibition parks and educational or institutional
complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire or life
hazards shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire
hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows are required by the
Fire Marshal and shall be connected to a water system in accordance
with accepted engineering practices. The Fire Marshal shall designate
and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The Fire Marshal
may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment
housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the
establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved
requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or
removed from service until approved by the Fire Marshal.
16. Maintenance of fire suppression equipment. A person shall not
obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or
fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the
provisions of the fire prevention code, except for the purposes of
extinguishing a fire, training or testing, recharging or making
necessary repairs or when permitted by the Fire Marshal. Whenever a
fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or re-
§ 5-505 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-505
1:123
§ 5-506. Penalties. [Ord. No. 7-1999, § VI, 1/26/1999]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of the
article and/or the Township fire prevention code shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding before any district justice, be sentenced for each such
violation to pay a fine of not less than $50 plus costs and not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms
and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 5-507. General provisions. [Ord. No. 7-1999, § VII, 1/26/1999]
installed as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been
accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment
shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire Marshal.
17. Sale of defective fire extinguishers. A person shall not sell, trade, loan
or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher that is not
approved by the Fire Marshal, or that is not in proper working order, or
the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the Fire Marshal.
The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or
exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk when said units
are permanently disfigured or marked with a permanent sign
identifying the unit as junk.
18. Street obstructions. A person or persons shall not erect, construct,
place or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood
or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any street,
within the boundaries of South Hanover Township. The word "street,"
as used in this article, shall mean any roadway accessible to the public
for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or
access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the
boundaries of South Hanover Township.
1. Conflicting provisions. Where conflicts occur between the technical
codes, those provisions providing the greater safety to life shall govern.
In other conflicts where sanitation, life safety or fire safety are not
involved, the most restrictive provisions shall govern. Where in any
specific case different sections within any of the technical codes specify
different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the
most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a
general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall be applicable.
2. Partial validity. In the event any part or provision of this article or the
"BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996," herein
adopted is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of
making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions thereof,
which are determined to be legal; and it shall be presumed that this
article and the "BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition,
§ 5-505 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-507
1:124
1996" would have been passed without such illegal or invalid parts or
provisions.
3. Segregation of invalid provisions. Any invalid part of this article or the
"BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996," herein
adopted, shall be segregated from the remainder of this article and the
"BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996" by the
court holding such part invalid and the remainder shall remain
effective.
4. Saving clause. Nothing in this article or the "BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code, Tenth Edition, 1996," herein adopted, shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or
any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action
accrued or existing under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No
right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or affected by
this article.
§ 5-507 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-507
1:125

ARTICLE VI
BOCA National Property Maintenance Code
§ 5-601. Title. [Ord. No. 6-1999, § I, 1/26/1999; Ord. No. 1-2011, § I,
4/26/2011]
This article together with the "2009 International Property Maintenance
Code" as published by the International Code Council, Inc., adopted herein,
shall be known and may be cited as the "Property Maintenance Code of
South Hanover Township."
§ 5-602. Adoption of standards. [Ord. No. 6-1999, § II, 1/26/1999;
Ord. No. 1-2011, § II, 4/26/2011]
§ 5-603. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. No. 6-1999, § III, 1/
26/1999; Ord. No. 1-2011, § III, 4/26/2011]
All the provisions of South Hanover Township's Code Enforcement
Ordinance is hereby adopted with this article. The administration and
enforcement of this article and of the "2009 International Property
Maintenance Code" herein adopted shall be carried out by the Township's
code enforcement department in accordance with the procedures
established by the code enforcement ordinance and by the "2009
International Property Maintenance Code," adopted herein. Said code
enforcement ordinance provides for certain powers and duties of a Code
Enforcement Officer, for the creation of a code hearing board and for
procedures relative to applications, fees, permits, inspections, appeals,
penalties and other matters.
§ 5-604. Deletions, amendments and additions. [Ord. No. 6-1999,
§ IV, 1/26/1999; Ord. No. 1-2011, § IV, 4/26/2011]
1. International Property Maintenance Code. There is hereby adopted in
its entirety by South Hanover Township, copies of which are on file in
the Code Enforcement Department that certain Property Maintenance
Code known as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2009
edition," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., through
the effective date of the adoption of this article, save and except
portions as are hereinafter deleted, amended or added.
2. Application. The provisions set forth in this article and in the "2009
International Property Maintenance Code" adopted herein shall take
effect 35 days from the date of enactment of this article or any
amendment thereto and shall apply throughout the entire Township.
1. Deletions. The following sections and subsections of the "2009
International Property Maintenance Code" herein adopted are hereby
deleted in their entirety:
A. Chapter 1.
§ 5-601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-604
1:127
(1) Section 103.5 — Fees.
(2) Section 112.4 — Failure to comply
2. Amendments. The following sections and subsections of the "2009
International Property Maintenance Code," herein adopted, are hereby
amended to read as follows:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section 101.1 — Title: These regulations shall be known as the
"Property Maintenance Code of South Hanover Township,"
hereinafter referred to as the Property Maintenance Code or
"this code."
(2) Section 111.1 — Application for appeal: Any person directly
affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order
issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the
Board of Appeals (Code Hearing Board), provided that a
written application for appeal is filed within 10 days after the
day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied
by other means.
(3) Section 111.3 — Notice of meeting: The Code Hearing Board
shall meet upon notice from the Chairman, within 30 days of
the receipt of the application for an appeal.
B. Chapter 3.
(1) Section 302.1 — Sanitation: All exterior property and premises
shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
Conditions which present a hazard to the health, safety, and
welfare of the general public shall not be permitted on any
property or premises. The occupant shall keep that part of the
exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in
a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Section 302.4 — Weeds: eight inches.
(3) Section 302.8 — Motor Vehicles: Except as provided for in
other regulations, no motor vehicle without a current
registration and current inspection sticker shall be parked,
kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time
be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, major overhaul,
including body work, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted
inside an approved spray booth.
(4) Section 304.14 — Insect screen: May 1 to October 15
§ 5-604 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-604
1:128
(5) Section 305.3 — Interior surfaces/mold: All interior surfaces,
including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good,
clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or
abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked
or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface
conditions shall be corrected.
All interior surfaces shall be free from mold growth. Suspected
mold growth shall be tested and cleaned up by a professional
mold specialist.
(6) Section 308.3.2 — Containers: The owner of any
establishment/dwelling unit producing garbage and/or rubbish
shall provide an adequate number of approved outside
garbage/rubbish storage containers. The containers shall be
made of metal, plastic, or equivalent material, 10 to 30 gallon
capacity, shall be leak-proof and shall be provided with tightfitting
covers which shall be kept securely closed at all times.
The refuse/garbage shall be stored inside the containers at all
times. Containers may be lined with plastic bags designed for
such use. Containers shall be labeled by address. Containers
shall not be stored in the minimum required front yard
setback, except containers and/or plastic bags may be placed
out for pickup 24 hours before the day of scheduled pickup.
C. Chapter 4.
(1) Section 404.4.1 — Room area: Every living room shall contain
at least 120 square feet and every bedroom occupied by one
person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and
every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain
at least 50 square feet of floor area for each additional
occupant thereof.
D. Chapter 6.
(1) Section 602.3 — Heat supply: October 1 to May 16
(2) Section 602.4 — Occupiable work spaces: October 1 to May 16
3. Additions. The following new sections and subsections are hereby
added to the "2009 International Property Maintenance Code" herein
adopted:
A. Chapter 2.
(1) Section 202 — Definitions:
Structural Hazards: Structural hazards shall include but not be
limited to the following:
(a) Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.
§ 5-604 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-604
1:129
(b) Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
(c) Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry
imposed loads with safety.
(d) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports
that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration.
(e) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports
that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety.
(f) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or
other horizontal members which sag split or buckle due to
defective material or deterioration.
(g) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or
other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to
carry imposed loads with safety.
(h) Fireplaces or chimneys which list bulge or settle, due to
defective material or deterioration.
(i) Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or
strength to carry imposed loads with safety.
(2) Unfit for Human Occupancy: Any building or structure which
has any or all of the following conditions or defects:
(a) Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or
shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house.
(b) Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs
or showers per number of guests in a hotel.
(c) Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
(d) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in
a hotel.
(e) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in
a dwelling unit or lodging house.
(f) Lack of adequate heating facilities.
(g) Lack of or improper operation of required ventilating
equipment.
(h) Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation
required by this code.
(i) Room and space dimensions less than required by this
code.
§ 5-604 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-604
1:130
(j) Lack of required electrical lighting.
(k) Dampness of habitable rooms.
(l) Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents as determined by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
(m) General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
(n) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
(o) Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and
removal facilities as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(3) Unsafe Structure: Any building or structure which has any or
all of the following conditions or defects shall be deemed to be
an unsafe structure provided that such conditions or defects
exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the
public or its occupants are endangered:
(a) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other
means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so
arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in
case of fire or panic.
(b) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway,
stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose,
torn, obstructed or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe
and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
(c) Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one
and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed
in the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure,
purpose or location.
(d) Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, and flood or by any other cause, to such
an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is
materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is
less than the minimum requirements of the Building Code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(e) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof
is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to
collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
(f) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is
not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored,
attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of
resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in
§ 5-604 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-604
1:131
the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure,
purpose or location without exceeding the working
stresses permitted in the Building Code for such buildings.
(g) Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped,
buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other
structural portions have materially less resistance to
winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of
similar new construction.
(h) Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof,
because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (ii)
faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement or
instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration,
decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other
cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
(i) Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is being used or exceeds the structural design
load for the occupancy or use.
(j) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb
line passing through the center of gravity does not fall
inside the middle one third of the base.
(k) Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged
by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so
dilapidated or deteriorated as to become (i) an attractive
nuisance to children; (ii) a harbor for vagrants, criminals
or immoral persons; or as to (iii) enable persons to resort
thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral
acts.
(l) Whenever any building or structure has been constructed,
exists or is maintained in violation of any specific
requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or
structure provided by the building regulations of the
Township, as specified in the Building Code, or of any law
or ordinance of the Township relating to the condition,
location or structure of buildings.
(m) Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be
used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty
construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer to be unsanitary, unfit for
human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to
cause sickness or disease.
§ 5-604 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-604
1:132
(n) Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration,
damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive
construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or
heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the
Fire Marshal to be a fire hazard.
(o) Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition
as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common
law or in equity jurisprudence.
(p) Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains
on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building
or structure or whenever any building or structure is
abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to
constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
B. Chapter 3.
(1) Section 301.4 — Street signs: All privately owned property,
subdivisions, or land development with streets shall be
provided with street signs to include, but not be limited to:
street name signs on poles at all intersections, directional and
informational signs. Such signs shall conform to Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation and Township specifications and
shall be installed by the owner in a manner specified by the
Municipal Engineer.
(2) Section 301.5 — General Conditions: Conditions which present
a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the general public
shall not be permitted on any property or premises.
(3) Section 302.2.1 — Adjoining property: No person, party, or
corporation shall willfully or negligently create, permit, or
allow any condition or situation on their property to adversely
affect an adjoining property.
(4) Section 302.2.2 — Sinkholes: Sinkholes vary in depth, act as
drains for surface water, and result from flushing soil, rocks, or
other surface materials into voids, either in the limestone
bedrock or soil profile. Sink holes shall be repaired using the
Best Technical Guidance (BTG) available to repair the sinkhole
to eliminate the potential attractive nuisance hazard found on
the property and/or premises.
(5) Section 302.4.1 — All grass and weeds: Grass and weeds
required to be maintained in accordance with Section 302.4
shall be applicable to any unimproved or improved lot or lots
within a recorded sub-division. All grass and weeds at fencelines,
property lines, border areas, areas around structures,
stored items, etc., shall be cut and/or trimmed and maintained
§ 5-604 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-604
1:133
in accordance with Section 302.4. Active construction sites
border areas adjacent to neighboring properties shall be
maintained in accordance with Section 302.4.
(6) Section 302.10 — Tree branches: All trees standing on private
property and shade trees within the public right-of-way shall be
kept trimmed over the public right-of-way by the property
owner so that the minimum height where they overhang a
public walk shall be eight feet. The minimum height where a
tree overhangs a road or street shall be 14 feet. However, the
Township reserves the right to designate a higher clearance on
certain streets or roadways where heavy traffic or other
conditions make it expedient.
Broken tree branches or a damaged, diseased or weakened
tree trunk hanging over or threatening a roadway or sidewalk
shall be removed.
(7) Section 302.11 — West Nile Virus: All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained to reduce the number of
mosquitoes around the area by eliminating standing water in
which mosquitoes can breed. Maintenance shall include but
not limited to the following:
• Dispose of anything outside that can hold water - for
instance, tin cans, ceramic pots and used tires.
• Drill holes in the bottoms of recycling containers left
outdoors.
• Clean clogged roof gutters as needed, especially if leaves
tend to plug their drains.
• Turn over plastic swimming/wading pools and wheelbarrows
when not in use.
• Do not allow water to stagnate in birdbaths, ornamental
pools, water gardens, and swimming pools or their covers.
• Alter the landscape of your property to eliminate standing
water.
(8) Section 302.12 — Snow and ice removal: The owner, occupant
or tenant of every property fronting upon or alongside of any
public street or road shall remove or cause to be removed all
snow, ice, slush or any combination thereof, from the sidewalk,
including that portion of the driveway where the sidewalk
crosses the driveway, for a minimum width of three feet, within
24 hours after said snow, ice, slush or any combination thereof,
shall ceased to fall, unless said snow, ice, slush or any
combination thereof be so hardened or frozen that it cannot be
removed without injury to the sidewalk, in which latter event
§ 5-604 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-604
1:134
the owner, occupant or tenant shall place salt, sand or other
abrasive material upon said snow, ice, slush or any
combination thereof, within the time provided. The owner of
a property shall be responsible for conforming to the
requirements of this section where such property is occupied
by such owner or is unoccupied or vacant or is multi-business
or multi-dwelling property occupied by more than one tenant
or occupant, and the tenant or occupant of a property shall be
responsible for conforming to the requirements of this section
where such property is occupied by such tenant or occupant
only. It shall be unlawful for any person, party, firm or
corporation or any agent thereof, to willfully or negligently
discharge, place, dump, or throw snow, ice, slush or any
combination thereof on the paved portion of any public street
within the Township.
(9) Section 302.14 — Indoor vs. outdoor furniture Appliances,
furniture and/or furnishings including cabinetry and similar
items manufactured for indoor use shall not be used and/or
stored or kept outdoors subject to weather.
(10) Section 302.15 — Grass clippings: It shall be unlawful for any
person, party, firm or corporation or any agent thereof, to
willfully or negligently discharge, place, dump, throw, store,
accumulate or maintain, or cause to be discharged, placed,
thrown, stored, accumulate or maintain any grass clippings or
other types of vegetation on the paved portion, in storm sewer
inlets of any public street within the Township or on private
property not owned by the individual responsible for such
action.
C. Chapter 7.
(1) Section 704.5 — Carbon monoxide alarms: A minimum of one
U.L.-listed carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed and
maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4, and in dwellings not
regulated in Group occupancies units on each floor level where
wood, coal, oil, or gas heating or cooking appliances are
installed, located in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions.
(2) Section 704.5.1 — Power Source: In Group R occupancies and
in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, carbon
monoxide alarms shall receive their primary power from the
building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a
commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery
backup. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection.
§ 5-604 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-604
1:135
§ 5-605. Penalties. [Ord. No. 6-1999, § V, 1/26/1999; Ord. No.
1-2011, § V, 4/26/2011]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
article and/or the Township Property Maintenance Code shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding before any district justice, be
sentenced for each such violation to pay a minimum fine of not less than
$50 plus costs and not more than $1,000 plus costs for each such offense
depending on the severity of the violation as determined by the district
justice and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions
hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
Exception: Carbon monoxide alarms are permitted to be solely
battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking
place and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations
or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or
ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic,
crawl space or basement available which could provide access
for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes
(3) Section 704.5.2 — Interconnection: Where more than one
carbon monoxide alarm is required to be installed with an
individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings
not regulated as group R occupancies, the carbon monoxide
alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that
activation of one carbon monoxide alarm will activate all the
alarms in the individual unit.
Exception:
(a) Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any
kind.
(b) Carbon monoxide alarms in existing areas are not required
to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not
result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes
exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl
space or basement available which could provide access
for interconnection without the removal of interior
finishes.
(4) Section 704.6 — Gas/charcoal grills: Use of gas/charcoal grills
inside a structure or building or in a garage, breezeway,
balcony, carport, and porch or under a surface that is
combustible shall not be permitted unless approved by the fire
official. Grills shall be positioned a minimum of five feet away
from siding, deck railings and out from under eaves and
overhanging branches.
§ 5-604 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-606
1:136
§ 5-606. General provisions. [Ord. No. 6-1999, § VI, 1/26/1999; Ord.
No. 1-2011, § VI, 4/26/2011]
1. Conflicting provisions. Where conflicts occur between the technical
codes, those provisions providing the greater safety to life shall govern.
In other conflicts where sanitation, life safety or fire safety are not
involved, the most restrictive provisions shall govern. Where in any
specific case different sections within any of the technical codes specify
different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the
most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between the
Administration, Chapter 1 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code 2009 edition," and the Code Enforcement Ordinance, the Code
Enforcement Ordinance shall govern.
2. Partial validity. In the event any part or provision of this article or the
"International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition," herein
adopted is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of
making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions thereof,
which are determined to be legal; and it shall be presumed that this
article and the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2009
edition," would have been passed without such illegal or invalid parts or
provisions.
3. Segregation of invalid provisions. Any invalid part of this article or the
"International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition," herein
adopted, shall be segregated from the remainder of this article and the
"International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition," and by the
court holding such part invalid and the remainder shall remain
effective.
4. Saving clause. Nothing in this article or the "International Property
Maintenance Code, 2009 edition," herein adopted, shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights
acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued
or existing under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or
remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or affected by this
article.
§ 5-606 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-606
1:137

ARTICLE VII
Uniform Construction Code
§ 5-701. Title. [Ord. No. 3-2004, § I, 5/25/2004]
This article, together with the Uniform Construction Code, adopted herein,
shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform Construction Code of the
Township of South Hanover" (hereinafter the "Township").
§ 5-702. Purpose. [Ord. No. 3-2004, § II, 5/25/2004]
The purpose of this article is to promote the general health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the Township and to conform to the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and the regulations promulgated
thereunder by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
(hereinafter sometimes collectively referred to as the "code").
§ 5-703. Adoption of standards. [Ord. No. 3-2004, § III, 5/25/2004]
1. Uniform Construction Code. The Uniform Construction Code, contained
in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401, 403 and 405, in effect as of the date of the
adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein
by reference as the Uniform Construction Code of the Township of
South Hanover, save and except those portions of the code as are
hereinafter deleted, amended or added.
2. Referenced codes. The Township, pursuant to the requirements of
Section 501(a)(1) of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act No.
45 of 1999, adopts and incorporates by reference the following codes as
defined in 34 Pa. Code, Chapter 401, Section 401.1 as the Uniform
Construction Code of the Township.
A. The provisions of Chapters 2-29 and 31-35 of the "International
Building Code."
B. The "ICC Electrical Code."
C. The "International Mechanical Code."
D. The "International Fuel Gas Code."
E. The "International Plumbing Code."
F. The "International Residential Code."
G. The "International Fire Code."
H. The "International Energy Conservation Code."
I. Section AE501 - AE503 and AE601 - AE605 of Appendix E of the
"International Residential Code."
§ 5-701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-703
1:139
§ 5-704. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. No. 3-2004, § IV, 5/
25/2004]
J. The "International Existing Building Code."
K. The "International Urban-Wildland Interface Code."
L. Appendix E of the "International Building Code."
M. Appendix H of the "International Building Code."
N. Appendix G of the "International Residential Code."
3. Application. The provisions set forth in this article and in the Uniform
Construction Code adopted herein shall take effect 35 days from the
date of the enactment of this article or any amendment thereto, and
shall apply throughout the entire Township.
1. Election. South Hanover Township hereby elects to administer and
enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act
45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to
time, and its regulations.
2. Administration and enforcement. Administration and enforcement of
the Uniform Construction Code within the Township shall be through
the code enforcement department. The Uniform Construction Code may
be administered and enforced utilizing any of the following ways as
determined by the Board of Supervisors of the Township:
A. Designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the
building code official to act on behalf of the Township;
B. Retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party
agencies to act on behalf of the Township;
C. Agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code
through an intermunicipal agreement;
D. Entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this article and the Act on
behalf of the Township;
E. Entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections, and enforcement
of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
3. Department of Code Enforcement. The provisions of the South Hanover
Township Code Enforcement Ordinance are hereby adopted with this
article. The administration and enforcement of this article and the
Uniform Construction Code herein adopted shall be carried out by the
code enforcement department in accordance with the procedures
§ 5-703 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-704
1:140
§ 5-705. Existing codes and ordinances. [Ord. No. 3-2004, § V, 5/25/
2004]
§ 5-706. Revisions. [Ord. No. 3-2004, § VI, 5/25/2004]
established by the South Hanover Township Code Enforcement
Ordinance and the Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401, 403 and 405.
1. General. All relevant ordinances, regulations, and policies of the
Township not governed by the Uniform Construction Code shall remain
in full force and effect.
2. Codes which equal or exceed the requirements of the code. All
construction code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by South Hanover Township on or before July 1, 1999, and
which equal or exceed the requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code shall continue in full force and effect until such time as such
provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code, as amended from time to time. Applicable
sections of the South Hanover Township Code Enforcement Ordinance
No. 2-1999, Building Code Ordinance No. 3-1999, Plumbing Code
Ordinance No. 4-1999, Electrical Code Ordinance No. 5-1999 and Fire
Prevention Code Ordinance No. 7-1999, adopted on January 26, 1999
shall continue in full force and effect until such time as these sections
fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code.
3. Codes which are less than the minimum requirements of the code. All
construction code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is
derived and whose requirements are less than the minimum
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the Uniform Construction
Code.
1. The following codes are amended and/or supplemented as follows:
A. International Building Code.
(1) Section 1612.3 Insert: Township of South Hanover.
(2) Section 1612.3: Insert: November, 1976.
(3) Section 3410.2: Insert: Effective date of this ordinance.
B. International Residential Code.
(1) Table 301.2(1): Insert:
• Ground snow load = 25
• Wind speed = 90
§ 5-704 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-706
1:141
§ 5-707. Permit fees. [Ord. No. 3-2004, § VII, 5/25/2004]
Permit fees assessable by the Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the Uniform
Construction Code shall be established by the Board of Supervisors of South
Hanover Township by resolution, as adopted and amended from time to
time.
§ 5-708. Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 3-2004, § VIII, 5/25/2004]
• Seismic Design Category = B
• Weathering = Severe
• Frost Line Depth = 36 inches
• Termite = Slight to Moderate
• Decay = Slight to Moderate
• Winter Design Temperature = 0°
• Ice Shield Underlayment Required = No
• Flood Hazards = National Flood Insurance Program, Flood
Insurance Study, November 1976, Community No. 420395
• Air Freezing Index = 780° days
• Mean Annual Temperature = 52°
(2) Section P2603.6.1: Insert: 12 inches and 24 inches.
(3) Section P3103.1: Insert: 18 inches and 12 inches.
C. International Plumbing Code.
(1) Section 904.1: Insert: 24 inches.
D. International Electrical Code.
(1) Section 404.2: Insert: Per Resolution enacted by South
Hanover Township Board of Supervisors.
1. Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors of the Township in conformity with the
requirements of the relevant provisions of the Uniform Construction
Code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth
therein.
2. Joint Board of Appeals. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 5-706 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-709
1:142
§ 5-709. General provisions. [Ord. No. 3-2004, § IX, 5/25/2004]
1. Conflicting provisions. The Uniform Construction Code herein adopted,
governs if there is a conflict between the Uniform Construction Code
and the South Hanover Township Code Enforcement Ordinance relating
to administration and enforcement provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code.
2. Validity. If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this article is
held, for any reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article.
3. Savings. This article shall not repeal or in any way affect the following
sections of the South Hanover Township construction codes adopted on
January 26, 1999:
A. Building Code Ordinance No. 3-1999, Sections 4, 5 and 6.
B. Plumbing Code Ordinance No. 4-1999, Sections 4, 5 and 6.
C. Electrical Code Ordinance No. 5-1999, Sections, 4, 5, 7 and 8.
D. Fire Prevention Ordinance No. 7-1999, Sections 4, 5 and 6.
4. Repeals. The following sections of the South Hanover Township
construction codes adopted on January 26, 1999 are hereby repealed:
A. Building Code Ordinance No. 3-1999, Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7.
B. Plumbing Code Ordinance No. 4-1999, Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7.
C. Electrical Code Ordinance No. 5-1999, Sections 1, 2, 3, 6 and 9.
D. Fire Prevention Ordinance No. 7-1999, Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7.
§ 5-709 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 5-709
1:143
Chapter 6
CONDUCT
§ 5-709 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 5-709
1:144
ARTICLE I
Protection of Public Property
§ 6-101. Unlawful to tamper with certain property. [Ord. No.
10-1972, § 1, 3/13/1972]
No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, or
tamper with or deface any public property of the Township of South
Hanover, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, streetlight,
fire hydrant or water or gas stop box on or in any street, road, alley, park or
other public ground in the Township.
§ 6-102. Unlawful to tamper with stakes and monuments. [Ord. No.
10-1972, § 2, 3/13/1972]
No person or persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with
or pull, drive, change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the
Township of South Hanover, made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed
or set, or caused to be done by the authorities of the Township in any survey
of or in or on any street alley or public ground in the Township, to evidence
the location, elevation, line, grade, corner or angle of any public street,
road, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, sewer or other public work, matter or
thing.
§ 6-103. Unlawful to tamper with lamp, warning sign or barricade.
[Ord. No. 10-1972, § 3, 3/13/1972]
No person or persons shall willfully or maliciously destroy or remove or
deface or obliterate or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade
erected by the authorities of the Township of South Hanover, or by any
person, partnership, firm or corporation doing work by permission of the
authorities of the Township on any of the streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks or
bridges in the Township, as a warning of danger.
§ 6-104. Unlawful to take earth, stone or other material from street,
alley or public grounds. [Ord. No. 10-1972, § 4, 3/13/1972]
No person or persons shall take any earth or other material from any street,
road or alley or from any park or other public ground in the Township of
South Hanover.
§ 6-105. Certain activities not prohibited. [Ord. No. 10-1972, § 5, 3/
13/1972]
This article shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks
and public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon and
therein, or to incidental results of work thereon or therein upon permit from
or by authority of the Township.
§ 6-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 6-106
1:145
§ 6-106. Penalties. [Ord. No. 10-1972, § 6, 3/13/1972; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 6-106 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 6-106
1:146
ARTICLE II
Fireworks
§ 6-201. Short title. [Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/23/2019]
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of South
Hanover Fireworks Ordinance."
§ 6-202. Legislative intent. [Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/23/2019]
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, by enactment of Act 43 of 2017,
amended the commonwealth's Fireworks Law by adding Article XXIV to the
Tax Reform Code of 1971, codified at 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq. The Fireworks
Law, as amended, has conferred certain authority upon municipal
governments to regulate the use of display fireworks within their
boundaries, including permit requirements, by establishing rules and
regulations therefor. The Fireworks Law also allows public and private
property owners to prohibit the use of fireworks on their property. Pursuant
to the authority afforded it, the Township of South Hanover desires to
establish rules and regulations to regulate the use of display fireworks
within its boundaries, including permit requirements, and to prohibit the
use of any fireworks on Township of South Hanover property without a
permit.
§ 6-203. Definitions and word usage. [Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/23/2019]
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
APA 87-1 — The American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1:
Standard for Construction and Approval for Transportation of Fireworks,
Novelties, and Theatrical Pyrotechnics, 2001 edition, or subsequent edition.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of the Township of South
Hanover.
COMPETENT OPERATOR — An individual currently registered with the
Attorney General of Pennsylvania and possessing the documented training
and knowledge necessary for the safe handling and use of display fireworks.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances which is intended to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, is suitable for use by the public, complies
with the construction, performance, composition and labeling
requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any
successor regulation and complies with the provisions for "consumer
fireworks" as defined in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale
and use of which shall be permitted throughout this commonwealth.
"Class C" or "consumer-grade" fireworks include firecrackers, Roman
1.
§ 6-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 6-203
1:147
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks to be used solely by professional
pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects
by combustion, deflagration or detonation. The term includes, but is not
limited to:
FIRE MARSHALS — The persons appointed by the Board of Supervisors to
enforce this article.
NFPA 1123 — The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1123,
Code for Fireworks Display, 2018 edition, or any subsequent edition.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE — A structure, vehicle or place adapted for
overnight accommodation of persons or for conducting business, whether
or not a person is actually present.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company or other legal entity.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of South Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 6-204. Regulation of consumer fireworks. [Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/23/
2019]
candles, rotating wheels, firecrackers or lady fingers, fountains, smoke
bombs, ground spinners and similar that contain a maximum of 50
milligrams of explosive material.
The term does not include devices as "ground and hand-held sparkling
devices," "novelties" or "toy caps" in APA 87-1 or any successor
standard, the sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted at all
times throughout this commonwealth.
2.
Salutes that contain more than two grains or 130 milligrams of
explosive materials;
1.
Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic
compositions; and
2.
Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks
UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 CFR 172.101 (relating to
purpose and use of hazardous materials table).
3.
1. Conditions. A person who is at least 18 years of age and meets the
requirements of the, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Fireworks Law,
Article XXIV, as amended, may purchase, possess and use consumer
fireworks.
2. Violations. A person may not intentionally ignite or discharge:
A. Consumer fireworks on public or private property without the
express written permission of the owner.
§ 6-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 6-204
1:148
§ 6-205. Regulation of display fireworks. [Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/23/
2019]
§ 6-206. Application for permit. [Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/23/2019]
B. Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices within, or throw
consumer fireworks or sparkling devices from, a motor vehicle or
building.
C. Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices into or at a motor vehicle
or building or at another person.
D. Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices while the person is under
the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or another drug.
E. Consumer fireworks within 150 feet of an occupied structure.
1. Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful for any person to
use or explode any display fireworks in the Township.
2. The ignition of display fireworks shall be conducted by a competent
operator, currently registered with the Attorney General of
Pennsylvania, approved by the Board of Supervisors, or its designee,
and be of such character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the
opinion of the Fire Marshal, after proper inspection, shall not be
hazardous to property or endanger any person. Display fireworks shall
be in accordance with NFPA 1123, Table 5.1.3.1.
3. The Fire Marshal may suspend any permit issued under this article due
to drought, dry conditions, high winds, or any other factor reasonably
related to the public safety. The Fire Marshal may, at his discretion,
deploy fire company members and/or equipment to the scene of any
permitted display. Where any such deployment occurs, the permittee
will be subject to a fee, which shall be set by and may be amended by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
4. All display fireworks shall be finished by 11:00 p.m. on Fridays,
Saturdays and holidays and by 10:00 p.m. Sundays through Thursdays.
5. A display fireworks permit may not be issued to a person under 21.
1. Applications for permits shall be made in writing on a form provided by
the Township of South Hanover, at least 30 days in advance of the date
of a fireworks display.
2. The individual, company, organization, or firm making application for a
permit shall provide the following information:
A. Letter to the Board of Supervisors requesting approval for the day
of the week and time of the fireworks display.
B. Location of the fireworks display.
§ 6-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 6-206
1:149
§ 6-207. Permit issuance and conditions. [Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/23/
2019]
C. Day, date, and time and estimated duration of the fireworks display.
D. General description of the type(s) and number of fireworks.
E. Fire prevention features to be in place during the display.
F. Contact person, company, address, and telephone number of the
operator or operators executing or performing the display.
G. Proof of qualification of the individuals/company executing the
display.
H. Insurance carrier, policy number, type and amount of coverage, and
attached proof of insurance.
I. Contact individual name, telephone number, organization, and
address of the responsible individual, company, organization, and
firm for whom the display will be provided.
3. An application shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fee,
which shall be set by and may be amended by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
1. A fireworks display permit shall be issued by the Fire Marshal before
any display fireworks are transported, stored, staged, used or displayed
in the Township and shall be prominently displayed on site a minimum
of 72 hours prior to display.
2. The use of any fireworks, including consumer fireworks and display
fireworks, on any Township of South Hanover property, including, but
not limited to, the streets and sidewalks of the Township of South
Hanover, and real property owned by the Township of South Hanover
for public parks, recreation areas, utility purposes, and/or for public
buildings, unless a permit is obtained in accordance with this article, is
prohibited.
3. No permit shall be issued to a person under 21 years of age.
4. No more than three permits per calendar year may be issued for
fireworks displays to the same permittee. No more than three permits
per calendar year may be issued for fireworks displays on a single
property.
5. A permit granted hereunder may be transferable, subject to approval by
the Fire Marshal and evidence of registration and delivery of a bond in
accordance with § 6-208 of this article.
6. When, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshal,
weather or other conditions exist or are imminent that would
compromise safety before or during any approved and permitted
§ 6-206 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 6-207
1:150
§ 6-208. Evidence of registration; bond/certificate of insurance.
[Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/23/2019]
§ 6-209. Extension of permit. [Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/23/2019]
fireworks display, the permit shall be revoked and the operators
directed to terminate the display.
7. After such permit shall have been granted, possession, use and
distribution of display fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that
purpose.
1. Prior to the issuance of any permit under § 6-207 hereof, the applicant
shall deliver to the Township evidence of the operator's registration
with the Attorney General of Pennsylvania. Individuals, companies,
entities, or competent operators shall secure a bond or a certificate of
insurance, naming the Township as an additional insured. The minimum
amount required for the bond or the certificate of insurance shall be
$1,000,000, conditioned for payment of all damages which may be
caused either to persons or to property by reason of the display and
arising from any acts of the permit holder, his agents, employees or
subcontractors.
2. The bond or certificate of insurance amount may be increased when, in
the opinion of the Township, additional hazards and liability exist.
1. Authorization. If, because of unfavorable weather, the display for which
a permit has been granted does not occur at the time authorized by the
permit, the person to whom the permit was issued may, within 24 hours,
apply for a request for an extension to the Fire Marshal.
2. Contents of request. The request for extension shall state under oath
that the display was not made, provide the reason that the display was
not made and request a continuance of the permit for a date designated
within the request, which shall be not later than one week after the date
originally designated in the permit.
3. Determination. Upon receiving the request for extension, the Fire
Marshal, if he/she believes that the facts stated within the request are
true, shall extend the provisions of the permit to the date designated
within the request, which date shall be not later than one week after the
date originally designated in the permit.
4. Conditions. The extension of time shall be granted without the payment
of an additional fee and without requiring a bond other than the bond
given for the original permit, the provisions of which shall extend to and
cover all damages which may be caused by reason of the display
occurring at the extended date and in the same manner and to the same
extent as if the display had occurred at the date originally designated in
the permit.
§ 6-207 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 6-210
1:151
§ 6-210. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 3-2019, 4/
23/2019]
1. Enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the Township's Fire
Marshals.
2. Penalties for violation.
A. In addition to the penalties set for under Section 2414 of the
Fireworks Law, 72 P.S. § 9414, any person using consumer and/or
display fireworks in violation of the provisions of this article
commits a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000,
plus all costs of prosecution, including attorneys' fees.
B. Each day that a violation continues and each section of this article
which is violated shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any
provision of the Fireworks Law, 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq., shall be
barred from obtaining a permit for display fireworks.
§ 6-210 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 6-210
1:152
Chapter 7
(RESERVED)
Chapter 8
(RESERVED)
Chapter 9
(RESERVED)
Chapter 10
(RESERVED)
Chapter 11
HOUSING
§ 6-210 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 6-210
1:153

ARTICLE I
Registration and Reporting of Rental Property Occupancy
§ 11-101. Purpose. [Ord. No. 5-2003, § 1, 9/23/2003]
This article is added to the Code of Ordinances of the Township of South
Hanover for the purpose of insuring the uniform and equitable distribution
of the tax levies of the Township of South Hanover upon the residents of the
Township.
§ 11-102. Definitions and interpretation. [Ord. No. 5-2003, § 1, 9/23/
2003]
The following words when used in this article shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
LESSEE — That person or persons who has the use of real estate of a lessor
and is responsible for the giving of any type of consideration therefore, but
not excluding those who are lessees for a period of less than 30 days.
LESSOR — Any person who grants a lease or otherwise permits the use of
his real estate or portion thereof for consideration, monetary or otherwise,
excluding hotels and motels except to the extent that they have permanent
residents.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
TOWNSHIP — Township of South Hanover, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
§ 11-103. Lessors to report status of rented real estate; description
of real estate and names of lessees to be furnished. [Ord. No.
5-2003, § 1, 9/23/2003]
All lessors within 30 days after the effective date of this article or, in the
case of real estate thereafter acquired or thereafter rented or becoming
available for rental, within 30 days after the acquisition, rental or
availability for rental thereof, as the case may be, shall report to the
Township the number of parcels or units of real estate presently or
hereafter rented and available for rental, a description (by address, number
and/or some other meaningful method) of the said parcels or units, and the
names of its lessees at the time of such report, together with a designation
as to which unit or parcel is occupied by each.
§ 11-104. Change in status of rented real estate to be reported.
[Ord. No. 5-2003, § 1, 9/23/2003]
Any change in the occupancy of real estate rented or leased or in the
identity of the lessee from that shown in the report of the lessor as required
in § 11-103 shall be reported by lessor to the Township within 10 days after
such change. It is intended hereby that lessors shall report a new lessee or
§ 11-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 11-104
1:155
a lessee who rents or leases a different unit or parcel of lessor's real estate
and when a unit or parcel of their real estate becomes vacant.
§ 11-105. Status of occupancy report. [Ord. No. 5-2003, § 1, 9/23/
2003]
The South Hanover Township Secretary shall prepare a form report entitled
"Status of Occupancy Report," which form report shall require that
information set forth in §§ 11-102 and 11-103 of this article and such other
pertinent information necessary for the updating of tax records that the
Board of Supervisors, by resolution, may direct be incorporated into the
said report form. All information gathered pursuant to this article shall be
used only for the collection of taxes and for no other purpose.
§ 11-106. Enforcement and remedies. [Ord. No. 5-2003, § 1, 9/23/
2003]
1. Enforcement notice.
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this article has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if
applicable, the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to
receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any other
person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner of record
and any other person against whom the Township intends to
take action.
(2) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the property in
violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this article.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Board of Supervisors within a period of 10 days.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Board of Supervisors,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
§ 11-104 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 11-106
1:156
2. Enforcement remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this article shall,
upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than
$600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues or each section of
this article which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
C. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this section.
§ 11-106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 11-106
1:157
Chapter 12
(RESERVED)
Chapter 13
LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
§ 11-106 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 11-106
1:158
ARTICLE I
Transient Retail Merchants
§ 13-101. Short title. [Ord. No. 1-1992, § 1, 2/11/1992]
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Transient Retail
Business Ordinance" of South Hanover Township.
§ 13-102. License required. [Ord. No. 1-1992, § 2, 2/11/1992]
From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person,
whether acting on his own behalf or as the agent, servant or employee
of other persons not exempted by the provisions of § 13-107 hereof, who
is not the holder of a valid and unexpired license issued pursuant to this
article to conduct a transient retail business which shall mean to engage
in selling, purchasing or soliciting the sale or purchase of food, printed
matter, services, goods, wares or merchandise of any description or in
soliciting the sale or purchase of food, printed matter, services, goods,
wares or merchandise of any description or in soliciting contributions, gifts
or pledges of money or any other thing of value by visitation to private
homes or residences or on the public streets or highways within South
Hanover Township; or to engage in selling, soliciting or taking any orders
for any goods, wares or merchandise from a fixed location within South
Hanover Township on a temporary basis that shall include but not be limited
to such activities conducted at the time of special occasions or celebrations
for seasonal purposes or for or in advance of specific yearly holidays.
§ 13-103. Application for license. [Ord. No. 1-1992, § 3, 2/11/1992;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. Any person not exempted by § 13-107 hereof desiring to obtain a license
to engage in the activities described in § 13-102 hereof shall make
application therefore in person to the Township Secretary.
A. The applicant shall submit over his/her signature the following
information, certified by the applicant to be true and correct:
(1) Name.
(2) Place and date of birth.
(3) Temporary address.
(4) Residence address.
(5) Address to which notices under this article shall be directed.
(6) Name and address of employer or principal, if any, and nature
of business or activity thereof.
(7) Nature of business or activity in which applicant wishes to
engage in the Township.
§ 13-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 13-103
1:159
§ 13-104. Compliance. [Ord. No. 1-1992, § 4, 2/11/1992]
§ 13-105. Revocation of license. [Ord. No. 1-1992, § 5, 2/11/1992]
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the South Hanover
Township Board of Supervisors for failure of the licensee to comply with any
(8) Exhibit county license or state license, if required, by intended
business.
(9) The make and model as well as the license number of any
vehicle to be used to conduct the business or activity in which
the applicant seeks to engage in the Township.
B. Upon submission of such application and the payment of a license
fee in an amount as established, from time to time, by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors, there shall be issued to the applicant a
license in the form of a card which, unless sooner revoked, shall
entitle the licensee to engage in the activities specified on this
application for a period of 30 days from the date of issuance.
C. Licenses may be renewed by the payment of the license fee as
provided for herein and by the submission of a statement that the
information supplied on the original application is still true and
correct or that the information supplied on the original application
should be amended to reflect any changes since the original
application.
1. Every person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the
provisions hereof shall comply with the following regulations while
carrying on business or activities within the Township:
A. He/she shall carry his/her license card at all times and exhibit it
upon request to any peace officer or any person upon whom he/she
shall call or with whom he/she shall talk in carrying on his/her
licensed activities.
B. He/she shall not permit any other person to have possession of his/
her license card and shall immediately report its loss to the
Township Secretary. He/she shall not cause or permit his/her
license card to be altered or defaced.
C. He/she shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling house
without invitation or permission of the occupant and shall
immediately leave any premises upon request.
D. He/she shall not represent his/her license card to be an
endorsement of himself or of his/her goods or services of his/her
principal or employer.
E. He/she shall immediately surrender his license upon revocation of
his/her license as hereinafter provided.
§ 13-103 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 13-105
1:160
of the regulations set forth in § 13-104 hereof or upon the discovery that the
licensee has made any false statements in his/her application for a license
hereunder.
§ 13-106. Request for reinstatement of license. [Ord. No. 1-1992,
§ 5, 2/11/1992]
Any person whose license has been revoked shall be entitled to appear with
counsel, if he/she so desires, before the Board of Supervisors at a regular
meeting and be heard on behalf of a request for reinstatement of his/her
license.
§ 13-107. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 1-1992, § 7, 2/11/1992]
§ 13-108. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1-1992, § 8, 2/11/1992; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty or fine of not less than $50
but not more than $600, together with costs of prosecution for each such
violation, and may upon default of payment of fine and costs be sentenced
to imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 13-109. Soliciting in some areas prohibited. [Ord. No. 1-1992, § 9,
2/11/1992]
Possession of a license does not give the holder thereof the right to solicit
on the premises of a person who, by sign or otherwise, has indicated that no
solicitation will be permitted on his/her property.
1. The following persons are exempted from the licensing requirements of
this article:
A. Persons soliciting contributions on behalf of organizations or
nonprofit corporations exempted from the provisions of or newly
registered pursuant to the Act of 1990, December 19, P.L. 1200, No.
202: who, while soliciting, are possessed of a card or other written
evidence of their appointment or authority to solicit for said
organizations or corporations.
B. Farmers engaged in selling only the produce of their farms from a
truck or other vehicle.
C. Persons who have been licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to engage in an activity described in § 13-101 hereof
when so engaged; including, without limitation, real estate,
insurance or security brokers an salesmen.
D. Persons engaged in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise
donated by the owner thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be
applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose.
§ 13-105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 13-109
1:161
Chapter 14
(RESERVED)
Chapter 15
MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 13-109 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 13-109
1:162
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 15-101. Definitions and interpretation. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
§ 15-102. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as chapters, as parts of chapters, as amendments to chapters, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 15-103. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
[Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
chapters and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier chapters and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded chapters or
regulations.
§ 15-104. Temporary and emergency regulations. [Ord. No. 3-1995,
9/12/1995]
1. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162 No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway,"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
2. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
3. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
1. The Board of Supervisors shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
A. In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
B. In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
§ 15-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-104
1:163
§ 15-105. Experimental regulations. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time by resolution, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Township where, for a period
of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by
authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and
in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of
permanent changes in the chapters of the Township relative to traffic and
parking.
§ 15-106. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
2. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
police department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
1. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
2. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
§ 15-104 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-106
1:164
§ 15-107. Use of streets by processions and assemblages. [Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
directing that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street;
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Board of Supervisors, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one
week in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be
held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to
be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of
the proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Board of Supervisors, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two
weeks in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be
held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to
be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of
the proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
§ 15-106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-107
1:165
§ 15-108. Authority of police officers. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The police officers of the Township are hereby authorized to direct traffic on
the highways of the Township and at intersections thereof and to otherwise
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 15-109. Authorization for use of speed timing devices. [Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The Township police department is hereby authorized to use all speed
timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are
approved or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with Title 75, Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3368.
This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Township, be they Township, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under the
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et
seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by
the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-107 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-109
1:166
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 15-201. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
[Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995; Ord. No. 2-2003, § 1, 2/11/2003; Ord.
No. 3-2012, § 1, 8/4/2012]
1. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
All other highways
other than state
highways
35 mph
Brinser Court Entire length 25 mph
Brinser Road Entire length 25 mph
Christian Drive Entire length 25 mph
Cooper Road Entire length 25 mph
Duke Street Grandview Road and
South Hornerstown Road
25 mph
Goldfinch Lane Entire length 35 mph
Grandview Drive Intersection of L.S. 22008
and L.R. 22011 (Route
39)
35 mph
Hayshed Road Entire length 35 mph
Joshua Court Entire length 25 mph
Knights Drive Intersection of North
Hoernerstown Road west
to Township line (Beaver
Creek)
35 mph
Main Street Station 0+00 and station
37+67
25 mph
Meadowlark Lane Entire length 35 mph
North and South
Hanover Street
Route 39 and Swatara
Creek Bridge
25 mph
Oakshire Drive Scout Lane and Pine Hill
Road
25 mph
Pleasant View Road Bridges on Beaver Creek 25 mph
§ 15-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-201
1:167
§ 15-202. Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and
elevated structures. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 15-203. Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on
hazardous grades. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
Red Top Road Intersection of North
Hoernerstown Road west
to Township line (Beaver
Creek)
35 mph
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction of
Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed Limit
Required to
Stop Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
§ 15-201 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-203
1:168
§ 15-204. Maximum speed limits established in parks. [Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 15-205. Traffic signals at certain locations. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
§ 15-206. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal. [Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
1. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Township,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as
specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
(Reserved)
2. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
On Facing
(Reserved)
2. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-207
1:169
§ 15-207. One-way streets established. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 15-208. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
[Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 15-209. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections. [Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
On
Direction of
Travel Not to Make Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
To
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling On
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to Make
Left Turn into
or Travel
Straight
Across
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-207 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-210
1:170
§ 15-210. U-turns prohibited at certain locations. [Ord. No. 3-1995,
9/12/1995]
§ 15-211. No-passing zones established. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
§ 15-212. Through highways established. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
§ 15-213. Stop intersections established. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995; Res. No. 6-1997, 10/28/1997; Ord. No. 3-2008, § 1, 5/13/2008]
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no passing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by Section 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as
the case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through
highway until he has followed all applicable requirements of that
section of the law:
Highway Between
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-210 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-213
1:171
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 15-212) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or across the second-named or
intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Apple Tree Lane Orchard Road North
Ardmore Drive Grandview Drive West
Ardmore Drive Dorchester Road East
Arthur Street Grandview Drive West
Arthur Street Wagner Street South
Arwin Drive Grandview Drive West
Banbury Circle Banbury Road West
Banbury Road Hornerstown Road South
Banbury Road Red Top Road Southeast
Banbury Square Banbury Road West and north
Belmont Road Oakshire Drive East
Bonnywick Drive Red Top Road South
Brompton Road Oakshire Drive East
Canal Street North Hanover Street East and west
Canal Street Sand Beach Road West
Ceymore Street Arthur Street North
Ceymore Street Wagner Street South
Cheltenham Drive Grandview Drive West
Cheltenham Drive Dorchester Road East
Crestview Road Oakshire Drive East
Dorchester Road Grandview Drive North
Duke Street Grandview Drive East
Duke Street Hoernerstown Road West
Dunover Court Sandy Hill Road South
§ 15-213 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-213
1:172
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Eastfield Road Hillymede Drive West
Eastfield Road Red Top Road North
Eastfield Road Thistledown Drive West
Fourth Street North Hanover Street West
Fox Chase Drive Hillymede Drive South
Fox Chase Drive Red Top Road South
Fox Meadow Road Union Deposit Road North
Fox Run Road Stone Mill Road West
Glendore Circle Harrogate Drive South
Grandview Drive PA Route 39 Northeast
Grandview Drive Union Deposit Road North and south
Grandview Road Margate Drive East
Hanshue Road Hershey Road East
Hanshue Road Hershey Road West
Hanshue Road Shetland Drive East
Harrogate Drive Hoernerstown Road East
Harrogate Drive Oakdale Plaza East and west
Hayshed Road Hershey Road East
Hayshed Road Red Top Road West
Hickory Drive Duke Street Northwest
Hillymede Drive Red Top Road Southeast
Hillymede Road Hoernerstown Road Southeast
Hillymede Road Red Top Road Northwest
Hoernerstown Road Grandview Drive East
Hoernerstown Road Union Deposit Road North and south
Jeff Lane Grandview Drive West
Kellock Run Road Union Deposit Road South
Knight Drive Hoernerstown Road East
Larchmont Road Hilldale Place East
Larchmont Road Oakshire Drive East
Long Lane Drive Red Top Road Southeast
Main Street Canal Street East
Main Street North Hanover Street East and west
§ 15-213 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-213
1:173
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Main Street Union Deposit Road West
Margate Drive Waverly Drive North and south
Mayapple Drive Longlane Drive East
Mayapple Drive Meadowood Drive West
Meadowood Drive Long Lane Drive Northeast
North Hanover
Street
Hershey Road North
North Hanover
Street
West Third Street North and south
Oakglade Drive Harrogate Drive North
Oakshire Drive Crestview Road East
Oakshire Drive Pine Hill Road North
Oaktree Road Red Top Road South
Orchard Drive Sand Beach Road East
Overview Drive Scout Lane North
Overview Drive Pine Hill Road North
Overview Drive Pleasant View Road South
Overview Drive Stone Mill Road East
Parklea Road Oakshire Drive East
Parkside Avenue Grandview Drive West
Parkside Avenue Dorchester Road East
Penn Street Canal Street South
Penn Street Main Street North and south
Pine Hill Road Nyes Road West
Pine Hill Road Union Deposit Road North
Pleasant View Road Overview Drive East
Pleasantview Drive Overview Drive East
Ramsgate Drive Shetland Drive Southwest
Red Fox Court Fox Meadow Drive East
Red Top Road Hoernerstown Road East and west
Rexford Road Oakshire Drive East and west
Rosslare Drive Hillymede Drive North
Rosslare Drive Oakglade Drive South
Sandy Hill Road Overview Drive East
§ 15-213 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-213
1:174
§ 15-214. Yield intersections established. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Scout Lane Oakshire Drive Southbound
Scout Lane Overview Drive East
Second Street Canal Street West
Shetland Drive Canal Road North and south
Shetland Drive Hershey Road West
Short Drive Hoernerstown Road West
Short Drive Red Top Road East
Silver Fox Court Fox Meadow Drive East and north
Stone Mill Road Hoernerstown Road Southeast
Stone Mill Road Overview Drive West
Stoudt Drive Red Top Road North
Surrey Lane Hershey Road West
Sycamore Road Duke Street Northwest
Third Street North Hanover Street East
Third Street Penn Street West
Thomas Street Wagner Street South
Timberline Place Ramsgate Drive East
Tulane Road Oakshire Drive East
Unnamed Street Sunny Lane and Broad
Street
Northwest
Union Deposit Road Hershey Road East
Union Deposit Road Sand Beach Road East
Victor Street Canal Street East
Victor Street Shetland Drive South
Wagner Circle Grandview Drive East
Wagner Street Grandview Drive West
Waverly Drive Margate Drive East and west
Willow Road Grandview Drive East
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-213 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-214
1:175
§ 15-215. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
[Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 15-216. Play highways established and authorized. [Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 15-212) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(c) of
the Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. No motor vehicle including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike shall
be operated on any property owned by the Township or any other public
agency or instrumentality within the Township without the permission
of the property owner and a permit from the Board of Supervisors of the
Township.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following areas upon the streets in the Township are established as
play highways:
Street Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
2. The Board of Supervisors is authorized to designate as play highways,
whenever he deems that action advisable, and for whatever period of
time directed by him, any part of any street in the Township, where
sledding and coasting, shall be permitted. That play highway shall be
set apart for the purpose under the direction of the [designated official].
3. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in
case of emergency, with special permission of the [designated official]
or of the police officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway
of all persons using it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any
§ 15-214 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-216
1:176
person who violates any provision of this subsection shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-216 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-216
1:177

ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 15-301. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and
bridges. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 15-302. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 15-303. Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain
streets and bridges. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge
or street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150
for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and costs.
1. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the
restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street.
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(b) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,
§ 15-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-303
1:179
§ 15-304. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets. [Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$25 and not more than $100 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets,
provided: Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from
driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street.
Street Between
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-303 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-304
1:180
ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 15-401. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. [Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 15-402. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. [Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995; Ord. No. 1-1998, § 1, 4/14/1998]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
All bridges Both Entire length
Duke Street South L.R. 22049 and L.R. 22015
Duke Street South The intersection of Duke Street and Hickory
Street and a point located 30 feet west of
the said intersection
East Main Street
(Union Deposit)
Both Entire length
Hickory Street West Between Duke Street and a point located 65
feet south of the intersection of Duke Street
and Hickory Street
North Duke
Street
East Intersection of Street Grandview and North
Duke Streets, south 30 feet
North Duke
Street
West Intersection of Street Grandview and North
Duke Streets, south 30 feet
Oakshire Drive Both Entire length
Sycamore Street North Intersection of Hemlock and Sycamore
Streets, west 106 feet
West Main
Street
South Entire length
§ 15-403. Parking prohibited in certain locations certain days and
hours. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 15-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-404
1:181
§ 15-404. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited in certain locations. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 15-405. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and
hours. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
§ 15-406. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995; Res. No. 3-1997,
4/8/1997]
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
111 West Main
Street
— — Handicapped
parking
§ 15-407. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
[Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
on the following named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and
4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 15-404 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-408
1:182
§ 15-408. Penalties. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs; provided it shall
be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel
of the Township to report to the appropriate official all violations of any
provision of this article, indicating, in each case: the section violated; the
license number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where
the violation took place; and any other facts that might be necessary in
order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain instructions
to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the office of
the Chief of Police and pay the sum of $______ within (______) hours after
the time of the notice, or if he will place the sum of $______, enclosed within
the envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed at
various locations within the Township, that act will save the violator from
prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the first
sentence of this section.
§ 15-408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-408
1:183

ARTICLE V
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 15-501. Applicability and scope. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle
Code, and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound those
vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of parking
regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as defined
by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to interfere
with traffic or pose a hazard to others, may be towed under the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 15-502. Authority to remove and impound. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 15-400 of this article; provided no such vehicle shall
be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of
this article, or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 15-503. Tow-away zones designated. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice
that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Township parking
regulations:
Street/Parking Lot Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 15-504. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by "approved storage garages" that shall be designated from time to time
by Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence to Board
of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an
amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient to indemnify
owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles
while in the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or
storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to Board of Supervisors
its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article,
and, when the schedule is approved by Board of Supervisors, those charges
shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of
charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is
removed or impounded under this article by any approved storage garage.
The Board of Supervisors shall delete from its list of approved storage
§ 15-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-504
1:185
garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with
any vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 15-505. Payment of towing and storage charges. [Ord. No. 3-1995,
9/12/1995]
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this article for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 15-506. Reclamation costs. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a $25 fee of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 15-507. Records of vehicles removed and impounded. [Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 15-508. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles. [Ord. No. 3-1995,
9/12/1995]
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 15-509. Penalty for violation. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S.
§ 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 15-510. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles. [Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with Section 7311 of
the Vehicle Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the
vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred
to a licensed Salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper
reports and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of
§ 15-504 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-510
1:186
Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 110 et
seq., as amended).
§ 15-510 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-510
1:187

ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 15-601. Declaration of snow and ice emergency. [Ord. No. 3-1995,
9/12/1995]
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 15-603 of this
article, the [designated official], in his discretion, may declare a snow
and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency").
Information on the existence of a snow emergency shall be given by the
Township through radio, newspaper or other available media, and
information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 15-602. Parking prohibited, driving motor vehicles restricted on
snow emergency routes during emergency. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
§ 15-603. Snow emergency routes designated. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/
12/1995]
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Location
Duke Street Sylvan View
Grandview Road From Pennsylvania Route 39 to Hoernerstown
Road
Hanshue Road From Pennsylvania Route 39 to Shetland Drive
Hickory Street North side of street, intersection radius of North
Duke Street and Hickory Street, east 212 feet
Hickory Street South side of street, intersection radius of North
Duke Street and Hickory Street, east 233 feet
Main Street Union Deposit
North Hanover Street From Main Street north to Pennsylvania Route
39
Pennsylvania Route 3 From Airport Road to Red Top Road
1. After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 15-603 of
this article.
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route,
unless that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
§ 15-601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-603
1:189
Street Location
Pine Hill Road From Union Deposit Road west to Nyes Road
Red Top Road From Stoudt Road west to Beaver Creek
Shetland Drive From Hanshue Road east to Sand Beach at
intersection with East Canal Street
Stoudt Road From Grandview Road to Red Top Road
Union Deposit Road From Grandview Road (Diffs Corner) to Pine Hill
Road
Victor Street
§ 15-604. Penalty for violation. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 15-601 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and
costs.
2. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 15-601 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-603 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-604
1:190
ARTICLE VII
Regulation of Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
§ 15-701. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along
certain streets prohibited. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 15-702. Restrictions on use of pushcarts. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the Township:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
1. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from the Board of Supervisors as provided in Subsection 3 of
this section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from the Board
of Supervisors. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Township, set by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to a
resolution. The permit shall be granted to the applicant, upon payment
of the fee, and upon his signing an agreement with the Board of
Supervisors that he shall be bound by the conditions imposed by the
Board of Supervisors and made a part of the permit, dealing with the
following matters:
A. Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location.
B. Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on.
§ 15-701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-702
1:191
§ 15-703. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy
vehicles. [Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
C. Requiring that there be no violation of any law, chapter or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Township, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a portion
of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 15-105 of Article I
or § 15-216 of Article II of this chapter; provided nothing in this
subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or
without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating,
skateboarding or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle
upon:
A. Any street except in order to cross the roadway.
B. Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this paragraph shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 15-702 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-703
1:192
ARTICLE VIII
Commercial Vehicle Parking
§ 15-801. Short title; purpose. [Ord. No. 6-2017, 10/24/2017]
§ 15-802. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6-2017, 10/24/2017]
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
hereinbelow:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer typically used
for business, industrial, office, or institutional purposes or having painted
thereon or affixed thereto a sign identifying a business, industry, office or
institution or a principal product or service as such. Agriculture equipment
used as part of a permitted agricultural principal use shall not be
considered a commercial vehicle.
§ 15-803. Parking prohibited in specific locations. [Ord. No. 6-2017,
10/24/2017]
1. The title of this article shall be the "Commercial Vehicle Parking
Ordinance of South Hanover Township."
2. Regulation of the parking of commercial vehicles in South Hanover
Township is essential in managing impacts and protecting public
health, safety, and welfare of Township residents and maintaining the
residential character of the neighborhoods in the Township. The
purpose and scope of this article are to prohibit the parking of specific
classes of commercial vehicles as defined by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation on specific public Township streets.
1. A commercial vehicle with a classification of Class 7 and above shall be
prohibited at all times from parking on Township roads in the following
locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Apple Tree Lane Both From the intersection of Orchard
Road to end
Ardmore Drive Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Dorchester
Road
Arline Lane Both From the intersection of Hanshue
Road to end
Arthur Street Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Wagner Street
Arwin Drive Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Grandview
Drive
§ 15-801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-803
1:193
Name of Street Side Location
Banbury Circle Both From the intersection of Banbury
Road to end
Banbury Road Both From the intersection of Red Top
Road to North Hoernerstown Road
Banbury Square Both From the intersection of Banbury
Road to Banbury Road
Belmont Road Both From the intersection of Oakshire
Drive to Rexford Road
Blackbird Lane Both From the intersection of Goldfinch
Lane to Whippoorwill Lane
Blue Jay Way Both From the intersection of
Meadowlark Lane to Meadowlark
Lane
Bonnywick Drive Both From the intersection of Red Top
Road to Red Top Road
Brinser Court Both From the intersection of Cooper
Road to end
Brinser Road Both From the intersection of Cooper
Road to Route 39
Broadview Street Both From the intersection of Route 39
to end
Brompton Road Both From the intersection of Oakshire
Drive to Roxbury Road
Ceymore Street Both From the intersection of Arthur
Street to Wagner Street
Chalfont Circle Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to end
Cheltenham Drive Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Dorchester
Road
Christian Drive Both From the intersection of
Meadowlark Lane to Cooper Road
Clarks Way Both From the intersection of Savannah
Drive to Savannah Drive
Cooper Road Both From the intersection of Brinser
Court to Hanshue Road
Crestview Road Both From the intersection of Oakshire
Drive to end
Dobbs Lane Both From the intersection of Savannah
Drive to the end
§ 15-803 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-803
1:194
Name of Street Side Location
Dorchester Road Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Cheltenham
Drive
Dove Court Both From the intersection of
Meadowlark Lane to end
Dunover Court Both From the intersection of Sandy Hill
Road to end
Earl Drive Both From the intersection of Shetland
Drive to Arline Lane
East Christopher
Court
Both From the intersection of Merion
Lane to end
East Fourth Street Both From the intersection of North
Hanover Street to end
East Main Street Both From the intersection of North
Hanover Street to East Canal
Street
Eastfield Drive Both From the intersection of Red Top
Road to Hillymede Drive
Fox Chase Circle Both From the intersection of Fox Chase
Drive to end
Fox Chase Drive Both From the intersection of Red Top
Road to Hillymede Circle
Fox Meadow Drive Both From the intersection of Union
Deposit Road to end
Fox Run Road Both From the intersection of Overview
Drive to end
Furnace Street Both From the intersection of South
Hanover Street to end
Galway Drive Both From the intersection of Oakglade
Drive to end
Glen Circle Both From the intersection of Merion
Lane to end
Glendore Circle Both From the intersection of Harrogate
Drive to end
Goldfinch Lane Both From the intersection of Hayshed
Road to Route 39
Grandview Drive Both From the intersection of Route 39
to Union Deposit Road
Hanshue Road Both From the intersection of Route 39
to Cooper Road
§ 15-803 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-803
1:195
Name of Street Side Location
Hanshue Road Both From the intersection of Route 39
to Shetland Drive
Harrogate Drive Both From the intersection of Oakglade
Plaza to North Hoernerstown Road
Harvey Circle Both From the intersection of Scout
Lane to end
Hayshed Road Both From the intersection of Route 39
to Meadowlark Lane
Hayshed Road Both From the intersection of Route 39
to Whippoorwill Lane
Hemlock Street Both From the intersection of Sycamore
Road to end
Hickory Road Both From the intersection of North
Duke Street to Hemlock Street
Hilldale Plaza Both From the intersection of Crestview
Road to Larchmont Road
Hillymede Circle Both From the intersection of Hillymede
Drive to end
Hillymede Drive Both From the intersection of Red Top
Road to Hillymede Circle
Hillymede Drive Both From the intersection of Red Top
Road to North Hoernerstown Road
Hunt Court Both From the intersection of Hanshue
Road to end
Jeff Lane Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to end
Joshua Court Both From the intersection of Cooper
Road to end
Kellocks Run Road Both From the intersection of Union
Deposit Road to end
Knight Drive Both From the intersection of North
Hoernerstown Road to Township
line
Larchmont Road Both From the intersection of Oakshire
Drive to Roxbury Road
Lexington Road Both From the intersection of Rexford
Road to end
Long Lane Drive Both From the intersection of Red Top
Road to end
§ 15-803 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-803
1:196
Name of Street Side Location
Margate Drive Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to end
Mayapple Drive Both From the intersection of Long
Lane Drive to Meadowood Drive
Meadowlark Lane Both From the intersection of Hayshed
Road to Route 39
Meadowood Drive Both From the intersection of Long
Lane Drive to end
Merion Court Both From the intersection of Waverly
Drive to end
Merion Lane Both From the intersection of Margate
Drive to Stoudt Road
Museum Drive Both From the intersection of Route 39
to end
North Duke Street Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Township line
North Hanover Street Both From the intersection of Route 39
to East Canal Street
North Penn Street Both From the intersection West Third
Street to West Main Street
Oakglade Circle Both From the intersection of Harrogate
Drive to end
Oakglade Drive Both From the intersection of Harrogate
Drive to Harrogate Drive
Oakglade Plaza Both From the intersection of Harrogate
Drive to end
Oaktree Road Both From the intersection of Red Top
Road to Township line
Oarkshire Drive Both From the intersection of Pine Hill
Road to Scout Lane
Orchard Road Both From the Township line to end
Overview Drive Both From the intersection of Pine Hill
Road to Pleasantview Road
Parklea Road Both From the intersection of Oakshire
Drive to Rexford Road
Parkside Drive Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Dorchester
Road
Patriot Way Both From the intersection of Route 39
to end
§ 15-803 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-803
1:197
Name of Street Side Location
Pine Hill Road Both From the intersection of Union
Deposit Road to Nyes Road
Pleasantview Road Both From the intersection of Township
line to Township line
Quail Court Both From the intersection of
Meadowlark Lane to end
Ramsgate Drive Both From the intersection of Shetland
Drive to the end of Ramsgate Drive
Red Fox Court Both From the intersection of Fox
Meadow Drive to end
Red Top Road Both From the intersection of North
Hoernerstown Road to Township
line
Rexford Road Both From the intersection of Belmont
Road to end
Rosemont Court Both From the intersection of Waverly
Drive to end
Rosslare Drive Both From the intersection of Hillymede
Drive to Oakglade Drive
Roxbury Road Both From the intersection of
Larchmont Road to Brompton
Road
Sandy Hill Road Both From the intersection of Overview
Drive to end
Savannah Drive Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Grandview
Drive
Scout Lane Both From the intersection of Overview
Drive to Township line
Second Street Both From the intersection of South
Penn Street to West Canal Street
Shetland Drive Both From the intersection of Route 39
to end
Short Drive Both From the intersection of North
Hoernerstown Road to Red Top
Road
Silver Fox Court Both From the intersection of Fox
Meadow Drive to Red Fox Court
Smoke House Lane Both From the intersection of Orchard
Road to end
§ 15-803 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-803
1:198
Name of Street Side Location
Sophia Lane Both From the intersection of Savannah
Drive to Savannah Drive
South Hanover Street Both From the intersection of East
Canal Street to Township Line
South Penn Street Both From the intersection of West
Main Street to West Canal Street
Stone Mill Road Both From the intersection of South
Hoernerstown Road to Overview
Drive
Stoudt Road Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Red Top Road
Sunny Lane Both From the intersection of Route 39
to end
Sycamore Road Both From the intersection of North
Duke Street to Hemlock Street
Thistledown Drive Both From the intersection of Eastfield
Road to end
Thomas Street Both From the intersection of Arthur
Street to Wagner Street
Timberline Place Both From the intersection of Ramsgate
Drive to Ramsgate Drive
Tulane Road Both From the intersection of Oakshire
Drive to Roxbury Road
Victor Street Both From the intersection of Shetland
Drive to end
Wagner Circle Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to end
Wagner Street Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to end
Waverly Drive Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to end
West Christopher
Court
Both From the intersection of Merion
Lane to end
West Fourth Street Both From the intersection of North
Hanover Street to end
West Main Street Both From the intersection of North
Hanover Street to Union Deposit
Road
West Third Street Both From the intersection of North
Hanover Street to end
§ 15-803 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-803
1:199
§ 15-804. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 6-2017,
10/24/2017]
§ 15-805. Severability. [Ord. No. 6-2017, 10/24/2017]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is
for any reason held illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such provision shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision, and such holding shall not render the remainder of this article
invalid.
§ 15-806. Repealer. [Ord. No. 6-2017, 10/24/2017]
Any ordinance or part thereof in conflict with the provisions of this article
is hereby repealed to the extent of said conflict, except that nothing in
this article shall affect any act done or liability incurred or any suit or
Name of Street Side Location
Whippoorwill Lane Both From the intersection of Goldfinch
Lane to Hayshed Road
Willow Circle Both From the intersection of Willow
Street to Willow Street
Willow Street Both From the intersection of
Grandview Drive to Willow Circle
2. This prohibition shall not apply to a commercial vehicle or combinations
of vehicles in the act of making pickups or deliveries to properties,
Township Public Works Department vehicles, or emergency services
vehicles.
1. The Township may bring civil complaints pursuant to or to enforce this
article. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in
which a violation is found to exist and for each section of the article
which is found to have been violated.
2. Civil penalties shall be assessed up to, and shall not exceed, $500 per
violation per day the violation exists. In any case where a penalty for a
violation of this article has not been timely paid and the person upon
whom the penalty was imposed is found to have been liable therefor in
civil proceedings, the violator shall be liable for the penalty imposed,
including additional daily penalties for continuing violations, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township in
enforcement proceedings.
3. Any person authorized by the Township to issue a civil complaint may
also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the
time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil complaint.
4. Fines shall be assessed up to, and shall not exceed, $150 per violation
per day the violation exists.
§ 15-803 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-806
1:200
prosecution pending or to be instituted under any repealed or superseded
ordinance.
§ 15-807. When effective. [Ord. No. 6-2017, 10/24/2017]
This article shall become effective five days after enactment.
§ 15-806 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 15-807
1:201
Chapter 16
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 15-807 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 15-807
1:202
ARTICLE I
Recreational Facilities Regulations
§ 16-101. Purpose of regulations. [Ord. No. 4-2008, § 1, 5/13/2008]
§ 16-102. Permitted hours of use. [Ord. No. 4-2008, § 1, 5/13/2008]
§ 16-103. Prohibited acts. [Res. No. 142-1979, 1/16/1979; Ord. No.
4-2008, § 1, 5/13/2008]
1. The parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities owned and
operated by the Township of South Hanover (hereinafter "park,
playground and recreational facilities") and the various programs
conducted by the Township of South Hanover Park and Recreation
Board (hereinafter "Park and Recreation Board") on or in those facilities
shall be governed by the regulations below.
2. The purpose of these regulations is to insure, to the greatest extent
possible, the provision of parks, recreational areas and recreational
programs to the residents of South Hanover Township and other users
in a safe, secure, environmentally responsible and wholesome
environment.
1. The park, playground and recreational facilities shall be available for
public use only from sunrise to sundown unless other hours are posted
by the Park and Recreation Board.
2. If an outdoor park, playground and recreational facility is equipped
with proper and authorized lighting equipment the Park and Recreation
Board shall establish permitted hours for the use of such facility.
3. All persons entering in or upon park, playground and recreational
facilities during the hours when the facility is not open according to the
above times or permitted by the Park and Recreation Board shall be
considered a trespasser and may be prosecuted as such.
1. The following acts are prohibited by any person on or within any park,
playground and recreational facility owned or operated by the
Township of South Hanover or when attending programs sponsored by
the Park and Recreation Board unless specifically permitted by the Park
and Recreation Board in writing.
A. Committing any disorderly, destructive or immoral act, or taking
any action that may risk bodily injury to any person.
B. Bringing any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances onto
such facilities, being intoxicated or under the influence of
controlled substances or possessing alcoholic beverages or
controlled substances other than medications prescribed by a
physician for medical treatment of the person in possession of the
same.
§ 16-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 16-103
1:203
§ 16-104. Regulation of activities. [Ord. No. 4-2008, § 1, 5/13/2008]
C. Gambling, soliciting or selling of any kind, except for authorized
concessions.
D. Casting, throwing or discarding upon any roadway, park or
playground area, paper, bottles, cans, or debris of any nature or in
any other way littering the premises, including damaging or
tampering with trash or recycling receptacles.
E. Picnicking or building a fire of any kind at a place not designated
for such purpose.
F. Camping or sleeping anywhere on the park, playground and
recreational facilities.
G. Hunting, trapping or removing wild game of any kind from the
premises.
H. Carrying or discharging firearms, air rifles, air pistols, fireworks,
slingshots, bows and arrows or any other deadly weapon on the
premises or off the premises in such a way as to endanger the
safety of any person or property.
I. Use of any equipment to either amplify voice, music or any other
sound except that personal radios may be used, if the volume is set
and kept at a reasonable level, or playing any musical instrument.
J. Washing, waxing, repairing or in any other way servicing a motor
vehicle.
K. Violating the rules or regulations relating to the use of any building
or place on the premises.
L. Defacing, injuring or destroying any notice posted by order of the
Park and Recreation Board.
1. All cars, motorcycles or other motorized vehicles shall be operated only
in areas designated as driveways or parking areas. No vehicles are
permitted on turf areas.
2. A dog/pet owner or keeper will immediately curb all feces deposited by
any dog/pet owned or under their control on South Hanover Township
property or park, playground and recreational facilities. The said owner
or keeper shall dispose of feces in a sanitary manner.
3. A dog/pet owner or keeper shall at all times properly restrain or leash
any dog/pet owned or under their control on South Hanover Township
property or park, playground and recreational facilities.
4. Any person using South Hanover Township property or a park,
playground and recreational facility must place any trash and approved
§ 16-103 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 16-104
1:204
§ 16-105. Penalties. [Res. No. 142-1979, 1/16/1979; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995; Ord. No. 4-2008, § 1, 5/13/2008]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days.
recyclable materials in the provided South Hanover Township recycling
and trash receptacles.
§ 16-104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 16-105
1:205
Chapter 17
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 16-105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 16-105
1:206
ARTICLE I
Sewage Facilities Regulations
DIVISION 1
Short Title, Procedures and Standards
§ 18-101. Short title. [Ord. No. 4-1970, § 100, 11/9/1970]
This chapter shall be known as the "South Hanover Township Sewage
Facilities Regulations."
§ 18-102. Minimum standards adopted. [Ord. No. 4-1970, § 200, 11/
9/1970; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The procedures and standards established in this chapter for the regulation
of sewage systems and related testing are those adapted from the aforecited
Sewage Facilities Act, and the regulations, standards and practices
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources promulgated
pursuant to said Act, which regulations, standards and practices, as may
be revised from time to time, are intended to serve as reference minimum
standards for the Township. Particularly, the "Standards for Individual
Sewage Disposal Systems" and the "Standards for Community Sewage
Disposal Systems," established in the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, as may from time
to time be revised, shall be the minimum standards of the Township, for
the design, installation and operation of such systems. A copy of these
standards shall be supplied on request, to any applicant, by the sewage
facilities officer.
§ 18-103. Conformity with provisions required. [Ord. No. 4-1970,
§ 201, 11/9/1970]
The construction, installation, alteration, extension or repair of any sewage
system, any part thereof, or any disposal or treatment plant in the Township
shall be in accordance with the procedures, practices and standards
established in this chapter, either directly or by reference.
§ 18-104. Suitability of land for development or subdivision. [Ord.
No. 4-1970, § 202, 11/9/1970]
The requirements for assuring the suitability of lands proposed for land
development or subdivision shall be in accordance with the procedures,
practices and standards established in this chapter, either directly or by
reference.
§ 18-105. Certain work to be done in compliance with regulations.
[Ord. No. 4-1970, § 203, 11/9/1970]
No sewage system, nor any part thereof, shall be constructed, installed,
altered, extended or repaired; no permit shall be issued nor system
§ 18-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-105
1:207
approved; and no land development nor subdivision shall proceed nor be
approved which does not comply with these regulations.
§ 18-106. Requirement of deep probe. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970;
Ord. No. 107-1980, 10/14/1980]
In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, regarding lot
testing and notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, a deep
probe and percolation test shall be required on each building lot in the
vicinity of each sewage disposal system. Said probe and percolation test
shall be completed prior to submission of a preliminary subdivision plan if
such a plan is required to be submitted with regard to the lot in question
and all test results shall be submitted to the Township at the time of
submission of the preliminary plan.
§ 18-107. Standard percolation tests. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, standard
percolation tests shall be conducted by the Township sewage facilities
officer. The applicant shall be required to provide a minimum of six
percolation test holes, provide pre-soaking of each hole, and provide an
adequate water supply for the four-hour percolation test.
§ 18-108. Discretionary percolation test. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/
1970; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, a percolation test
shall be required where the results of the deep probe indicate that only
an alternate system is permissible on the building lot. In such event, the
Township sewage facilities officer shall determine, at his own discretion, the
depth of the percolation test holes.
§ 18-109. Discretionary authority of sewage facilities officer. [Ord.
No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In addition to the sewage facilities regulations set forth in this chapter,
and notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, where health hazards
are apparent in either surface expression or as evidenced by contaminated
wells, the Township sewage facilities officer shall have, at his discretion, the
authority to order septic system repairs, modifications or replacement in
accord with existing Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
regulations and the aforesaid sewage facilities regulations.
§ 18-110. Application for sewage services. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/
1970; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In addition to the sewage facilities regulations set forth in this chapter, and
notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, all services of the Township
sewage facilities officer requested by applicants shall be submitted in
writing to the sewage facilities officer, along with payment for such services
§ 18-105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-110
1:208
in accordance with the fee schedule therefore established, from time to
time, by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 18-111. Lateral piping. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In addition to the sewage facilities regulations set forth in this chapter,
and notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, all lateral piping to be
placed within drainfields shall be four-inch perforated rigid plastic pipe or
an approved equivalent. Orangeburg, terra-cotta, or other individual tile
pipes shall not be allowed within drainfields.
§ 18-112. Trench pipe ends. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In addition to the sewage facilities regulations set forth in this chapter, and
notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, trench pipe ends shall be
sealed by mortar or plastic plugs.
§ 18-113. Slope of trench lines. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In addition to the sewage facilities regulations set forth in this chapter, and
notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, the slope of trench lines
shall not exceed one inch per 100 feet.
§ 18-114. Site testing information. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In addition to the sewage facilities regulations set forth in this chapter, and
notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, all site testing information
obtained for use in conjunction with any Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources planning module or application for sewage
disposal system shall be performed or witnessed by the Township sewage
facilities officer.
§ 18-115. Replacement of septic system. [Res. No. 134-1978, 9/26/
1978]
In addition to the sewage facilities regulations set forth in this chapter,
and notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, no septic system shall
be placed within any existing or former gully, swale, depression, or other
drainageway which serves as a stormwater course during any rainfall event.
§ 18-116. Adoption of additional rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
4-1970, 11/9/1970; Ord. No. 90-1978, § 1, 9/26/1978]
The Township, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in
appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives,
reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules and
regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper in connection with the
§ 18-110 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-116
1:209
interpretation and enforcement of the sewage facilities regulations, which
rules and regulations shall become and shall be construed as part of this
chapter.
§ 18-116 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-116
1:210
DIVISION 2
Definitions
§ 18-121. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4-1970, §§ 301 — 319, 11/9/1970;
Ord. No. 117-1981, 8/11/1981]
1. As used in this chapter, words and phrases shall have the meanings
given herein:
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building arranged, intended or designed to
be occupied by three or more families living independently of each
other.
BUILDING SEWER — The piping carrying liquid wastes from a building
to a treatment tank, or to a collector pipe of a community or public
sewage system.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more dwelling
units, or for the collection of sanitary sewage or industrial wastes, or
both, and including various devices for the treatment of such sewage or
wastes, or which discharges into a public sewage system.
DISPOSAL FIELD — An area in which open joint or perforated piping is
laid in covered trenches or excavations, for the purpose of distributing
liquid from a treatment tank into the soil.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes, having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities, and arranged
for occupancy by one family.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A single system of piping, tanks or
other facilities, serving only a single dwelling unit, and disposing of
sewage in whole or in part into the soil of the property, or into any
waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or discharging into a
community or public sewage system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Liquid wastes resulting from the processing
of materials in any commercial, industrial or manufacturing process or
establishment.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
MOBILE HOME — A transportable or portable vehicle or structure
designed for or capable of use for living or commercial purposes, or
as an office or place of assembly whether contained in one unit, or in
two units designed to be joined in one integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at the site complete
The erection or installation of a building, for residential or other
purposes, the useful occupancy of which will require disposal of
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes.
A.
Any improvement or use of land which results in a need to provide
for the disposal of sanitary sewage or industrial wastes.
B.
§ 18-121 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-121
1:211
and ready for occupancy except for minor incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and is constructed so that it may be used with or
without a permanent foundation, with or without the removal of wheels,
rollers, skids or tongue except one that is displayed for sale.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any site, lot, field or tract of ground, or part
thereof:
MUNICIPALITY — South Hanover Township, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
PUBLIC SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system of collector and interceptor
piping, located in public rights-of-way or easements, discharging into
and including centralized sewage treatment plants and all auxiliary
facilities, providing means for a large number of sewers in a general
area to dispose of sewage.
RECREATION FACILITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system for the
collection and disposal, with or without treatment, of sanitary sewage
serving any facility or land used seasonally or periodically occupied for
recreational purposes, whether or not the facility or land use includes
permanent or portable structures or enclosures.
SEEPAGE PIT — A covered pit with open-jointed lining, through which
liquid from a treatment tank can seep or leach into the soil.
SEWAGE — Any substance which contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals, and any noxious or deleterious substances harmful or inimical
to the public health or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water
for domestic water supply or for recreation.
SEWAGE FACILITIES OFFICER — The person, or his duly authorized
agent, appointed by the Township to have the responsibility for
administering the provisions of this chapter, issuing permits and
making inspections as herein provided.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot, tract, or parcel of land, or
part thereof, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land including
changes in street lines or lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of transfer of ownership or of building development;
provided, however, the division of land for agricultural purposes in
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement
of access, shall not be included within the meaning of "subdivision."
TREATMENT TANK — A water-tight tank designed to retain sewage
solids long enough for satisfactory bacterial decomposition to take
place:
A. Where two or more mobile homes are parked.
Which is used by the public as a parking space for two or more
mobile homes, and shall include any building, structure, tent,
vehicle or enclosure, used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of such a park.
B.
§ 18-121 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-121
1:212
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA — Shall be
inclusive of any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, lakes, dammed
water, ponds, springs, and all other bodies of surface or underground
water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the
boundaries of the commonwealth.
SEPTIC TANK — A water-tight tank receptacle which receives
sewage and is designed and constructed to provide for sludge
storage, sludge decomposition, and the separation of solids from
the liquid, through a period of detention before the liquid is
discharged.
A.
AEROBIC TREATMENT TANK — Any unit which incorporates, as
part of the treatment process, a means of introducing air into the
sewage held in a storage tank or tanks so as to provide aerobic
biochemical stabilization during a detention period.
B.
§ 18-121 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-121
1:213

DIVISION 3
Regulation of Sewage Systems
§ 18-131. Applicability of regulations. [Ord. No. 4-1970, § 400, 11/9/
1970]
These regulations, procedures, practices and standards shall apply
throughout the Township, to all sewage systems hereafter constructed,
installed, altered, extended or repaired.
§ 18-132. Sewage facilities permit required; exception. [Ord. No.
4-1970, § 401, 11/9/1970; Ord. No. 2-1987, § 1, 4/28/1987; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 18-133. Application for permit; information required. [Ord. No.
4-1970, § 402, 11/9/1970]
1. No person may install or construct an individual or community on-lot
sewage system, or install, construct, occupy or use a building to be
served by that system without first obtaining a permit from the sewage
facilities officer, as provided in Subsections 4 and 5 of this section.
2. A permit is required by the Township of South Hanover for alterations
to an existing individual or community on-lot sewage system when the
alteration requires repair, replacement or enlargement of a treatment
tank, subsurface absorption area or retention tank.
3. Multiple installation of chemical toilets or other portable toilets
proposed for temporary use at a construction site, a recreation activity
or a temporary facility shall be covered by one permit.
1. Application for a sewage facilities permit shall be made to the sewage
facilities officer by the person, corporation or other entity who will be
responsible for performing the work.
2. The application shall be made on a multicopy form, as prepared for such
use by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and
provided by the sewage facilities officer, and shall contain or be
accompanied by the following information and data:
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Description of the real estate upon which the system is to be
installed, and the improvements thereon which the system will
serve.
C. Information related to the proposed installation:
(1) For a system proposed to discharge into a community or public
sewage system:
(a) Official name of the agency operating the system into
which discharge is to be made.
§ 18-131 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-133
1:215
§ 18-134. Application and procedure for lot testing. [Ord. No.
4-1970, § 403, 11/9/1970]
(b) Location and size of the collector pipe of the system into
which discharge is to be made.
(c) Evidence of acceptance of, and capacity for, the discharge
by the operating agency and system.
(2) For an on-lot treatment and disposal system, or any other
system not discharging into a public system:
(a) Detailed information showing the absorptive qualities,
depth and type of soil involved, and the high-water level of
the ground water table.
(b) Number and location of private and public water supplies
within 100 feet of the proposed system.
(c) Location of and distance to any public sewage system
within one mile of the site.
D. Approval of the proposed system, when such is required, by the
Department of Environmental Resources or any other agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Such further information as may be required by the sewage
facilities officer to ensure the proposed system complies with these
regulations.
1. For systems which will treat and dispose of sewage on the lot or land to
be served by the system, the applicant shall make an initial application
to the sewage facilities officer containing the following information:
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Description of the real estate upon which the system is to be
installed, and the improvements thereon which the system will
serve.
C. Brief description of the arrangements to conduct the required soil
percolation rate tests, indicating the locations of the test holes on
the site, who will be responsible for preparing the holes and
performing the tests, and when the holes can be prepared, soaked
and tested in accordance with this chapter.
D. The sewage facilities officer, or his agent, may periodically inspect
the presoaking process, and shall observe the actual percolation
rate tests. The presoaking and the rate tests shall be performed on
a date and at a time in accordance with a written schedule
established cooperatively by the sewage facilities officer and
whoever is responsible for performing the tests, provided that the
sewage facilities officer may not require a date and time more than
§ 18-133 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-134
1:216
§ 18-135. Issuance or denial of permit; time limit; exception. [Ord.
No. 4-1970, § 404, 11/9/1970]
§ 18-136. Reasons for denial of permit. [Ord. No. 4-1970, § 405, 11/
9/1970]
§ 18-137. Inspection of installation of sewage systems. [Ord. No.
4-1970, § 406, 11/9/1970; Ord. No. 129-1986, § 1, 2/11/1986; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
48 hours, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, later than that
requested, and provided that if the sewage facilities officer or
his agent fails to observe the tests performed according to such
schedule, he shall accept the results reported by whoever is
responsible for performing the tests and further provided that the
results of tests performed other than according to such schedule,
which are not observed by the sewage facilities officer or his agent,
shall not be accepted, and shall be repeated on the order of the
sewage facilities officer.
E. The applicant shall be advised by the sewage facilities officer of the
additional data which will be required, concerning the site and the
proposed system. The sewage facilities officer shall aid the
applicant by providing suggestions as to satisfactory sources of
such data.
1. Permits shall be issued or denied by the sewage facilities officer in
writing within seven days after receiving an application for a permit.
2. When the sewage facilities officer has found an application incomplete,
the applicant shall be notified in writing within seven days and the time
for acting thereon shall be extended seven days beyond the date of
submission of adequate supplementary or amendatory data. When the
sewage facilities officer is satisfied the application is complete, and the
proposed design meets the requirements of this chapter and will
adequately protect the public health, a permit shall be issued.
1. A denial of a permit by the sewage facilities officer shall be for any one
or more of the following reasons which shall be incorporated into the
written denial:
A. Failure of the proposed design to meet the requirements of these
regulations.
B. Soil or geological conditions are such as to preclude safe and
proper operation of the desired installation.
C. A public sewage system is accessible, into which the sewage can be
feasibly and legally discharged.
D. Proposed system will not adequately protect the public health.
§ 18-134 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-137
1:217
§ 18-138. Effect on building permit issuance. [Ord. No. 4-1970,
§ 407, 11/9/1970]
The officer of the Township responsible for the issuance of building permits
shall not issue a building permit for any structure which is connected, or is
intended to be connected, to any individual or community sewage system,
until a sewage facilities permit has been issued for the sewage system
which serves or will serve the structure.
§ 18-139. Mobile homes considered separate dwelling units;
exception. [Ord. No. 4-1970, § 408, 11/9/1970]
For the purposes of this chapter, mobile homes shall be considered as
separate dwelling units, each requiring an individual sewage system, except
for those mobile homes located in a mobile home park for which a sewage
facilities permit has been issued.
§ 18-140. Separate sewage systems required; exception. [Ord. No.
4-1970, § 408, 11/9/1970]
Every dwelling unit shall have a separate, individual sewage system except
those contained in apartment houses or in a two-family house with the
dwelling units arranged one above the other.
1. Whoever shall receive a permit to install a sewage system shall notify
the sewage facilities officer as to when installation is to be made, and
the sewage facilities office or his agent may make such inspections or
tests as deemed necessary, before or during installation. The sewage
facilities officer shall be notified in writing when the installation is
completed, and no installation shall be covered until it is inspected and
given final written approval by the sewage facilities officer, provided
that if the sewage facilities officer or his agent fails to inspect the
installation within 48 hours, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, of
receiving the notice of completion, the installation may be covered, and
it shall be accepted by the sewage facilities officer as in accordance
with the approved plan and standards for the system; further provided
that the sewage facilities officer may order correction of any
installation found by inspection to be not in accordance with the
approved plan and standards, and that a new notice of completion shall
be effected, following any ordered uncovering or corrective work.
2. The sewage facilities officer or his agent required to make such
inspections or tests as deemed necessary, before or during installation
shall charge an hourly fee per inspection in an amount as established
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors with a
minimum charge per inspection, also in an amount as established from
time to time by resolution. This fee is to be paid by the owner of the land
inspected.
§ 18-137 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-141
1:218
§ 18-141. Recreation facility sewage system. [Ord. No. 4-1970,
§ 410, 11/9/1970]
§ 18-142. Approval by commonwealth of certain proposed sewage
systems required prior to issuance of permit. [Ord. No. 4-1970,
§ 411, 11/9/1970]
1. Sewage systems which serve recreation facilities shall comply with the
following regulations. Lands newly used for these purposes shall
comply from the outset; lands previously used for these purposes shall
comply within one year after adoption of this chapter, and it shall be
obligatory upon the owner or operator of any lands used for recreation
purposes to obtain a sewage facilities permit, prior to installing or
operating any sewage system, issued in accordance with the provisions
herein:
A. Structures or land uses serving, or intended to serve, more than 20
persons, or used or intended to be used periodically throughout the
year, shall be served by an individual sewage system as defined and
regulated in § 18-107 of this chapter.
B. Structures or land uses serving 20 or fewer persons, and generally
used only during the warm weather months, may be served by a
sewage system composed of a fully-enclosed insect-tight structure,
a privy vault or tank made of concrete, coated steel, or other
material impervious to water and sewage, and related facilities.
Such systems shall be in accordance with standards for such
structures as accepted by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, and shall be subject to initial and
periodic inspection by the sewage facilities officer. Holding tanks
shall be cleaned promptly, at the end of seasonal use, and at such
other times as necessary or as ordered by the sewage facilities
officer.
C. The sewage system serving any recreation facility open to the
public, with or without an admittance fee, is subject to the approval
and regulation of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
1. In accordance with the afore-cited acts, rules and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or such other regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as may apply, the sewage facilities
officer shall require, prior to issuing a sewage facilities permit, written
or other acceptable means of notice the approval of the proposed
sewage system by the sanitary water board, or the department of
environmental resources, or such other agency of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania as may have jurisdiction, for sewage systems proposed
to serve any of the following:
A. An apartment house.
§ 18-141 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-142
1:219
§ 18-143. Consultation with county sanitarian required before
issuance of permit for certain sewage systems. [Ord. No. 4-1970,
§ 412, 11/9/1970]
§ 18-144. Sewage facilities officer may consult county sanitarian
prior to issuance of permit. [Ord. No. 4-1970, § 413, 11/9/1970]
The sewage facilities officer may obtain the consultation the County
Sanitarian of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
prior to issuing a sewage facilities permit for any proposed sewage system.
§ 18-145. Discharge of raw sewage and untreated industrial wastes
prohibited and declared a nuisance. [Ord. No. 54-1976, § 1, 1/20/
1976]
No person, firm or corporation owning any real property within the
Township of South Hanover upon which is located an individual or
community sewage system, disposal field, building sewer, recreation facility
sewage system, seepage pit or treatment tank shall permit the discharge
of any raw sewage or untreated industrial wastes into or through any
of the aforementioned individual or community sewage systems, disposal
fields, building sewers, recreation facility sewage systems, seepage pits or
treatment tanks which by reason of malfunction, disrepair or fault in design,
causes or permits said raw sewage or untreated industrial waste to escape
to the surface of the ground or cause or permit the same to be discharged
B. A commercial structure or land use.
C. A community sewage system serving three or more lots.
D. An educational facility, public or private.
E. A hospital or industrial facility.
F. An industrial structure or land use.
G. A mobile home structure or land use.
H. A mobile home park.
I. A public or commercial park or recreation facility.
J. A public building or land use.
1. The sewage facilities officer shall be required to obtain the consultation
of the County Sanitarian of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, prior to issuing a sewage facilities or a
sewage system proposed to serve the following:
A. A community sewage system serving more than two dwelling units.
B. A nonresidential facility for which the sewage system is not subject
to approval by an agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 18-142 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-145
1:220
upon any private or public property, street, highway or right-of-way so
as to emit any unpleasant or noxious odor or to create a possible health
hazard within the Township. Any discharge of raw sewage or untreated
industrial waste upon any premises within the Township and in violation
of the provisions of this section, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Township.
§ 18-146. Responsibilities of owners of real property. [Ord. No.
54-1976, § 1, 1/20/1976]
The owner of any real property within the Township upon which is located
an individual or community sewage system, disposal field, building sewer,
recreation facility sewage system, seepage pit or treatment tank shall
maintain the same in a good state of repair and in good working order and
shall take such corrective measures as are necessary to comply with § 18-45
of this division.
§ 18-147. Authority for Township to perform or have performed
such corrective measures as are necessary and collect the costs
thereof plus additional penalties. [Ord. No. 54-1976, § 1, 1/20/1976]
The Board of Supervisors or any officer or employee of the Township
designated thereby for the purpose is hereby authorized to give notice, by
personal service or by United States mail, to the owner of any real estate
whereon raw sewage or untreated industrial waste is being discharged in
violation of § 18-45 of this division, directing and requiring such owner to
take such corrective measures as are necessary to abate the nuisance so
as to comply with the provisions of this division within five days after the
service of notice. In case any person, firm or corporation shall neglect, or
fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of time stated
therein, the Township authorities may take or have taken such corrective
measures as are necessary to abate the nuisance, and the costs thereof,
together with any additional penalty authorized by law, may be collected by
the Township from such person, firm or corporation in the manner provided
by law.
§ 18-148. Penalties. [Ord. No. 54-1976, § 1, 1/20/1976; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and
costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this division
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 18-145 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-148
1:221

DIVISION 4
Fees
§ 18-151. Fees. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970; Ord. No. 89-1978, § 1,
9/26/1978]
§ 18-152. Subdivision site inspection. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 18-153. Sewage facilities permit. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 18-154. Review of sewage planning modules. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/
9/1970; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
For review of sewage planning modules, an amount established by the
Township sewage enforcement officer based on a rate as established from
time to time by resolution per review of said module (also an additional
fee as established from time to time by resolution per each additional
field review). Upon completion of the review, if the amount paid exceeds
the amount of actual fee for review, the balance shall be refunded to the
1. The Board of Supervisors shall prescribe, from time to time by
resolution, such fees as shall be deemed necessary for the proper
administration and enforcement of the South Hanover Township
Sewage Facilities Regulations.
2. The fees so prescribed shall be paid to the Township to defray the costs
of administration, inspection and enforcement as provided by the
sewage facilities regulations and may include fees for subdivision site
inspections, issuance of sewage facilities permits, review of sewage
facilities planning modules and such other items as shall be deemed
necessary by the Board of Supervisors.
1. Site inspection and testing, including deep probe:
A. Inspection fees for the first probe (individual lots) shall be in an
amount as established from time to time by resolution.
B. Inspection fees for each additional probe (individual lots) shall be
in an amount as established from time to time by resolution.
2. Percolation test (individual lots) shall be in an amount as established
from time to time by resolution.
1. Sewage facilities permit for the installation of new facilities and repair
or enlargement of existing facilities shall be in an amount as established
from time to time by resolution.
2. Sewage facilities permit for the minor repair of existing facilities shall
be in an amount as established from time to time by resolution.
§ 18-151 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-154
1:223
applicant, and if the fee exceeds the amount of payment, the applicant shall
pay the additional amount before the report is released.
§ 18-154 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-154
1:224
DIVISION 5
Penalties, Appeals and Remedies
§ 18-161. Penalties. [Ord. No. 4-1970, 11/9/1970; Ord. No. 5-1972,
§ 1, 3/13/1972; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and
costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this division
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 18-162. Appeals to Board of Supervisors. [Ord. No. 4-1970, § 800,
11/9/1970]
Any person, corporation or other entity aggrieved by an action of the
sewage facilities officer, by means of denial of a permit, disapproval of an
installed system, or an issued order, may appeal to the Township Board
of Supervisors, within 30 days after such action or order. The supervisors
shall hold a hearing on such an appeal within 15 days after receiving a
written notice of appeal. At that time, the applicant may be represented
by counsel and may present evidence as to why a permit should be issued
or retained, or an installed system approved, or an order rescinded or
changed. No transcript of testimony shall be required, but the applicant
shall be notified in writing within seven days after the hearing of the
decision of the supervisors and the reasons therefor.
§ 18-163. Further appeals. [Ord. No. 4-1970, § 801, 11/9/1970]
§ 18-164. Remedies available. [Ord. No. 4-1970, § 802, 11/9/1970]
The provisions of this article shall in no way restrict any remedies otherwise
provided by law; and the Township or any person may take any appropriate
action at law or in equity, civil or criminal, to enforce the provisions of this
article.
1. Any person, corporation or other entity aggrieved by the action of the
Board of Supervisors on an appeal may, within 30 days after such
action, further appeal to the Secretary of Health of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
2. The secretary of health, or his designee, shall hear the appeal in
accordance with the provisions of the "Administrative Agency Law," P.L.
1388, Act of the General Assembly of Pennsylvania of June 4, 1945.
§ 18-161 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-164
1:225

ARTICLE II
Connection Requirements
§ 18-201. Definitions. [Ord. No. 68-1977, § 1, 5/10/1977]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — South Hanover Township Sewer Authority, a Pennsylvania
municipality authority.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the service lateral of a collection sewer.
COLLECTION SEWER — The authority's collection sanitary sewers located
under highways, roads, streets, and rights-of-way with branch service
laterals that collect and convey sanitary sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or
industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
CONNECTION UNIT — Each individual building or house whether
constructed as a detached unit or as one of a pair or row which is designed
or adaptable to separate ownership for use as a family dwelling unit or
for commercial or industrial purposes. A school, factory, apartment house,
office building, or other multiple unit structure whose individual apartments
or units are connected to a common internal sewage system and which are
not commonly subject to separate ownership shall be considered as one
connection unit.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within this Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building,
or other enclosure used or intended for use, in whole or in part, in the
operation of a business enterprise for the manufacturing, fabricating,
processing, cleaning, laundering, or assembling of any product, commodity
or article, or from which any process waste, as distinct from sanitary
sewage, shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or water
borne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping in the course of any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of the
development, recovery, or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation or other group or entity.
§ 18-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-201
1:227
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
discharged from any improved property.
SERVICE LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a
collection sewer to the curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, to the
property line or, if no such service lateral shall be provided, then "service
lateral" shall mean that portion of, or place in, a collection sewer which is
provided for connection of any building sewer.
SEWER — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collection,
transporting, pumping, and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes, situated in or adjacent to this Township, owned by the authority and
leased to this Township for operation and use.
SEWER — Any pipe, main, or conduit constituting a part of the sewer
system used or usable for sewage collection purposes.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of South Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, a municipal subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
§ 18-202. Use of public sewers required. [Ord. No. 68-1977, § 2, 5/
10/1977]
1. The owner of any improved property accessible to and whose principal
building is within 150 feet from the sewer system shall connect such
improved property with and shall use such sewer system, in such
manner as this Township may require, within 60 days after notice to
such owner from this Township to make such connection, for the
purpose of discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from
such improved property subject, however, to such limitations and
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be
established by this Township, from time to time.
2. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connection of such improved property with a sewer shall be
required under Subsection 1 of this section shall be conducted into a
sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall be
established herein or as otherwise shall be established by this
Township, from time to time.
3. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property within this Township, any sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection 1 of this section.
No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural
outlet within this Township any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in
violation of Subsection 1 of this section except where suitable
treatment has been provided which is satisfactory to this Township.
4. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used or maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under
Subsection 1 of this section to be connected to a sewer. Every such
§ 18-201 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-202
1:228
§ 18-203. Building sewers and connections. [Ord. No. 68-1977, § 3,
5/10/1977]
privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in
existence shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of this Township,
shall be cleansed and filled at the expense of the owner of such
improved property and under the direction and supervision of this
Township; and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or
similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by this Township,
cleansed and filled, shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may
be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such
improved property.
5. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or similar receptacle at
any time shall be connected with a sewer.
6. The notice by this Township to make a connection to a sewer, referred
to in Subsection 1 of this section shall consist of a copy of this article,
including any amendments and/or supplements at the time in effect, or
a summary of each section hereof, and a written or printed document
requiring the connection in accordance with the provisions of this
article and specifying that such connection shall be made within 60
days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be given at any
time after a sewer is in place which can receive and convey sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the
particular improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the
owner either by personal service or by registered mail or by such other
method as at the time may be provided by law.
1. No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use,
alter or disturb in any manner any sewer or any part of the sewer
system without first obtaining a permit, in writing from this Township.
2. Application for a permit required under Subsection 1 of this section
shall be made by the owner of the improved property served or to be
served.
3. No person shall make or cause to be made a connection of any improved
property with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled each of the
following conditions:
A. Such person shall have notified this Township of the desire and
intention to connect such improved property to a sewer.
B. Such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit as
required by Subsection 1 of this section.
C. Such person shall have given this Township at least 24 hours'
notice of the time when such connection will be made so that this
Township may supervise and inspect the work of connection and
necessary testing.
§ 18-202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-203
1:229
D. Such person shall have furnished satisfactory evidence to this
Township that any tapping fee charged and imposed by the
authority against the owner of each improved property who
connects such improved property to a sewer has been paid.
4. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer
through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved
property on one building sewer shall not be permitted except under
special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good
cause shown and then only after special permission of this Township, in
writing, shall have been secured and subject to such rules, regulations,
and in the event a single house connection is permitted to serve a
double house, it will be necessary for both property owners to sign an
agreement relieving the authority and Township of any responsibility or
obligation caused by or resulting from installation of a single house
connection. The agreement shall provide that any disagreement
between the two parties concerning maintenance of the common sewer
will be sufficient cause for the authority and/or this Township to install
an additional connection to the sewer main to provide individual service
to houses. The installation of such separate service lateral from the
sewer main to the curb, as well as the house connection from the curb
to the property, shall be made at the joint expense of the property
owners signing the agreement.
5. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer, including
testing, shall be borne by the owner of the improved property to be
connected; and such owner shall indemnify and save harmless this
Township from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or
indirectly, as a result of construction of a building sewer or of
connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
6. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated
by this Township and where the service lateral is provided. The invert of
a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or a
higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall
be made and the connection of a building sewer to the service lateral
shall be made secure and watertight.
7. After construction of the sewer system has been completed, the service
lateral shall be constructed from the collection sewer to the building
sewer, by and at the expense to the owner, who has obtained a permit,
and upon installation shall become the property of the authority.
Connections to the collection sewer where no branch or wye (Y) fitting
has been previously provided shall be made and a service lateral
provided by this Township.
8. Connections to service laterals, if of the same pipe size, shall be made
by properly joining to the bell end of the service lateral provided. Where
different types or sizes of materials are to be joined, an approved
§ 18-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-203
1:230
§ 18-204. Rules and regulations governing building sewers and
connections to sewers. [Ord. No. 68-1977, § 4, 5/10/1977; Ord. No.
87-1978, § 2, 8/22/1978; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
adapting fitting shall be used. Projecting the smaller pipe into the
larger and sealing will not be permitted. This applies also to the
connection of a house drain to the building sewer pipe.
9. As the sewer system is constructed or extended and sewer service
becomes available, if the owner of any improved property located
within the Township and accessible to and whose principal building is
located within 150 feet from the sewer system, after 80 days' notice
from this Township requiring the connection of such improved property
with a sewer, in accordance with Subsection 1 of this section shall fail to
connect such improved property, as required, this Township may make
such connection and may collect from such owner the costs and
expenses thereof by a municipal claim, an action in assumpsit or such
other legal proceeding as may be permitted by law.
1. A building sewer shall be no less than four inches in internal diameter.
2. All service laterals and building sewers shall be constructed of one of
the following types of pipes:
A. Extra-strength vitrified clay sewer pipe conforming to ASTM C-200,
minimum six inch diameter.
B. PVC gravity sewer pipe conforming to ASTM D-3034.
C. Ductile-iron centrifugally cast soil pipe at least four inches in
internal diameter conforming to ANSI A21.51, AWWA C151, Class
51.
D. Service weight cast-iron centrifugally cast bituminous concrete soil
pipe at least four inches in internal diameter conforming to ANSI
A21.11, AWWA C111.
3. Jointing materials for the various types of pipe shall be as follows:
A. Vitrified clay pipe shall have compression-type joints conforming to
ASTM C-425, Type III.
B. PVC gravity pipe shall have joints consisting of a rubber gasket and
conforming to ASTM D-1869, C361 or C443.
C. Ductile-iron pipe shall have single neoprene rubber gaskets
conforming to ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C111).
D. Service weight cast-iron pipe bituminous coated shall have single
neoprene rubber O-ring. Adapter gasket conforming to ASTM
#443.
§ 18-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-204
1:231
E. Sewer joint compound shall be Atlastic 77 or equal, and shall be
installed as follows:
Pipe joint surfaces must be clean and dry, apply a prime coat and
allow to dry overnight; trowel a one-half inch thick layer of joint
compound on the groove end of the pipe set in place in the trench
covering about two-thirds of the joint face around the entire pipe
circumference.
4. Uniform bearing shall be provided along the entire length of a building
sewer by the use of six-inch stone bed, 1-B stone, and all joints of a
building sewer shall be watertight and root-proof. No cement mortar
joints shall be used.
5. Where an improved property, at the time of securing a permit under
Subsection 1 of § 18-203 to connect to a sewer shall be served by its
own sewage disposal system or device, the existing house sewer line
shall be broken on the structure side of such sewage disposal system or
device and attachment shall be made with proper fittings to continue
such house sewer line, as a building sewer, undiminished in inside
diameter, but not less than four inches, to the service lateral.
6. It shall be the duty of every person constructing or owning any building
connected to the sewer system to assure that their building sewer,
house drain and plumbing fixtures are adequate for the purpose and
will allow free passage of any material that enters or should enter the
system. No change of the building sewer of any building shall be
permitted unless notice thereof shall have been given the Township and
approval of the Township thereto obtained in writing.
7. Fittings in a building sewer shall conform to the type of pipe used in
construction.
8. Changes in direction in a building sewer must be made only by use of
"Y" branches or of 1/8 or 1/16 bends. No 1/4 bends will be permitted.
Caulking of lead joints or alignment of self-sealing joints to angles of
less than 1/16 bend equivalent only shall be permitted.
9. Fittings or connections in a building sewer which have an enlargement,
chamber or recess with a ledge or shoulder reduction of pipe area that
shall offer any obstruction to flow, shall not be allowed.
10. Ductile-iron pipe joints will be push-on type, consisting of a single
rubber gasket joint as described in ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C111).
A. The building sewer must be tested and approved as provided in
Subsections 16, 17 and 18 of this section.
B. Service weight cast-iron pipe joints will be push-on type consisting
of a single neoprene gasket joint conforming to ASTM C-564-70.
§ 18-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-204
1:232
11. Basement floor drains shall not be permitted to be connected to the
building sewer except where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the
Township that their connection is absolutely necessary.
A. A permit shall be obtained from the Township before any floor drain
may be attached to the building sewer drainage system.
B. No permit for a basement floor drain shall be granted until the
owner of the building or his agent has executed, signed and filed
with the Township a written statement releasing the Township from
any damage or personal injury that may result.
12. Cleanouts. Generally, cleanouts shall be provided in each building
sewer and at intervals to permit complete rodding with a 100-foot long
auger or tape. Cleanouts shall be constructed by using a "Y" fitting in
the run of pipe with a 45° bend and riser to the ground surface. The
riser pipe must be provided with a standard four-inch screw type
ferrule and plug.
13. Special conditions. Wherever in the opinion of the Township the
trenching conditions require either a specific type of pipe, jointing
material or encasement in concrete, such materials, as it may direct,
shall be installed to protect the property owner and/or the Township for
special conditions as follows:
A. Where the trench is over 12 feet deep, extra-strength V.C. pipe or
Class 51 ductile-iron pipe must be used.
B. Where the trench is less than four feet deep in a traveled roadway,
special bedding, consisting of crushed stone or concrete cradle, as
directed by the Township, must be used.
C. Where lines are laid in full, ductile-iron with concrete encasement
and neoprene rubber gaskets shall be used at the direction of this
Township.
D. Where foundation conditions are poor due to ground water or
subsurface materials, a bedding of PennDOT II2A modified crushed
stone at least eight inches in depth shall be installed beneath the
pipe.
E. Where rock is encountered, the trench shall be excavated to a
depth of four inches below the bottom of the pipe and the trench
refilled to the grade line with crushed stone.
14. A building sewer may be provided with a horizontal trap, known as a
house trap, of not less than four inches inside diameter, of cast iron
equivalent to cast iron soil pipe. Such trap shall be provided with a vent
and clean-out openings, each to be at a level of at least equal to the
finished grade level and to be provided with bent cowls. Lines from
such trap to such finished grade level shall be of the same size and
material as the building sewer.
§ 18-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-204
1:233
15. The house trap described under Subsection 14 of this section shall be
located at a point approved by the Township in accordance with rules
and regulations applicable thereto as adopted by this Township. Such
trap and its vent shall be on the property side of the curb.
16. The slope or grade of a building sewer, when the inside diameter is four
inches or more, shall be no less than one-fourth inch per foot of length
and shall be downward in the direction of flow; provided, however, that
when a commercial or industrial establishment requires a building
sewer with an inside diameter of six inches or more, the slope shall be
no less than one-eighth inch per foot of length. When physically
required in order to connect with the sewer lateral, the slope of the
building sewer may be reduced to one-eighth inch per foot but only with
the permission of this Township.
17. This Township shall observe all testing of a building sewer. All
equipment and material required for testing shall be furnished by the
owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer. In the event
that a building sewer is not approved by this Township, further test or
tests shall be made following completion of necessary corrections. A fee
in an amount as established from time to time by resolution will be
charged by this Township for observation of each test subsequent to the
initial test.
18. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected, tested
(as provided in Subsection 17 of this section) and approved. If any part
of a building sewer is uncovered before so being inspected, tested and
accepted, it shall be uncovered for inspection and testing at the cost
and expense of the owner of the improved property.
19. Every building sewer shall be tested by filling the same with water,
completely, so that every section shall be tested with not less than a tenfoot
head of water. Water shall be kept in the building sewer for 15
minutes before inspection starts and no leakage shall be observable at
the time of inspection. Upon approval of the test of a building sewer by
this Township, a certificate of approval will be issued to the owner of
the improved property to be connected to a sewer.
20. Whenever this Township has reason to believe any building sewer has
become defective, such building sewer shall be subject to test and
inspection. Defects found upon such test and inspection shall be
corrected, as required by this Township in writing, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property served through such
building sewer.
21. Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
22. Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of
§ 18-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-204
1:234
installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a
manner satisfactory to this Township.
23. Street opening permits and restoration of surface. Whenever the
surface of any public street, sidewalk, or cartway is disturbed by
construction of the building sewer, the surfacing material must be
restored in kind and maintained to the satisfaction of this Township.
Any and all construction in a public street of this Township shall be in
compliance with the ordinances of this Township and any and all
construction in a state highway shall be in compliance with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation requirements and
specifications and all necessary permits shall be obtained from this
Township before construction is commenced, including the permit
required for opening or disturbing the surface of a street.
24. The construction of building sewers shall, at all times, be subject to
supervision and inspection by this Township, or its representatives, and
shall conform to this Township's specifications. The building sewer shall
not be covered until permitted by this Township and all backfilling of
trenches shall be under its supervision and shall be thoroughly
compacted by tamping in six inch layers to a minimum height of 12
inches above the top of the pipe.
25. Connections with sewers where same are run through private property
shall in all respects be governed by these rules and regulations or
subsequent revision.
26. No roof drainage, cellar, surface water, waste from hydrants or ground
water from underground drainage fields shall be permitted to drain into
the sewer system. The sewer system is intended to convey sanitary
sewage and liquid wastes only.
27. This Township shall have the right to close up or disconnect from the
sewer system any service lateral or building sewer used for carrying
rain, cellar drainage, surface water, ground water or objectionable
matter or whenever any violations of these rules and regulations are
committed.
28. This Township shall not be liable for any damage or expense resulting
from leaks, stoppages, or defective plumbing or from any other cause
occurring to any premises or within any house or building; and it is
expressly stipulated by and between this Township and the owner that
no claims shall be made against this Township on account of the
breaking or stoppage of, or any damage or expense to, any lateral,
building sewer, or house connection when the cause thereof is found to
be in the lateral, building sewer, or house connection.
29. This Township shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure of service
when occasioned by emergency, required repairs, or failure from any
cause beyond control. This Township reserves the right to restrict the
use of sewer service whenever the public welfare may require it. In
§ 18-204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-204
1:235
§ 18-205. Persons authorized to do work relating to connections.
[Ord. No. 68-1977, § 5, 5/10/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 18-206. Reservations. [Ord. No. 68-1977, § 6, 5/10/1977]
consideration of the right to connect to the sewer system, this Township
shall not be liable for any damage or expense resulting from leaks,
stoppages or defective plumbing or from any other cause occurring to
any premises or within any building and it is hereby expressly agreed
by all persons making connection with the sewer system that no claims
shall be made against this Township on account of the breaking or
stoppages of, or any damage or expense to, any service lateral or
building sewer where the cause thereof is found to be in such service
lateral or building sewer.
1. Any person desiring to carry on or work at the business of installing a
building sewer for any improved property shall obtain from the
Township a certificate to engage in or work at said business. A
certificate fee in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution to defray in part the administrative and enforcement costs
shall be imposed annually. The certificate shall be effective only for the
year in which it is issued.
2. A homeowner may secure a certificate to undertake plumbing work on
his own property after registration for such work with the Township. A
fee in an amount as established from time to time by resolution shall be
imposed for a homeowner's certificate which will be effective only for
the year in which it is issued.
3. No person not certified, as herein provided, shall be allowed to carry
on, or engage in, the business relating to connections, unless he or they
have first secured a certificate registered in the Township office; nor
shall any person or persons other than a certified person be allowed to
alter, repair, or make any connection with any facilities related to
connections.
4. Certificates, other than homeowners, will be issued only to those
persons or corporations earning their livelihood in the plumbing
business and having a bona fide place of business.
5. Every certified person, firm or corporation shall give notice of any
change in his, their, or its place of business.
6. No person, firm, or corporation carrying on the business of plumbing
and house drainage, shall allow his or their name to be used by any
person, directly or indirectly, either to obtain a permit or permits, or to
do any work under his or their certificate.
7. The Township reserves the right to revoke any certificates issued under
this section for just cause; such notice of revocation to be given in
writing to the certificate holder, stating the reasons for the action.
§ 18-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-206
1:236
§ 18-207. Housing developments and real estate subdivisions. [Ord.
No. 68-1977, § 7, 5/10/1977; Ord. No. 3-2000, §§ 1, 2, 11/14/2000]
1. If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this
Township, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with
respect to a building sewer, within 45 days of receipt of such notice, this
Township may refuse to permit such person to discharge sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes into the sewer system until such
unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of
this Township.
2. This Township reserves the right to refuse to any person the privilege of
connection of any improved property to a sewer, or to compel
discontinuance of use of a sewer by any person, or to compel the
pretreatment of industrial wastes, in order to prevent discharge into
the sewer system of wastes which may be deemed by this Township to
be harmful to the sewer system or to have a deleterious effect on
sewage treatment process.
1. Procedure for construction of a sanitary sewerage system or extension.
A. In cases where a builder or developer desires or is required to
install collection sewers, service laterals and building sewers to
every housing unit within a housing development prior to their
individual sale, he may do so upon meeting all conditions as set
forth in this section and in other sections of this article. Plot plans
for such a development must be submitted to the authority for
approval prior to any construction. Sewer plans conforming to all
original specifications established by the authority, as to type of
pipe, location of mains, size of pipe, grades, all necessary
appurtenances, will be reviewed by the authority's engineer prior
to approval from the necessary state agencies. The engineering
fees and charges for this review shall be paid by the builder or
developer to the authority. In no case will lesser standards than
exist in the presently constructed sewer system and as outlined in
these provisions be permitted for any future extensions.
B. Upon approval of such plans by the authority, the extensions may
be constructed by and at the expense of the builder or developer,
but only under the inspection of an inspector designated by the
authority and/or its engineer. The cost of such inspections,
including salaries and expenses, shall be borne by the builder or
developer making the extensions.
2. When a person who develops and/or subdivides land within the
Township is required by any ordinance of the Township to provide for
the installation of public sanitary sewer facilities within a land
development area and/or subdivision and to provide for connection
lines or when a person not so required desires to provide for such
installation and connection to existing Township collection lines, he
shall install such public sanitary sewer facilities at his own expense
§ 18-206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-207
1:237
with his own forces, or under separate contract provided that he first
applies for and obtains written authorization from the authority to
proceed with such construction in conformity with approved plans and
specifications.
3. Plan requirements and processing procedures. The following
procedures shall govern the submission of plans for approval to the
authority:
A. Preliminary meeting. Prior to his submission of plans for the
construction of public sanitary sewer facilities, the developer shall
consult with the authority and engineer as well as the South
Hanover Township Board of Supervisors for the purpose of
preliminarily discussing the preparation of sewer design plans. The
developer should, at the preliminary meeting, present any available
data or preliminary drawings he has concerning the nature of the
development proposal and the approximate number of units to be
connected to the sanitary sewer system.
B. Preparation of plans and specifications. Sewer design plans for the
proposed sanitary sewer shall be prepared at the expense of the
developer and may be prepared by the developer's engineer. The
sewer design plans shall meet all requirements of the Department
of Environmental Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and shall further be prepared in accordance with the design
standards and specifications as set forth in this chapter and in
accordance with such additional specifications and requirements
as the authority engineer shall deem appropriate or necessary.
C. Land development planning module. Prior to completion and
submission of sewer design plans to the authority, the developer
shall submit approved copies of the land development planning
module and the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan to the
authority and the Township. Upon receipt of the above items in
form satisfactory to the authority, written notification shall be given
to the developer that he is authorized to proceed with completion of
the sewer design plans and applicable water quality modules.
D. Final sewer design plan and applicable module. Upon completion of
the final sewer design plan and the modules required under the
rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental
Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the same shall be
submitted to the authority with such permit application fees as may
be required by the department of environmental resources prior to
its issuance of a permit to the authority for construction of the
proposed public sanitary sewage collection system. The authority
shall, after review and approval of the final sewer design plan and
applicable module, submit its application for issuance of required
water quality management permit, to the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Resources.
§ 18-207 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-207
1:238
4. Written authorization to proceed with construction.
A. No construction work shall be commenced until written
authorization is received by the developer from the authority. Upon
receipt by the authority of the requisite permits from the
department of environmental resources authorizing construction of
the proposed public sanitary sewerage system, the authority shall
advise the developer in writing that the developer is authorized to
proceed to construct the proposed public sanitary sewerage
system, provided that the developer has complied with all other
requirements imposed by the authority pursuant to these rules and
regulations. Construction shall commence and proceed in strict
accordance with the final sewer design plan, all applicable
specifications or regulations of the authority and of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Any deviation from the final sewer
design plan; applicable specifications or regulations during any
phase of construction shall be justification for the revocation by the
authority of the developer's authorization to proceed with
construction and upon written notification of such revocation all
construction shall immediately cease.
B. In the event that construction of the proposed public sanitary
sewerage system or any section thereof is not completed within one
year after the date of the issuance of written authorization to
proceed by the authority as provided for in this section, such
written authorization to proceed may be revoked by the authority
or the Township Board of Supervisors, giving notice of such
revocation in writing to the developer. Thereafter, the developer
must secure renewed written authorization from the authority and
Board of Supervisors to proceed to complete the project. No
construction or work of any nature may be performed on the
project subsequent to the supervisors and authority giving written
notice of revocation or authorization to proceed or prior to issuance
of a renewed written authorization.
5. Performance bond or escrow deposit. Prior to issuing written
authorization to the developer to commence construction and as a
prerequisite to such authorization, the developer shall provide a
performance bond or shall deposit an escrow with the authority in an
amount equal to the cost of construction as estimated by the authority's
engineer.
6. Construction schedule. Immediately prior to commencement of
construction, the developer shall provide the authority with an
estimated construction schedule so that the progress and performance
inspections required to be made by the authority under the provisions
of these rules and regulations may be performed.
7. Tests and final inspection. Upon completion of construction and prior to
the discharge of any sewage into the lines, the authority shall conduct a
final inspection, which inspection shall include such tests as the
§ 18-207 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-207
1:239
authority deems necessary to insure that the construction conforms in
all respects to the sewer design plans, specifications and regulations.
Any deficiencies noted at the time of final inspection by the authority
shall be reported in writing to the developer who shall correct such
deficiencies at his expense. Therefore, the developer may request that
a reinspection be made by the authority.
8. Approval and acceptance of system. After completion of the final
inspection and any re-inspections that are necessary, and upon receipt
of a maintenance bond if required pursuant to Subsection 11 of this
section, the authority shall, upon the recommendation and acceptance
of its engineer made in the form of an engineer's certificate of
completion, certifying that the improvements have been constructed in
accordance with the Township specifications, notify the developer in
writing that the constructions is approved, and that the public sanitary
sewage system will be accepted by the authority upon proper
dedication to it by the developer. The developer shall then take such
steps as are necessary to dedicate the system to the authority free of all
liens and encumbrances.
9. No sewage to be discharged into lines prior to approval. No sewage
shall be permitted to be discharged into the newly constructed public
sanitary sewerage system until the developer has been notified in
writing of the authority's approval and intent to accept the system
pursuant to Subsection 7 of this section.
10. Applications for house connections and service lateral connections. All
house connections and service lateral connections to any newly
constructed public sanitary sewer shall be made in accordance with the
rules and regulations applicable to such connections including, but not
limited to, those rules and regulations prescribing permit applications.
Such application shall be required for each connection to be made to a
collecting sewer even though such connection is to be made by a unit
within a planned development, the main collection lines for which are
being constructed or have been constructed by or at the expense of the
developer and even though the authority has waived the connection
charge and must be completely filled out in all parts, and signed by the
customer. The initial application shall be accompanied by the proper
connection charge.
11. Maintenance bonds or cash deposits. If required, prior to issuing
written approval of the system to the developer and as a prerequisite to
such approval, the developer shall provide the authority with a one year
maintenance bond in the amount of 100% of the construction cost of the
public sanitary sewerage system constructed by him, or shall deposit
with the authority cash in such amount as is estimated necessary and
sufficient by the authority's engineer.
12. Inspections and inspection fees. In all instances where new main
sanitary sewer collection system lines are being installed, the
authority's engineer or his designee shall be on the job site during
§ 18-207 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-207
1:240
§ 18-208. Miscellaneous. [Ord. No. 68-1977, § 8, 5/10/1977]
periods of actual work as determined by the authority's engineer or
his designee to be necessary to inspect the materials and construction
methods being used to insure that the same conform to all applicable
regulations. The authority shall collect an inspection fee based on cost
and out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the authority's engineer, which
sum shall be paid to the authority by the developer or owner of the
land upon which the said line is being constructed for each hour or
part thereof which the authority's engineer or his designee expends
at the construction site performing such inspections. The authority's
engineer shall estimate the total cost of such inspection fee and said
estimated inspection fee shall be paid by the developer to the authority
prior to the issuance of a written authorization to proceed with the
installation of the proposed sewerage system. Upon completion of all
necessary inspections by the authority's engineer, or his designee, any
inspection costs in excess of the estimated amount previously posted
by the landowner or developer shall be billed by the authority to the
landowner or developer which inspection costs shall be paid to the
authority before it shall issue written authorization to discharge sewage
into the system. If the authority's engineer's estimate exceeds the
actual cost of inspection, then the balance on hand shall be refunded to
the landowner or developer.
13. Design standards, specifications, plans. Sewer construction design
shall be in accordance with the design standards and specification
requirements as set forth in the "Standard Construction and Material
Specifications for Wastewater Collection System Extensions" prepared
by Gannett Fleming, Inc., and dated 1993, which sewer construction
specifications are incorporated into this chapter and made a part hereof
as if more fully set forth at length. All drawings submitted to the
authority in conjunction with any application for a permit under this
section shall conform in every respect to the drawing criteria as set
forth in the aforementioned sewer construction specifications.
Wastewater pumping station construction design shall be generally in
accordance with the "Guidelines Regarding Material and Construction
Specifications for Wastewater Pumping Stations" dated as of August 8,
2000, which guidelines are incorporated into this chapter and made a
part hereof as if more fully set forth at length.
1. Access. This Township shall have the right of access at reasonable times
to any part of any improved property served by the sewer system as
shall be required for purposes of inspection, measurement, sampling
and testing and for performance of other functions relating to service
rendered by this Township through the sewer system.
2. Variance from rules. No officer or employee of the Township is
authorized to vary these rules and regulations without action by the
Township.
§ 18-207 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-208
1:241
§ 18-209. Additional rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 68-1977, § 9,
5/10/1977]
This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and the sewer system, which additional rules and
regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed as a
part of this chapter.
§ 18-210. Penalties. [Ord. No. 68-1977, § 10, 5/10/1977; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and
costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 18-211. Declaration of purpose. [Ord. No. 68-1977, § 13, 5/10/
1977]
It is declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this Township.
3. Control of service. The Township shall not be liable for a deficiency or
failure of service when occasioned by an emergency, required repairs,
for any cause beyond control. The Township reserves the right to
restrict the use of sewer service whenever the public welfare may
require it.
4. Property owner vacating premises. When premises are vacated, the
owner must give notice at the Township office, and he will be
responsible for the sewage charges until such notice is given.
5. Notice of change of ownership. Each property owner must give the
Township written notice of any change of ownership of any improved
property.
§ 18-208 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-211
1:242
ARTICLE III
Sewer Authority Rental Rates
§ 18-301. Definitions. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 1, 5/10/1977]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — South Hanover Township Sewer Authority, a Pennsylvania
municipality authority, acting by and through its board or, in appropriate
cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in ppm, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C. The standard
laboratory procedure shall be that found in the latest edition of "Standard
Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the
American Public Health Association.
BILLING UNIT — Includes, as applicable, each of the following: a
commercial establishment, a dwelling unit, an industrial establishment and
an institutional establishment.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building
or enclosure used or intended for use in the operation of one business
enterprise for the sale and distribution of any product, commodity, article
or service or used or intended for use for any social, amusement, religious,
educational, charitable or public purpose and containing plumbing facilities
for kitchens, toilet or washing facilities.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure
occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by a family
or other group of persons living together or by a person living alone.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use
by human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/
or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping in the course of
any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course
of the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building
or other enclosure which does not constitute a commercial establishment, a
dwelling unit, or an industrial establishment.
MULTIPLE UNIT — Any improved property in which shall be located more
than one billing unit.
§ 18-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-301
1:243
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation, or other group or entity, including a municipal authority and
any municipal subdivision.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions,
expressed in grams per liter of solution, and indicates the degree of acidity
or alkalinity of a substance.
PPM — Parts per million, by weight.
PROPERLY CHOPPED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been chopped to such
a degree that all its particles will be carried freely under normal sewer flow
conditions, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from any improved property.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — The plant and facilities owned by the
Derry Township Municipal Authority and used for the purpose of treatment
and disposition of sanitary sewage and certain industrial wastes.
SEWER — Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system
and used or usable for collection and transportation of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
transporting, and pumping of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes,
situated in or adjacent to the Township, owned by the authority and leased
to the Township for operation and use.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids neither dissolved nor floating on the surface
of the liquid, as determined by appropriate procedures found in the latest
edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater"
published by the American Public Health Association.
TOTAL SOLIDS — All solids as determined by appropriate procedures found
in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" published by the American Public Health Association.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of South Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, a municipal subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in
appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any poisonous substance, including blood, copper,
cyanide, chromium, beryllium, cadmium, lead, nickel, tin and zinc ions, and
any phenolic bodies or radioactive isotopes.
WATER SYSTEM — The facilities owned by any person and used for the
supply of water to the public in and adjacent to the Township.
§ 18-301 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-302
1:244
§ 18-302. Connection to the sewer system. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 2, 5/
10/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
No person shall connect any improved property with any part of the sewer
system without first making application for and securing a permit, in
writing, from the Township. Such application shall be required for each
connection to be made to a collecting sewer even though such connection
is to be made by a unit within a planned development, the main collection
lines for which are being constructed or have been constructed by or at
the expense of the developer and even though the authority has waived the
connection charge. The application must be completely filled out in all parts
and signed by the customer. The initial application shall be accompanied by
the proper connection charge. Further application shall be made on a form
to be provided by the Township.
§ 18-303. Sewer rentals or charges. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 3, 5/10/
1977]
Sewer rentals or charges are imposed upon and shall be collected from the
owner of each improved property which shall be connected with the sewer
system, for use of the sewer system, whether such use shall be direct or
indirect, and which shall be payable as provided herein.
§ 18-304. Computation of sewer rentals or charges. [Ord. No.
67-1977, § 5, 5/10/1977; Ord. No. 91-1978, 9/26/1978; Ord. No.
95-1979, § 1, 2/13/1979; Ord. No. 109-1980, 12/28/1980; Ord. No.
113-1981, 3/10/1981; Ord. No. 116-1981, § 1, 7/14/1981; Ord. No.
1-1987, §§ 1, 2, 1/20/1988; Ord. No. 4-1993, § 1, 12/28/1993; Ord.
No. 5-1994, §§ 1 — 3, 12/27/1994; Ord. No. 4-1998, § 1, 12/22/1998;
Ord. No. 4-2000, § 1, 12/26/2000]
1. Flat rates for dwelling units, commercial establishments and
institutional establishments. Sewer rentals or charges for sanitary
sewerage discharged into the sewer system from any improved
property constituting a dwelling unit, a commercial establishment or an
institutional establishment shall be on a flat rate basis for the following
classification at the following rates per month:
Classification Rate per Month
A. Each dwelling unit $40
B. Commercial
establishments:
(1) Each fire house or
municipal building
$59.97
(2) Each church $48.14
(3) Each retail gasoline
station without car
washing facilities
$59.97
§ 18-302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-304
1:245
Classification Rate per Month
(4) Each retail gasoline
station with car washing
facilities
$119.93
(5) Each motel or hotel $19.99 per unit. Wherever
a restaurant or bar room is
conducted in connection
with any motel or hotel, a
separate sewer rental or
charge shall be imposed
for such facilities in
accordance with the
classification set forth
under Subsection B(6)
below.
(6) Each restaurant, bar room
or other commercial
establishment which
regularly dispenses food
or beverages for
consumption on the
premises.
$7.93 per month per
employee plus $3.99 per
month for each seat
regularly intended for
customer use, subject to a
minimum charge of $79.93
per month. This sewer
rental or charge shall be
computed on the basis of
the average daily number
of employees for the month
immediately preceding the
date of the bill.
(7) All other commercial
establishments not
separately classified under
Subsections B(1), (2), (3),
(4), (5), (6) above and not
constituting a combination
dwelling unit and
commercial establishment
as classified in Subsection
C below
$5.99 per month per
employee, plus $59.93 per
month for each public rest
room, subject to a
minimum charge of $89.94
per month. This sewer
rental or charge shall be
computed on the basis of
the average daily number
of employees for the month
immediately preceding the
date of the bill.
§ 18-304 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-304
1:246
Classification Rate per Month
C. Combination dwelling unit
and commercial
establishment located in
one structure and owned,
occupied and operated by
the same person;
provided, however, that
this subsection shall not
be applicable in those
cases where the
commercial establishment
shall constitute a
restaurant, bar room or
other commercial
establishment which
regularly dispenses food
and/or beverages for
consumption on the
premises
$59.97 per month
D. Schools:
(1) Each public or private
school per pupil, based
upon the daily average
number of pupils enrolled
on days when the school
was in session during the
immediately preceding full
school term. Teachers and
employees shall be
classified and treated as
pupils for purposes of this
article.
$6.10 per month
(a) Schools with no cafeteria,
gym or shower facilities
$1.90 per month per pupil
(b) Schools with a cafeteria,
but no gym or shower
facilities
$2.47 per month per pupil
(c) Schools with cafeteria,
gym and shower facilities
$3.04 per month per pupil
2. Metered rates for industrial establishments.
A. Sewer rentals or charges for sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes, not subject to special charge hereunder, which shall be
discharged into the sewer system from any improved property
constituting an industrial establishment shall be based upon
§ 18-304 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-304
1:247
volume of water usage, adjusted, if appropriate, as provided in
this article, where the volume of water usage shall be metered in
connection with the water system or otherwise.
B. Sewers rentals or charges for sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes, not subject to a special charge hereunder, which shall be
discharged into the sewer system from any improved property
constituting an industrial establishment may be based upon actual
metered volume of discharge, as permitted in this article.
C. In either of the foregoing cases, such sewer rentals or charges shall
be computed in accordance with the following metered rate
schedule; subject, however, to a minimum sewer rental or charge
per month, regardless of volume of water usage or of volume of
actual metered waste discharged, of $54.37 per month or $5.45 per
employee, based upon the daily average number of employees for
the month immediately preceding the month for which the bill is
rendered, whichever is larger:
METERED RATE SCHEDULE
Per monthly water consumption of $8.88 per 1,000 gallons
metered waste discharge
3. Nonmetered rates for industrial establishments. Sewer rentals or
charges for sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, not subject to a
special charge hereunder, which shall be discharged into the sewer
system from any improved property constituting an industrial
establishment when the volume of water usage shall not be metered as
permitted in this article, shall be computed in accordance with the
metered rate schedule provided herein and shall be based upon an
estimate by this Township of the water consumption of said improved
property constituting an industrial establishment.
4. Multiple users. Each billing unit located in a multiple unit shall be billed
as a separate entity and the foregoing sewer rentals or charges, as
appropriate, shall be used in computing the sewer rentals or charges
applicable to each such billing unit as though such billing unit was in a
separate structure and had a direct and separate connection to the
sewer system; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be
applicable to a combination dwelling unit and commercial
establishment as specified in Classification (b)(3) above.
5. Charges for industrial wastes having certain concentrations.
A. In the event this Township shall consent to accept industrial wastes
for discharge into the sewer system from any industrial
establishment having total suspended solids in excess of 300 ppm
or BOD in excess of 250 ppm, charges for the total volume of waste
shall be determined in accordance with the following formula:
§ 18-304 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-304
1:248
§ 18-305. Time and method of payment. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 5, 5/
10/1977; Ord. No. 91-1978, § 1, 9/26/1978; Ord. No. 109-1980, § 1,
10/28/1980; Ord. No. 113-1981, 3/10/1981; Ord. No. 116-1981, 7/14/
1981; Ord. No. 7-1989, § 1, 1/23/1990; Ord. No. 4-1993, § 2, 12/28/
1993; Ord. No. 4-1995, § 1, 12/26/1995; Ord. No. 2-2010, § 1, 11/23/
2010; Ord. No. 4-2012, § 1, 12/26/2012]
Total Charge = Q+0.005 Q (BOD in ppm - 250) 0.005 Q (SS in
ppm - 300)
For purposes of the above formula:
Q = Metered quantity charge
SS = Suspended solids
B. The strength of industrial wastes shall be determined at intervals
deemed advisable by this Township or as may be requested by the
particular industrial establishment. The collection and analysis of
waste samples for determination shall be supervised by a qualified
testing laboratory approved by this Township. All costs for waste
sampling and collection shall be paid by the party who desires the
waste be sampled and analyzed. The Township reserves the right to
submit a revised analysis on a quarterly basis. The analysis of all
waste samples collected shall be made in accordance with the
latest edition of "Standard Methods from the Examination of Water
and Wastewater," as published by the American Public Health
Association.
6. Changes in flat rate classifications. If the use or classification of any
improved property shall change during any month, the sewer rental or
charge shall be adjusted by this Township, by proration on a daily basis
to the nearest calendar month, with a credit or charge, as shall be
appropriate under the circumstances, being made on the statement for
the next succeeding month.
7. Additional flat rate classifications and modifications of flat rate
classifications. This Township reserves the right from time to time, to
establish additional flat rate classifications and to establish monthly
rates therefor, and this Township furthers reserves the right, from time
to time, to alter, modify, revise and/or amend flat rate classifications and
the monthly rates applicable thereto.
8. Special agreements. Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the
contrary, this Township shall have the right based upon good reasons
and circumstances existing, to enter into a special agreements with the
owner of any improved property, with respect to terms and conditions
upon which sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes may be
discharged into the sewer system and with respect to payments to be
made to this Township in connection therewith. In such event, such
service and payments with respect thereto shall be governed by the
terms and conditions of such special agreement.
§ 18-304 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-305
1:249
§ 18-306. Liens for sewer rentals; filing and collection of liens;
termination of water service. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 6, 5/10/1977; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995; as amended by Ord. No. 3-2018, 4/24/2018]
Sewer rentals where charges are imposed by this article shall be a lien on
the improved property connected to and served by the sewer system; and
any such sewer rentals or charges which are not paid within 60 days after
1. Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this article shall be payable
monthly.
2. All bills with respect to billing units shall be rendered each month on
the 25th day of each month for service during the preceding month.
3. Sewer rentals or charges shall be due and payable five days after
mailing or delivery by or on behalf of this Township to the person
responsible for payment thereof and shall be payable at the South
Hanover Township Building or such other location as this Township
shall designate. If sewer rentals or charges are not paid within 20
calendar days after the same become due and payable, an additional
sum of 10% of the net bill shall be added to such net bill, which net bill,
plus such additional sum, shall constitute the gross bill. Payment made
or mailed and postmarked on or before the last day of such twenty-day
calendar day period shall constitute payment within such period. If the
end of such twenty-calendar day period falls on a legal holiday or on a
Sunday, payment made on or mailed and postmarked on the next
succeeding business day which is not a legal holiday shall constitute
payment within such period.
A. Whenever service to any improved property shall begin after the
last day or shall terminate before the last day of any monthly billing
period, sewer rentals or charges for such period shall be prorated
equitably, if appropriate, for that portion of the monthly billing
period during which such improved property was served by the
sewer system.
B. The Board of Supervisors may from time to time by resolution
provide a discount in such amount as the Board may determine to
every owner of property upon whom sewer rentals or charges are
imposed on a flat rate basis, provided that such owner shall make
payment of the total annual rental or charge on or before January
20 of the calendar year in which such rentals or charges shall
otherwise become due and payable.
4. Every owner of improved property which is connected to the sewer
system initially shall provide this Township with and thereafter shall
keep this Township advised of his correct address. Failure of any person
to receive monthly bills for sewer rentals or charges shall not be
considered an excuse for nonpayment nor shall such failure result in an
extension of the period of time during which the net bill shall be
payable.
§ 18-305 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-306
1:250
each monthly billing date applicable to the particular improved property
shall be filed as a lien against the improved property so connected and
served by the sewer system, which lien shall be filed in the office of the
Prothonotary of Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, and shall be collected in the
manner provided by law for filings collected by municipal claims; and/or, in
the case of a property which is connected to a public water system, when
any such sewer rentals or charges are not paid within 60 days after each
monthly billing date applicable to take from improved property, said water
service may be terminated in accordance with applicable law.
§ 18-307. Measuring volume of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes for industrial establishments. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 7, 5/10/
1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. Method of measuring volume.
A. Whenever the entire water supply of an improved property or, if
applicable, a billing unit or billing units located therein,
constituting an industrial establishment, which shall be
discharging sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the
sewer system, is supplied by the water system, the volume of water
furnished, as determined from meter readings of the water system,
shall be used as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/
or industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals or charges, subject
to adjustments, if appropriate, as provided in this article.
B. Whenever an improved property or, if applicable, a billing unit or
billing units located therein, constituting an industrial
establishment which shall be discharging sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes into the sewer system, shall have a source or
sources of water supply in addition to or other than the water
system, the owner of such improved property shall provide a meter
or meters on such additional or other source or sources of water
supply. The total volume consumed, as determined from the meter
readings of the water system and the meter readings of the meter
or meters on such other source or sources of water supply, as
appropriate, shall be used as the measure of discharge of sanitary
sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing the sewer rentals or
charges, subject to adjustment, if appropriate, as provided in this
article.
C. Whenever an improved property or, if applicable, a billing unit or
billing units located therein, constituting an industrial
establishment shall use water from the water system and/or water
from a source or sources of supply in addition to or other than a
water system for cooling or unpolluted commercial or industrial
process purposes and all or part of the water so used shall not be
discharged into the sewer system, the volume used as the measure
of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in
computing sewer rentals or charges may be adjusted by one of the
following methods:
§ 18-306 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-307
1:251
(1) By installing a meter or other measuring device on the
connection to the sewer system. The readings from such meter
or measuring device shall be used as the measure of discharge
of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing
sewer rentals or charges.
(2) By installing a meter or other measuring device to measure the
volume not being discharged into the sewer system. The
readings from such meter or measuring device shall be
deducted from the total water meter readings and the
remainder shall be used as the measure of discharge of
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing sewer
rentals or charges.
(3) If it is not practical, in the opinion of this Township, to install a
meter or other measuring device to determine continuously the
volume not discharged into the sewer system, this Township
shall determine, in such manner and by such method as it may
prescribe, the percentage of metered water which is being
discharged into the sewer system. The quantity of water used
as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals or charges shall
be the percentage so determined of the quantity measured by
the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to such estimated
percentage shall be submitted to this Township, after notice of
such estimate. The decision of this Township with respect to
the matter shall be final for the then current calendar year.
D. Whenever an industrial establishment shall discharge only
industrial wastes into the sewer system, the volume of water used,
measured as herein provided, shall be used as a measure of the
quantity of industrial wastes so discharged.
2. Measuring devices. Meters or other measuring devices which shall not
be available in connection with the water system, but which shall be
required or permitted under provisions of this article, shall be furnished
and installed in accordance with specifications of this Township by the
owner of the improved property at his expense, shall be under the
control of this Township and may be tested, inspected or repaired by
this Township whenever necessary. The owner of the improved property
upon which such meter or other measuring device shall be installed
shall be responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping; and all
repairs thereto shall be made at the expense of the owner, whether such
repairs shall be made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other
causes. Bills for such repairs, if made by this Township, shall be due and
payable immediately upon completion of such repairs and shall be
collected in the same manner as monthly bills for sewer rentals or
charges.
3. Meter readings. This Township, except to the extent that meter
readings are made by any other person in connection with the water
§ 18-307 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-307
1:252
§ 18-308. Admission of industrial wastes into the sewer system.
[Ord. No. 67-1977, § 8, 5/10/1977]
system and are made available to this Township for purposes of this
article, shall be responsible for the reading of all meters or other
measuring devices and the same shall be available to this Township at
all reasonable times.
1. Approval required for industrial wastes. [Amended by Ord. No.
4-2018, 9/25/2018]
A. The discharge into the sewer system of industrial wastes having: a
five-day BOD greater than 250 ppm; a suspended solids content
greater than 256 ppm; a total phosphorous concentration greater
than 11.0 ppm; or any quantity of substances possessing
characteristics described in § 18-309 shall be subject to prior
review and approval of this Township and shall also be subject to
prior review and approval of the Derry Township Municipal
Authority.
B. The Township hereby adopts Article IX of the Rates, Rules and
Regulations for the Sewer System of the Derry Township Municipal
Authority, as amended and supplemented, and all industrial waste
disposers in the Township shall be governed thereby.
2. Preliminary treatment and handling of industrial wastes.
A. Whenever necessary, in the opinion of this Township, the owner of
an improved property shall provide, at his expense, such facilities
for preliminary treatment and handling of industrial wastes as may
be necessary to:
(1) Reduce BOD to 250 ppm, suspended solids to 256 ppm and
total phosphorus to 11.0 ppm. [Amended by Ord. No.
4-2018, 9/25/2018]
(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to come
within the maximum limits permitted in this article.
(3) Control the quantities and rates of discharge over a twentyfour-
hour day and seven-day week.
B. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed facilities for preliminary treatment and handling of
industrial wastes shall be submitted to the Township sanitary
engineer for review and comment, and no construction of any such
facility shall be commenced until approval thereof first shall have
been obtained, in writing, from this Township, and until approval
thereof first shall have been obtained from any governmental
regulatory body having jurisdiction, including, but not limited to,
the Derry Township Municipal Authority.
§ 18-307 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-308
1:253
§ 18-309. Prohibited wastes. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 9, 5/10/1977]
C. Whenever facilities for preliminary treatment and handling of
industrial wastes shall have been provided by the owner of such
improved property, such facilities continuously shall be maintained,
at the expense of the owner, in satisfactory operating condition;
and this Township shall have access to such facilities at reasonable
times for purposes of inspection and testing.
1. No person, except upon written permission of this Township, shall
discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, roof or surface
drainage or any cooling water or unpolluted industrial or commercial
process water into any sewer.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged any of the following described wastes or
waters into the sewer system:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°
Fahrenheit;
B. Any water or waste containing more than 100 ppm of fats, oils or
greases;
C. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, solvent or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas which, by reason of its
nature or quality, may cause fire or explosion or which, in any other
way, may be injurious to persons or the sewer system or the sewage
treatment plant;
D. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, shall be capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into any
sewer or the sewage treatment plant for maintenance and repair;
E. Any garbage, except properly chopped garbage;
F. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
bones, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, butchers offal
or any other solid or viscous substances which shall be capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in any sewer or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewer system or the sewage
treatment plant;
G. Any water or waste having a pH (as determined by this Township)
lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures or equipment of
the sewer system or the sewage treatment plant or to personnel
engaged in operation and maintenance thereof;
H. The maximum allowable industrial loads (MAIL) listed in Schedule
A are established to control the influent pollutant loads discharge
§ 18-308 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-309
1:254
to the DTMA wastewater treatment plants from regulated
industrial dischargers:
Schedule A*
Parameter
MAIL
(pounds per day)
Copper 4.290
Mercury 0.029
Molybdenum 0.706
Zinc 8.018
* The discharge of industrial wastes by regulated industrial users
shall be controlled so as not to exceed the total daily MAIL
limits set forth in Schedule A. The MAIL limits may be applied
to individual industrial users by means of limitations on the
concentration or the mass loadings, as appropriate.
I. Any water or waste containing any toxic substance in quantity
sufficient to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to
interfere with any sewage treatment process, the sewage
treatment plant or that will pass through the sewage treatment
plant in such condition so that it will exceed state, federal or other
validly existing requirements for the receiving stream;
J. Any water or waste containing total solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense shall be required to
handle such water or waste at the sewage treatment plant for
sewage treatment processes;
K. Any drainage from building construction; unless otherwise
permitted, authorized or approved, with or without special charge
by this Township and if required by law, by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any governmental unit, board, commission or
department having jurisdiction.
3. This Township reserves the right to refuse permission to connect to the
sewer system, to compel discontinuance of use of the sewer system or
to compel pretreatment of industrial wastes in order to prevent
discharges deemed harmful or to have deleterious effect upon any
portion of the sewer system.
4. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement or arrangement between this Township and any
person whereby industrial wastes of unusual strength or character may
be admitted into the sewer system by this Township, either before or
after preliminary treatment.
§ 18-309 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-310
1:255
§ 18-310. Regulations governing admission of industrial wastes into
the sewer system. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 10, 5/10/1977; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. Required survey data. Any person desiring to make a connection to the
sewer system through which industrial wastes shall be discharged into
the sewer system shall file with this Township an industrial wastes
report which shall supply pertinent data, including estimated quantity
of flow and chemical and bacteriological analyses, to this Township with
respect to industrial wastes proposed to be discharged into the sewer
system.
2. Screening and holding tanks.
A. Industrial establishments shall install fine screens to remove husks,
hulls, vegetable skins, peeling, threads, lint, grease and other such
non-settleable and floating solids, or other organic or inorganic
substances, determined by this Township to overload, impair the
efficiency of or cause difficulties in operation of the sewage
treatment plant used to treat and dispose of the wastes or in
maintaining required quality of the sewage treatment plant
effluent.
B. Any improved property discharging 3,000 cubic feet or more of
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes per day into the sewer
system and having large variations in the rate of discharge of such
within a twenty-four-hour period shall install suitable holding tanks
for equalizing the rate of discharge uniformly over the entire
twenty-four-hour period. The average rate of discharge during any
twenty-four-hour period shall not be exceeded by more than 50% at
any time during such twenty-four-hour period.
3. Control manholes.
A. Any person who shall discharge industrial wastes into the sewer
system, when required by this Township, shall construct and
thereafter properly shall maintain, at his own expense, a suitable
control manhole to facilitate observation, measurement and
sampling by this Township.
B. Any such control manhole, when required by this Township, shall
be constructed at an accessible, safe, suitable and satisfactory
location in accordance with plans approved by this Township prior
to commencement of construction.
4. Sewage samplings. Industrial wastes being discharged into the sewer
system shall be subject to periodic sampling, inspection and
determination of character and concentration. Such sampling,
inspection and determination shall be made by this Township as
frequently as may be deemed necessary. Representative samples for a
full working day shall be obtained by taking hourly samples and
compositing them in accordance with the flow at the time of sampling.
§ 18-310 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-310
1:256
§ 18-311. Access. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 11, 5/10/1977]
This Township shall have the right of access at reasonable times to any
part of the improved property served by the sewer system as shall be
required for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing and for performance of other functions relating to service
rendered by this Township through the sewer system.
§ 18-312. Responsibility of owners of improved property. [Ord. No.
67-1977, § 12, 5/10/1977]
The owner of each improved property connected to the sewer system shall
be responsible for all acts of tenants or other occupants of such improved
property insofar as such acts shall be governed by provisions of this article.
Sewage sampling facilities shall be exercised in the collection and
preservation of all samples to insure preservation thereof in as nearly
the natural state as possible, including the refrigeration of all samples
which are intended for analysis by biochemical methods.
5. Analysis.
A. This Township shall be responsible for analysis of samples of
industrial wastes, at such intervals as this Township shall
determine or at the request and expense of the industrial
establishment.
B. Laboratory methods used in the analysis of samples of industrial
wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," as
published by the American Public Health Association, provided,
however, that alternate methods for the analysis of industrial
wastes may be used, subject to mutual agreement between this
Township and the person discharging such industrial wastes into
the sewer system.
6. Changes in type of wastes. Any owner of an improved property who is
discharging or permitting to be discharged industrial wastes into the
sewer system and who contemplates a change in the method of
operation which will alter the type of industrial wastes at the time being
discharged into the sewer system shall notify this Township in writing
at least 10 days prior to consummation of such change.
7. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 18-310 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-313
1:257
§ 18-313. Adoption of additional rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
67-1977, § 13, 5/10/1977]
The Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules
and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper in connection with
use and operation of the sewer system, which rules and regulations shall
be, shall become and shall be construed as part of this article.
§ 18-314. Declaration of purpose. [Ord. No. 67-1977, § 16, 5/10/
1977]
It hereby is declared that the adoption of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Township.
§ 18-313 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-314
1:258
ARTICLE IV
Holding Tanks
§ 18-401. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1-1991, § 1, 1/7/1991]
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new holding tanks designed to receive and
retain sewage whether from residential or commercial uses and it is hereby
declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of this Township.
§ 18-402. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1-1991, § 2, 1/7/1991]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
HOLDING TANK — A retaining tank, whether permanent or temporary, to
which sewage is conveyed by a water carrying system.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage and is designed and
constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of South Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 18-403. Rights and privileges granted. [Ord. No. 1-1991, § 3, 1/7/
1991]
The Township is hereby authorized and empowered to control within the
Township the methods of retaining tank use, including the use of holding
tanks, sewage disposal and sewage collection and transportation.
§ 18-404. Rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 1-1991, § 4, 1/7/1991]
§ 18-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-404
1:259
§ 18-405. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable
law. [Ord. No. 1-1991, § 5, 1/7/1991]
All rules and regulations adopted by the Township shall be in conformity
with the provisions hereof, all other ordinances of the Township and all
applicable laws, rules and regulations of the administrative agencies of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 18-406. Fees, rates and charges. [Ord. No. 1-1991, § 6, 1/7/1991]
The Township shall have the right by resolution to fix, alter, charge and
collect rates, assessments, permit fees and other charges in the area served
1. The following rules and regulations shall apply to the installation and
maintenance of holding tanks within the Township of South Hanover:
A. Holding tanks may be used in lieu of other methods of sewage
disposal only in compliance with all relevant requirements of the
statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and rules and
regulations of the Department of Environmental Resources or other
appropriate commonwealth agency.
B. The following design standards for holding tanks shall apply in
addition to those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
including, but not limited to, § 73-62 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code:
(1) The capacity of a holding tank shall be large enough to hold a
minimum of three days sewage waste or 1,000 gallons,
whichever is larger.
(2) Holding tanks shall be constructed of durable materials and
shall be watertight and shall meet the specifications of
§ 73.31(b) of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
(3) The holding tank shall be provided with a conveniently located
cleanout access.
(4) The holding tank shall be equipped with a warning device to
indicate when the tank is filled to 75% of its capacity. The
warning device shall create an audible or visible signal at a
location frequented by the owner or a responsible individual in
the employ or family of the owner.
(5) Disposal of waste from a holding tank shall be at a site
approved by the Department of Environmental Resources.
2. The Township is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such
additional rules and regulations by resolution with regard to the subject
matter hereof as it may deem necessary to accomplish the purposes of
this article.
§ 18-404 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-406
1:260
by its facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable
law.
§ 18-407. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges. [Ord. No. 1-1991,
§ 7, 1/7/1991]
§ 18-408. Duties of improved property owner. [Ord. No. 1-1991, § 8,
1/7/1991]
§ 18-409. Violations. [Ord. No. 1-1991, § 9, 1/7/1991; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who violates any provision of § 18-307 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for a period not in excess of 30 days.
1. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the Township and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department
of Environmental Resources and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
2. The Township will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks. Pumping receipts shall be submitted to the
Township on the first day of January, April, July and November for all
pumping performed in the three-month period immediately preceding
the submittal date.
3. The Township will complete and retain annual inspection reports for
each permitted tank. Inspection fees as adopted by resolution of the
Township from time to time shall be paid by the property owner.
1. The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. Obtain a permit from the Township sewage enforcement officer for
permission to install a holding tank. Prior to and as a condition of
issuance of the permit, the property owner shall pay the applicable
permit fee and shall pay an additional sum as prescribed by
resolution as security for the compliance by the property owner
with the provisions of this article.
B. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any applicable law
and the rules and regulations of the Township and any
administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Permit only the Township or its agent to inspect holding tanks on an
annual basis.
D. Permit only the Township or its agent to collect, transport and
dispose of the contents of any holding tank therein.
§ 18-406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-410
1:261
§ 18-410. Abatement of nuisances. [Ord. No. 1-1991, § 10, 1/7/1991]
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 18-408, above, shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by
the Township by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or appropriate
equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 18-410 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 18-410
1:262
Chapter 19
(RESERVED)
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE
§ 18-410 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 18-410
1:263

ARTICLE I
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
DIVISION 1
General
§ 20-101. Short title. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. I, § 1, 9/13/1994]
This article shall be known as the "South Hanover Township Municipal Solid
Waste and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 20-102. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. I, § 2, 9/13/1994]
§ 20-103. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. I, § 3, 9/13/1994]
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section:
ALUMINUM CANS — Clean, nonaerosol, empty aluminum beverage and
food containers.
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — Person, firm or corporation licensed or
contracted by the Township of South Hanover to handle municipal waste
and recyclables in accordance with the provisions of this article.
BULKY WASTE — Items of solid waste which, due to their size, shape
or weight, cannot be collected as part of the normal weekly municipal
waste collection and therefore require special handling. For example, large
household appliances such as stoves and refrigerators, plumbing fixtures,
furniture, large crates, tires, tools, machinery or parts thereof and similar
items in size shall be considered bulky waste.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Lumber, roofing, material,
sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, macadam, plaster and brick, conduit,
pipe, insulation and other material which results from a construction,
demolition or remodeling process.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Paper boxes constructed in a corrugated
manner and used as containers for business and consumer applications.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
1. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Township of South Hanover by regulating
the collection, storage, transportation, removal, dumping, deposit,
disposal and recycling of solid waste by:
A. Instituting a comprehensive solid waste management program.
B. Establishing a mandatory recycling program pursuant to the
requirements of Act 101 of the Pennsylvania General Assembly,
1988, and amendments thereto.
§ 20-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 20-103
1:265
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
This definition includes a mobile home. Any multifamily establishment of
two or three dwelling units is included in this definition.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT — An agreement entered into by the Township of
South Hanover with a private person or corporation for the collection and
disposal of all municipal residential waste and/or recyclables within the
Township of South Hanover to the extent provided by this article and the
agreement.
GLASS — Clear (flint) or colored glass bottles and jars. Expressly excluded
from this definition of glass are blue glass, lead crystal, porcelain, ceramic
products, mirrors, tempered or plate glass and light bulbs.
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any bond, copier, letterhead or
mimeograph paper typically sold as "white ledger" paper and computer
paper.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaging in
manufacturing or processing including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants and refineries.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service to persons including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MULTIFAMILY ESTABLISHMENTS — Rental housing apartment buildings
or apartment complexes which have four or more dwelling units and
condominium associations and homeowners associations of four or more
dwelling units which are established and organized in such a manner that
the association provides common services for the residents of the housing
development. This definition shall also include apartment buildings and
apartment complexes owned and operated by institutional establishments if
this institutional establishment charges a rental fee for the dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility or building owned or
operated by a local government or county government, local government
or county government authority, state government or agency or federal
government or agency.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and any other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities;
and sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the
Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial or institutional
waste supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution
control facility. (Pennsylvania Act 101, § 103).
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions
and containing advertisements and matters of public interest excluding
magazines and other glossy paper.
§ 20-103 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 20-103
1:266
NONRESIDENTIAL — Commercial, industrial, institutional and municipal
establishments.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTIC BOTTLES — Empty, clean consumer product bottles made of
polyethylene terephthalate (PETE), high density polyethylene (HDPE) and,
most commonly, but not limited to, plastic bottles used as containers for
soda, milk and other consumer food products or for household cleaning
products or for personal care products.
RECYCLABLES/RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by
the Township of South Hanover for separation, collection, processing,
recovery or reuse as part of a recycling program.
RECYCLING — The program or system of separation, collection, processing,
recovery or reuse of recyclables.
RESIDENTIAL MUNICIPAL WASTE — Municipal solid waste, as herein
defined, that is generated at a dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — See "dwelling unit."
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials
resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and any sludge
from an industrial, mining and agricultural water supply treatment facility,
wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control facility; provided, that
it is not hazardous. The term shall not include coal refuse as defined in the
Act of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318), known as the "Coal Refuse
Disposal Control Act." The term shall not include treatment sludges from
coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on
pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to the Act
of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as the "Clean Streams Law."
SOLID WASTE — Any waste including, but not limited to, municipal residual
or hazardous waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials. (Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act 97, § 103).
STEEL CANS — Clean, nonaerosol, empty all-steel (ferrous material) or
bimetal beverage and food containers.
TOWNSHIP — The governmental jurisdiction and legal entity of the
Township of South Hanover, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
§ 20-103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 20-103
1:267

DIVISION 2
Storage, Handling and Disposal of Municipal Waste
§ 20-111. General. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. II, § 1, 9/13/1994]
It shall be the duty of every owner of property and every person occupying
a dwelling where municipal waste is generated and accumulated, at his/
her own expense and cost, except as otherwise specified in this article, to
provide and keep at all times a sufficient number of containers to hold all
municipal waste accumulated between intervals of collection of such waste
by an authorized collector; and to insure the sanitary and legal disposal of
such waste in accordance with this article and all other Township, state and
federal applicable laws and regulations.
§ 20-112. Storage on residential property. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. II,
§ 2, 9/13/1994]
§ 20-113. Storage on commercial, institutional and industrial
properties. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. II, § 3, 9/13/1994]
1. Containers. All municipal waste accumulated by owners of residential
properties shall be placed in containers for collection by an authorized
collector. The containers shall be durable, watertight and made of rustresistant
metal or plastic. The size of each container shall not exceed a
thirty-three-gallon capacity and the weight shall comply with OSHA
requirements unless bulky (dumpster type) containers are used.
2. Location of containers. Each municipal waste container and curbside
recyclable container shall be placed for collection so as to be accessible
to the collector at ground level and at a point immediately behind the
curbline of the street within no more than 10 feet of the cartway of the
street from which the collection with a vehicle is made if there is no
curbing or at a location mutually agreeable between the resident, the
Township and the collector. Failure to place containers at such locations
may result in waste not being picked up. Waste containers and curbside
recyclable containers shall be placed for collection no earlier than one
day prior to the scheduled collection and shall be removed from the
collection site the day of collection once collection has been made. At all
other times, all municipal waste and curbside recyclable containers
must be stored within the property lot lines away from the right-of-way
of any street or road. Locations for collection of recyclable material
shall be as specified by the Township. The location of bulky containers
at multifamily establishments shall be in accordance with § 20-113,
Subsection 2, below.
1. Containers. Storage of municipal waste on commercial, institutional
and industrial properties shall be done in the same type of containers as
required for residential properties except where the accumulation of
solid waste for such commercial, institutional or industrial property
precludes their use, in which case such owner or occupant shall make
§ 20-111 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 20-113
1:269
§ 20-114. Authorization of collectors. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. II, § 4,
9/13/1994]
special arrangements with the authorized collector for the storing of
such additional quantities. Special arrangements shall include the
number and type of special bulk container(s) to be furnished by the
collector as may be approved by the Township.
2. Location of containers. Containers for the collection at commercial,
institutional or industrial properties shall be located on the owner or
occupant's premises at a place agreed upon by the owner or occupant
of the commercial, institutional or industrial property and the
authorized collector and shall be satisfactory to the Township. Such
locations shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, roads, streets, highways, alleys or entrances and exits of
public or private buildings.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation other than persons or
corporations authorized by license or contract by the Township to
collect and/or transport solid waste of any nature as a regular hauling
business within or from the Township. If the Township decides to enter
into an exclusive contract for the collection of residential municipal
waste (exclusive or multifamily establishments) in the Township said
contractor shall be required to collect said waste in the Township
exclusive of other private haulers and collectors subject to exceptions
to the exclusive Township contract. The Township shall not issue a
license to any private hauler or collector for the collection of residential
municipal waste other than the hauler or collector having the exclusive
contract with the Township. Authorization to collect, transport and
dispose of municipal waste for persons other than oneself may be given
only by the Township through the issuance of a contract for or license.
All applications for licensing shall be reviewed by the Township and
shall be approved in accordance with the following:
A. Municipal waste collection licenses or contracts may be issued to
only those persons or corporations who can provide satisfactory
evidence that they are capable of providing the necessary services
and can comply with the provisions and intent of this article. The
Township reserves the right to disapprove any application for
license.
B. Applications for municipal waste collection license must furnish the
following information:
(1) The number of collection vehicles; the make, model, license
plate number and size of each vehicle to be used for collection
and transportation.
(2) The location, address and telephone number of the business
office of the applicant.
§ 20-113 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 20-114
1:270
§ 20-115. Transportation of solid waste. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. 2,
§ 5, 9/13/1994]
Any person transporting solid waste within the Township shall prevent or
remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the transport of
such solid waste. The vehicles used to transport or convey solid waste shall
be leak-proof and enclosed to the extent necessary to ensure no loss or
spillage of waste from the vehicles. The Township shall have the authority
to inspect the vehicles used for the transport of solid waste as it deems
necessary.
§ 20-116. Disposal of municipal waste. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. II, § 6,
9/13/1994]
All municipal waste produced, collected and transported from within the
jurisdictional limits of the Township shall be disposed of at a landfill or
other disposal facility licensed or permitted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Resources, and designated by
the County of Dauphin through its municipal solid waste management
plan as developed and implemented by the Dauphin County Intermunicipal
Solid Waste Authority (DCISWA). The Township reserves the right to make
inspections of authorized collectors to insure that waste generated within
the Township is being disposed of in an authorized or designated facility.
Any authorized collector found to be in violation of this section shall have
his license to collect or haul municipal waste in the Township revoked.
(3) A certificate of insurance coverage providing complete third
party comprehensive, bodily injury and property damage
liability insurance, limits of which will not be less than
$555,000/$1,000,000 for bodily injury and $500,000 for
property damage.
(4) Intended disposal facility proposed to be used by the applicant
in conformance with the county plan.
(5) Any other information which the Township may request and
deem necessary prior to the issuance of a license.
C. License may be issued on a calendar year basis but may be revoked
at any time by the Township for just cause including, but not limited
to, violation of any of the provisions of this article, applicable state
or federal law or regulations or other policies established by the
Township or contractual arrangements entered into between the
applicant and the Township.
D. Fees for licenses may be set by the Township and the amount shall
be provided to an applicant or any person upon request.
§ 20-114 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 20-117
1:271
§ 20-117. Unlawful deposit for collection of municipal waste. [Ord.
No. 2-1994, Art. II, § 7, 9/13/1994]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit for collection any solid waste
including bulky items not generated at the address from which collection
is made or to bring any solid waste into the Township or from one address
to another in the Township for the purpose of taking advantage of the
collection service or to avoid the cost of collection.
§ 20-118. Bulky waste. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. II, § 8, 9/13/1994]
Bulky waste which is not collected by the normal or weekly residential
collection shall not be stored outside of a building or accessory building
on any land in the Township except for a period not exceeding 14 days
pending the special handling for disposal of the bulky waste. It shall be
unlawful for any person to place bulky waste on any property other than on
the property at which it was generated or directly associated with. Bulky
waste shall be disposed of at a state permitted or licensed disposal facility,
a facility especially designated by the Township to take such bulky items or
a legitimate salvage dealer that is in the business of disposing or recycling
such items.
§ 20-119. Leaf waste. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. II, § 9, 9/13/1994]
Brush, tree trimmings, yard clippings, leaves, grass or other waste from
living plantings may be stored for periods of time in excess of 14 days
if necessary until the next scheduled collection for such items or for the
purpose of composting or burning such materials in accordance with the
Township ordinances unless such storage violates other ordinances or
regulations of the Township.
§ 20-120. Construction and demolition waste. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art.
II, § 10, 9/13/1994]
All waste materials resulting from the building, structural alterations,
repairs, construction or demolition of buildings or structures shall be
disposed of as permitted by the regulations of the state department of
environmental resources or pertinent ordinances or regulations of the
Township. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and the
contractor to ensure the disposal of such waste in accordance with
applicable laws and regulations.
§ 20-121. Exclusions. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. II, § 11, 9/13/1994]
1. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any commercial,
municipal, institutional, industrial or multifamily establishment not
regularly engaged in the business of collecting municipal waste from
hauling its own municipal waste on an irregular or unscheduled basis to
a state permitted disposal facility or to the disposal facility as
designated by the Township in accordance with the regulations of the
disposal facility.
§ 20-117 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 20-121
1:272
2. Nothing containing herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out
normal farming operations including composting or spreading of
manure or other farm produced agricultural waste not otherwise
prohibited or regulated for land applications.
3. The provisions of this article do no apply to anything but the storage,
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste and do not
apply therefore to hazardous or residual waste as defined by the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act and its amendments. All
hazardous or residual waste must be disposed of in compliance with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
§ 20-121 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 20-121
1:273

DIVISION 3
Service Fees and Billing
§ 20-131. General. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. III, § 1, 9/13/1994]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner of property and every
person occupying a dwelling unit, premises or place of business within the
Township where municipal waste is produced, accumulated and collected as
required by this article to pay a service fee for the collection and disposal of
this waste, except as otherwise provided by this article to a licensed hauler
or to the Township.
§ 20-132. Service charges to be based on volume of waste collected.
[Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. III, § 2, 9/13/1994]
§ 20-133. Charges to be established by resolution. [Ord. No. 2-1994,
Art. III, § 3, 9/13/1994]
All fees established under an exclusive contract for the collection of waste
by the Township shall be established by a resolution of the Township Board
of Supervisors. Charges so established shall be reviewed at least annually
and adjusted as necessary to insure that all costs included in the collection
and disposal of municipal waste under the exclusive contract, including the
administrative costs of the Township, are covered by service charges.
1. To encourage and maximize recycling, all municipal waste fees paid
either to a licensed hauler, an exclusive contractor or the Township
shall be based upon the volume of waste collected at the commercial,
institutional or industrial establishment and at residential units to
effectuate this provision the following guidelines are hereby
established:
A. Licensed haulers shall be required, prior to obtaining a license
from the Township, to file with the Township a complete schedule of
rates showing evidence that their rates are established on a volume
basis and said rates shall be refiled with the Township annually
upon license renewal.
B. Any exclusive contract for the collection of residential municipal
waste that may be established by the Township shall include
provisions for billing residential units on a volume basis.
§ 20-131 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 20-133
1:275

DIVISION 4
Recyclables
§ 20-141. Introduction. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. IV, § 1, 9/13/1994]
The Township, recognizing that reclaiming of recyclable material is an
important method for addressing the growing solid waste disposal problem
through conserving landfill space and that recycling conserves natural
resources, reduces energy consumption and promotes the general interest
and to be in compliance with Pennsylvania Act 101, 1988, does hereby
authorize and encourage separation, collection, processing, storage,
transportation and recycling materials in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
§ 20-142. General. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. IV, § 2, 9/13/1994]
Recyclables separated for the purpose of materials recovery rather than
disposal and collected by the Township or its designated agent or contractor
shall not be considered solid waste as defined under this article and shall
not be subject to the provisions of this article which require the disposal
of waste at designated facilities unless such recyclables become
unmarketable.
§ 20-143. Establishment of program. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. IV, § 3,
9/13/1994]
The Township hereby establishes a program for the mandatory separation of
recyclables from solid waste by persons residing in single-family dwellings
and multifamily establishments and by commercial, municipal, institutional
and industrial establishments.
§ 20-144. Items to be separated and recycled. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art.
IV, § 4, 9/13/1994]
1. At residential units (including multifamily establishments):
A. Newspapers.
B. Glass.
C. Aluminum and steel cans.
D. Plastic bottles.
2. At commercial, municipal, institutional or industrial establishments'
lunchrooms, offices and other nonprocessing areas, at least these
items:
A. High grade office paper.
B. Aluminum cans.
3. At community activities:
§ 20-141 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 20-144
1:277
§ 20-145. Exclusions. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. IV, § 5, 9/13/1994]
Newspapers that are used for secondary purposes such as wrapping other
waste or for cleaning which renders them unusable for recycling shall not
be required to be recycled.
§ 20-146. Residential units. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. IV, § 6, 9/13/
1994]
§ 20-147. Multifamily units and nonresidential units. [Ord. No.
2-1994, Art. IV, § 7, 9/13/1994]
A. Newspapers.
B. Glass.
C. Plastic bottles.
D. Aluminum and steel cans.
E. High grade office paper.
1. The Township or its authorized agent shall establish and promulgate
regulations on the manner, days and time of collection of recyclable
materials and for the bundling, handling, location and time of
placement of such materials for collection. Regulations shall be
promulgated for each of the programs undertaken including, but not
limited to, the residential, multifamily and commercial sources of
recyclable materials.
2. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curb or other designated
area (§ 20-112, Subsection 2) separated from solid waste for collection.
3. Containers for curbside recyclables will be as specified by the Township
or as provided by the Township directly or through exclusive contract
for collection of recyclables.
1. Each nonresidential unit and multifamily unit may elect to provide
proper collection, transportation of and disposal for regulated
municipal waste and recyclable materials by either (A) themselves
transporting such recyclables to a facility or (B) contracting with a
Township licensed hauler to collect and transport such recyclables to a
facility. With respect to recyclable materials, multifamily units and
nonresidential units that elect to contract for collection and
transportation services may either (A) request Township approval to
receive the services under the contract or (B) themselves contract with
a Township licensed hauler.
2. Multifamily units and nonresidential units approved to receive service
under the contract shall (A) comply with the Township's policies and
procedures established for residential units and (B) notwithstanding
the provisions of § 20-146 of this article, shall source separate the
§ 20-144 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 20-147
1:278
§ 20-148. Abandonment by owner. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. IV, § 8, 9/
13/1994]
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of
recyclable materials by the person who generated them until such
recyclable materials are abandoned by such owner. Recyclable materials
shall be deemed abandoned when picked up at curbside by a licensed
Township hauler, its agents or its independent contractors.
§ 20-149. Collection by unauthorized person(s). [Ord. No. 2-1994,
Art. IV, § 9, 9/13/1994]
From the time of pick-up of recyclable items at the curb or designated
location or at a drop-off center as designated or authorized by the Township,
the recyclable items shall become the property of the licensed Township
hauler or its authorized agent or contractor. It shall be a violation of this
article for any person unauthorized by the Township to collect, pick up or
cause to be collected or picked up any such items. Any and each collection
in violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereafter provided.
§ 20-150. Unlawful disposal of recyclables. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. IV,
§ 10, 9/13/1994]
Upon and after the effective date of this article it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to dispose of any recyclable items as established
in § 20-144, above, commingled with other solid waste not required to be
recycled or to dispose of such items in other places that will not insure
that items are recycled unless the material is so contaminated that it is
unacceptable for recycling.
recyclable materials designated in the Township's policies and
procedures.
3. Multifamily units and nonresidential units that do not receive services
under the contract shall:
A. Provide regular recycling containers at easily accessible locations
for source separation of designated recyclable materials.
B. Provide written instructions to all persons within each multifamily
unit and nonresidential unit to ensure that all designated
recyclable materials are source separated.
C. Provide collection and transportation of source separated
designated recyclable materials.
D. Submit to the Township on forms provided by the Township
quarterly reports of the quantities of each designated recyclable
material and municipal waste generated and disposed of.
§ 20-147 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 20-151
1:279
§ 20-151. Plan to be filed and approved by the Township. [Ord. No.
2-1994, Art. IV, § 11, 9/13/1994]
Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments and multifamily
establishments conducting their own recycling program, not in conjunction
with an agent of the Township or under an exclusive contract as may
be established by the Township for the collection of municipal waste and
recyclables, shall file with the Township and have approved by the
Township, individual recycling programs which provide for, at a minimum,
the recycling of items in § 20-144, Subsection 2, above.
§ 20-151 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 20-151
1:280
DIVISION 5
Penalties and Remedies
§ 20-161. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. V, § 1, 9/13/1994; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than
$1,000, together with the cost of prosecution and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days.
Each violator of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense and each and every day such violation continues shall be
subject to the penalty imposed by this section for each and every separate
offense.
§ 20-162. Other remedies. [Ord. No. 2-1994, Art. V, § 2, 9/13/1994]
In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Township may require the owner
or occupant of a property to remove any accumulation of solid waste and
should said person fail to remove such solid waste after five days following
written notice, the Township may cause the solid waste to be collected and
disposed of with the costs of such action to be charged to the owner or
occupant of the property in a manner provided by law.
§ 20-161 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 20-162
1:281
Chapter 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 20-162 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 20-162
1:282
ARTICLE I
Street Occupancy
§ 21-101. Permit required. [Ord. No. 38-1974, § 1, 6/11/1974; Ord.
No. 121-1982, 2/9/1982]
In accordance with the provisions of § 1156 of Article XI of the Second Class
Township Code, as amended, no railroad or street railway shall hereafter
be constructed upon any Township road, nor shall any railroad or street
railway crossings, nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric conduits or other
piping, be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone, telegraph, or electric
light or power poles, or any coal tipples or any other obstructions be erected
upon or in, any portion of a Township road except under such conditions,
restrictions and regulations relating to the installation and maintenance
thereof as may be prescribed in permits granted by the Township for such
purpose. The conditions, restrictions and regulations are set forth in the
application and permit which is incorporated herein and made a part hereof
by reference thereto, and are hereby specifically adopted by the Board of
Supervisors. Such regulations or requirements for the issuance of a permit
shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 21-102. Application for permit. [Ord. No. 38-1974, § 2, 6/11/1974]
The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Township
and submitted to the Township in triplicate. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees set forth
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for highway occupancy
permits and restoration charges. In addition, the applicant shall submit
three copies of a sketch showing such dimensions as the location of the
intended facility, width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way lines and a
dimension to the nearest intersecting street.
§ 21-103. Issuance of permit. [Ord. No. 38-1974, § 3, 6/11/1974]
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned
requirements have been filed.
§ 21-104. Notice of completion of work. [Ord. No. 38-1974, § 4, 6/
11/1974]
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice thereof
to the Township.
§ 21-105. Inspection of work; Township may rectify defective work
and collect costs. [Ord. No. 38-1974, § 5, 6/11/1974]
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the Township shall
inspect the work and, when necessary, enforce compliance with the
conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit. Where
any settlement or defect in the work occurs, if the applicant shall fail to
rectify any such settlement or other defect within 60 days after written
§ 21-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 21-105
1:283
notice from the Township to do so, the Township may do the work and shall
impose upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20%
of such cost.
§ 21-106. Penalty for violation. [Ord. No. 38-1974, § 5, 6/11/1974;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person, firm, corporation or utility which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject, upon conviction before a district
justice, to pay a fine of not more than one $1,000 and cost of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the
Dauphin County Jail for not more than five days.
§ 21-107. Duties of Township road master. [Res. No. 41-1974, § 1, 6/
11/1974]
All application for road encroachment permits shall be made to the
Township road master and said permit shall be issued by him. The Township
road master shall also be responsible for inspection after the work is
completed and for enforcement of this article.
§ 21-108. Specifications for street cuts. [Ord. No. 38-1974, 6/11/
1974; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. The following street cut specifications shall be met by any and all
individuals working within South Hanover Township rights-of-way and
street openings:
A. Trench excavation, backfilling and compacting.
(1) Maintenance and protection of traffic.
(a) Maintain traffic in one or more unobstructed lanes and
provide access to all streets and private drives.
(b) Provide and maintain protective devices as required by
state and local codes, permits and regulations.
(c) Employ traffic control measures in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication
213, "Temporary Traffic Control Devices," current edition.
(2) Cutting paved surfaces prior to excavation.
(a) Where installation of pipelines, miscellaneous structures
and appurtenances necessitate breaking a paved surface,
make cuts in a neat, uniform fashion forming straight lines
parallel with the center line of the trench. Cut offsets at
right angles to the center line of the trench.
(b) Protect edges of cut pavement during excavation to
prevent raveling or breaking; square edges prior to
pavement replacement.
§ 21-105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 21-108
1:284
(c) In addition to the trench, excavations should include the
saw cutting and removal of the existing paved surface nine
inches back from the sides of the trench, exposing
undisturbed subgrade. The present road shall be cut or
saved in a neat straight line to the bottom of the existing
base course. The detached material shall be removed.
(3) Trench excavation.
(a) Support excavations with sheeting, shoring and bracing or
a "trench box" as required to comply with federal and state
laws and codes.
(b) Install adequate excavation supports to prevent ground
movement or settlement of adjacent structures, pipelines
or utilities.
(c) Keep the ground surface on both sides of the excavation
free of excavated material to comply with federal and state
laws and codes.
(d) Provide temporary barricades to prevent excavated
material from encroaching on private property, walks,
gutters and storm drains.
(e) Maintain accessibility to all fire hydrants, valve pit covers,
valve boxes, curb boxes, fire and police call boxes and
other utility controls at all times. Keep gutters clear or
provide other satisfactory facilities for street drainage. Do
not obstruct natural watercourses. Where necessary,
provide necessary channels to allow the flow of water
either along or across the site of the work.
(f) In areas where pipelines parallel or cross streams, ensure
that no material slides, is washed or is dumped into the
stream course. Remove cofferdams immediately upon
completion of pipeline construction.
(g) Comply with PA DER Chapter 102 and the PA DER Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual.
(h) Intercept and divert surface drainage away from
excavations. Design surface drainage systems so that they
do not cause erosion on or off the site or cause unwanted
flow of water.
(i) Comply with federal and state requirements for
dewatering to any watercourse, prevention of stream
degradation and erosion and sediment control.
(4) Backfill and compaction.
§ 21-108 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 21-108
1:285
(a) Backfill trenches with suitable backfill material in lifts no
greater than 12 inches in depth and compact to a density
of not less than 95% of the maximum dry weight density at
its optimum moisture content plus or minus 2%.
(b) Suitable backfill material.
1) From top of pipe bedding material to 24 inches over
top of pipe:
a) Material excavated from the trench if free of
stones larger than two inches and free of wet,
frozen or organic materials.
2) From 24 inches above pipe to subgrade elevation:
a) Material excavated from the trench if free of
stones larger than eight inches in size and free of
wet, frozen or organic materials.
(c) Compaction testing. Determine compaction by the testing
procedure contained in ASTM D698 or ASTM D2922.
(5) Protection of existing utilities and structures.
(a) Take all precautions and utilize all facilities required to
protect existing utilities and structures. Comply with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Underground Utility
Protection Law. Request cooperative steps of the utility
and suggestions for procedures to avoid damage to its
lines.
(b) Advise each person in physical control of powered
equipment or explosives used in excavation or demolition
work of the type and location of utility lines at the job site,
the utility assistance to expect and procedures to follow to
prevent damage.
(c) Immediately report to the utility and the road master any
break, leak or other damage to the lines or protective
coatings made or discovered during the work and
immediately alert the occupants of premises of any
emergency created or discovered.
(d) Allow free access to utility personnel at all times for
purposes of maintenance, repair and inspection.
B. Trench paving and restoration.
(1) Restoration materials.
(a) Bituminous materials and aggregates. Refer to Publication
408 Specifications. All bituminous materials and
aggregates used in base course construction, paving and
§ 21-108 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 21-108
1:286
resurfacing are designated in these specifications by, and
shall conform to, the applicable portions of the Publication
408 Specifications.
(2) Temporary trench paving.
(a) Place temporary paving immediately upon completion of
trench backfilling. Unpaved trenches shall not remain
unpaved longer than five working days after backfilling,
nor over weekends and holidays.
(b) Shape and compact subgrade material, then place and
compact base course to the required thickness.
(c) Place temporary paving material. Compact to required
minimum thickness with trench roller having a minimum
300 pounds pressure per inch-width of compaction.
(d) Continuously maintain temporary paving.
(e) Temporary paving materials shall consist of:
1) Base. Compacted eight-inch thick layer of PennDOT
No. 2A coarse aggregate or compacted four-inch thick
layer of B.C.B.C.
2) Compacted three-inch thick layer of PennDOT ID-2
binder course.
(3) Permanent trench paving.
(a) For bituminous surface course, saw existing paving in
accordance with 67 Pa. Code, Chapter 459. Remove
temporary paving material. Trim existing paving to remove
damaged areas. Cut straight joint lines and right angle
offsets.
(b) Construct permanent base and surface courses to the
required compacted thickness and in accordance with
PADOT Publication 408 Specifications.
(c) Permanent paving material shall consist of:
1) Base. Compacted eight-inch thick layer of PennDOT
No. 2A coarse aggregate or compacted five-inch thick
layer of B.C.B.C.
2) Surface. Compacted three inch ID-2 binder course and
1 1/2 inch wearing course.
(4) Driveways.
(a) Trim concrete and bituminous driveway surface to remove
damaged areas. Saw or cut straight joint lines parallel to
§ 21-108 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 21-108
1:287
the center line of the trench. Cut offsets at right angles to
the trench center line.
(b) Restore existing concrete driveways with a six inch layer
of concrete reinforced with WWF 6 x 6 - W2.9 x W2.9 (6
ga.) wire mesh, placed two inches from top surface.
(c) Restore existing bituminous driveways in kind; minimum
1 1/2 inch layer wearing course over six inch layer of
select granular material (2RC).
(d) Restore earth driveways with a six-inch layer of select
granular material (2RC).
(e) Restore stone or gravel driveways in kind; minimum sixinch
layer of select granular material (2RC).
(f) Restore brick driveways with like bricks placed on a fourinch
thick wet sand bed. Place bricks in like pattern and
spacing.
(5) Joints. All joints to be sealed with hot bituminous material
using AC-20, asphalt cement, or E-8, emulsified asphalt, or
approved equivalent. When wearing coarse is placed adjacent
to curb to form bituminous gutter, seal with hot bituminous
material of the class and type designated for wearing course
and extend to 12 inches form the curb applied evenly.
(6) Restoration options.
(a) When working within South Hanover Township rights-ofway,
street openings must be repaired to Township
specifications. The contractor or party responsible for
repair has two options:
1) Install permanent repairs initially.
2) Install a temporary repair which will remain in place
for a minimum of 90 days but no longer than 180 days
and then return to install a permanent repair.
(b) With either option, the contractor or responsible party can
be required to return at any time during two years
following the initial work to correct any deficiencies in
accordance with Township specifications and the
recommendations of the Township Engineer.
§ 21-108 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 21-108
1:288
ARTICLE II
Sidewalks, Driveways and Drainage Structures
§ 21-201. Permit required for construction. [Ord. No. 41-1974, § 1,
8/13/1974]
No person, firm or corporation shall grade, construct, install or erect a
drain, culvert, footwalk, drive or driveway or other means of ingress or
egress, or affecting discharge or passage of drainage water onto or along a
Township road unless and until the Township has granted a permit for such
grading, construction, installation or erection.
§ 21-202. Application for permit. [Ord. No. 41-1974, § 2, 8/13/1974;
Ord. No. 130-1986, § 1, 4/29/1986]
§ 21-203. Fees. [Ord. No. 41-1974, § 3, 8/13/1974]
The costs of filing such application and permit to be issued thereon, and
the cost of any inspection deemed necessary by the supervisors, shall be
determined according to a schedule of fees which will be adopted by the
supervisors by resolution and all such fees and costs shall be paid into the
Township treasury.
§ 21-204. Plan modifications authorized. [Ord. No. 41-1974, § 4, 8/
13/1974]
The supervisors may alter plans filed with the application, and specify
and changes or modifications of any kind which they may deem necessary,
1. Application for such permit shall be made by the owner or occupier, or
by his contractor or agent in writing, on forms provided by the
Township and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be
established by the Township. There shall be appended to each
application a drawing or plan showing the outlines of the property
affected with existing improvements thereon, existing drains, culverts,
footwalks, drives and driveways, with the proposed drain, culverts,
footwalks, drives and driveways proposed to be added, and the
relationship of the foregoing to the Township road, particularly with
relationship to the effect on the drainage of said road.
2. All driveway entrances or aprons shall be constructed in accordance
with the requirements of § 22-503 of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance as amended [Chapter 22], and each permit
shall require that paving be completed within 12 months of the date the
permit is issued unless extended in writing by the Board of Supervisors.
Failure to complete the required driveway paving within the twelvemonth
period shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be
subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth. Notice of this requirement
shall be given to each recipient of a driveway permit and no additional
notice shall be required.
§ 21-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 21-204
1:289
and make its approval of the granting of any permits subject to any such
alterations, changes or modifications.
§ 21-205. Conformity to plans and specifications required. [Ord. No.
41-1974, § 5, 8/13/1974]
All grading, construction, installation and erection shall be in strict
compliance with the plans and specifications on the basis of which the
permit is granted.
§ 21-206. Penalty for violation. [Ord. No. 41-1974, § 8, 8/13/1974;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this article or of
any of the terms and conditions of any permit issued pursuant hereto,
including any regulations applicable thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 together with cost of
prosecution, or in default thereof, to imprisonment for not more than 15
days.
§ 21-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 21-206
1:290
Chapter 22
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 21-206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 21-206
1:291

ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose, Authority, Application and Interpretation
§ 22-101. Short title. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 101, 7/12/1977]
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "South Hanover
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 22-102. Purpose. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 201, 7/12/1977]
§ 22-103. Authority. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 202, 7/12/1977, Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The Planning Commission is hereby designated by the Board of Supervisors
as the agency to review and make recommendations regarding all preapplication
plans and data as required herein. The Planning Commission
is further designated as the agency which shall review and make
recommendations on all preliminary and final plats as required herein, prior
to action on same by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 22-104. County review. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 203, 7/12/1977; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for harmonious development
of the Township and county by:
A. Ensuring the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions into
the development of the Township of South Hanover.
B. Ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human
habitation.
C. Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans with public
improvement plans.
D. Ensuring coordination of intermunicipal public improvement plans
and programs.
E. Ensuring the protection of water resources and drainageways.
F. Ensuring the efficient movement of traffic.
G. Ensuring equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform standards and procedures.
H. Ensuring the greater health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the Township of South Hanover.
I. Ensuring the efficient and orderly extension of community services
and facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience.
1. Applications for subdivision and land development within South
Hanover Township shall be forwarded upon receipt by the Township to
§ 22-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-104
1:293
§ 22-105. Application of regulations. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 204, 7/12/
1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
the Dauphin County Planning Commission for review and report,
together with a fee sufficient to cover the costs of the review and
report, which fee shall be paid by the applicant. The Township shall not
approve such applications until the county report is received, or until
the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded
to the county.
2. The County Planning Commission will normally accept, for review, the
preliminary plat and later the final plat with separate fees for each
application at each stage of processing the proposed subdivision or land
development.
3. In cases where a minor subdivision is permitted by the Township to be
filed as a final plat, the County Planning Commission will also accept
such a plat with its fee for review.
4. Appropriate officials of the County Planning Commission will sign the
final plats prepared for recording, indicating that the plat was
reviewed.
1. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract, or parcel of land
located in South Hanover Township shall be affected; no street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other facilities in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public
use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings thereon
unless and until a final subdivision plat has been approved by the Board
of Supervisors and publicly recorded in the manner prescribed herein;
nor otherwise except in strict accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
2. No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect or alter any
building upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued;
and no building may be erected or altered in a subdivision or land
development, unless and until a final subdivision plat has been
approved by the Board of Supervisors and recorded, and until
construction of the improvements required in connection therewith has
been guaranteed in the manner prescribed herein.
3. Unit or condominium subdivision of real property is included within the
meaning of the subdivision as defined herein and must comply with the
subdivision regulations except for lot requirements under § 22-404 of
this chapter, provided such subdivision is served by a public or common
sewage collection and treatment system. Such compliance shall
include, but not be limited to, the filing of preliminary and final plats,
the dedication and improvement of rights-of-way, roads, streets and the
payment of fees and charges as established by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 22-104 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-105
1:294
§ 22-106. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 205, 7/12/1977]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety,
comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance,
restriction, or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of a statute, other ordinance, resolution, or regulation
impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
resolution, ordinance, or regulation shall be controlling.
4. Preliminary and final plats shall indicate the location of each structure
and clearly define each unit and shall indicate public easements,
common areas, and improvements, all easements accessory to each unit
and improvements to public rights-of-way.
5. Unit or condominium subdivisions are subject to the regulations of the
Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27], as they apply to use and
density requirements, setbacks, parking, and other features and shall
be indicated on the subdivision plans.
6. Exemptions. The following are exempt or partially exempt from the
provisions of this chapter:
A. The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
B. The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
§ 22-105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-106
1:295

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 22-201. Definitions. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 301, 7/12/1977; Ord. No.
82-1978, 4/18/1978; Ord. No. 112-1980, 12/23/1980; Ord. No.
117-1981, 8/11/1981; Ord. No. 118-1981, 9/22/1981; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995; Ord. No. 1-1997, § 1, 1/28/1997; Ord. No. 8-1999,
§ 1, 7/27/1999]
1. The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning hereby ascribed thereto, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activities and the natural
processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
ALLEY (or SERVICE DRIVE) — A minor right-of-way, publicly or
privately owned, primarily for service access to the back or side of
properties and not intended for general traffic circulation.
APPLICANT (see DEVELOPER and SUBDIVIDER) — A landowner or
developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for the
subdivision or development of a tract of land, including his heirs,
successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat
or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS (SUPERVISORS) — The Board of
Supervisors of the Township of South Hanover. See "governing body."
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side, or rear lot line set
so as to provide the required yard.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE (SETBACK) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any enclosed
structure and the ultimate adjacent right-of-way, and the line defining
side and rear yards, where required.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is
improved, designated or intended for vehicular use.
CHAIRMAN — The Chairman of the South Hanover Township Planning
Commission.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections. It is defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
§ 22-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-201
1:297
COMMISSION — The South Hanover Township Planning Commission.
COMMISSION STAFF — The Township Engineer and/or other
personnel retained by the Planning Commission.
COMMON ELEMENTS —
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within a development site
and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas
set aside for public facilities.
CONDOMINIUM — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of
land and certain parts of a building thereon which would normally be
used by all the occupants, together with individual ownership in fee
of a particular unit or apartment in such building or on such parcel
of land and may include dwellings, offices and other types of space in
commercial buildings or on property.
COOPERATIVE — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land
and of a building or buildings thereon which would normally be used
by all the occupants, together with individual rights of occupancy of a
particular unit or apartment in such building or buildings or on such
parcel of land and may include dwellings, offices and other types of
space in commercial buildings or on property and where the lease,
sale or exchange of a unit is subject to the agreement of the group of
persons having common ownership.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended to
furnish access for pedestrians.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end and
terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround.
The land on which the building is located and portions of the
building which are not included in a unit.
A.
The foundation, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways and entrances and
exits of the building.
B.
C. The yards, parking areas and driveways.
Portions of the land and building used exclusively for the
management, operation or maintenance of the common elements.
D.
E. Installations of all central services and utilities.
All other elements of the building necessary or convenient to its
existence; management, operation, maintenance and safety or
normally in common use.
F.
G. Such other facilities as are designated as common elements.
§ 22-201 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-201
1:298
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original
ground and designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also,
the material removed in excavation.
DETENTION POND — A vegetated pond designed to drain completely
after storing stormwater runoff for a given storm event and then
releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk
of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space
and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of development plan" when
used in this chapter shall mean the written and graphic materials
referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE — The flow of water or liquid waste and the method of
directing such flow, whether natural or artificial.
DRAINAGE DISTRICT — A watershed where natural surface
configurations, runoff characteristics and defined conveyances have
attained the conditions of equilibrium, and which includes any channel
or conveyance of surface water having a defined bed and banks,
whether natural or artificial with perennial or intermittent flow.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer or
other structure designed, intended, or constructed for the purpose of
diverting surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets,
public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any part of any
subdivision or contiguous land areas.
DRIVEWAY — A minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between
a street and a parking area or garage within a lot or property.
DWELLING — A building designed for residential purposes and used as
living quarters for one or more persons.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes and having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities arranged for
occupancy by one family or a single person.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — A two-story multifamily dwelling
containing one-story dwelling units, under one ownership.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more
families living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking, including apartment houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED (ROW) (TOWNHOUSE) — A
building used by one family, and having party wall(s) in common with
other buildings.
§ 22-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-201
1:299
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED — A building used by one
family, having one dwelling unit, and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, SEMI-DETACHED — A building used by
one family, having one side yard, and one party wall in common with
another building.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, DETACHED — A building used by two
families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, having two
side yards.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, SEMI-DETACHED — A building used by two
families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, having one
side yard, and having one party wall in common with another building.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted for the limited use of land for
public or quasi-public purposes.
ENERGY DISSIPATER — A device used to slow the velocity of
stormwater, particularly of concentrated discharge such as pipe outlets.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed and registered under
the laws of the commonwealth to engage in the practice of engineering.
(This does not include the determination of property boundaries unless
the engineer is also a licensed and registered surveyor as set forth in
this article.)
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering specifications of
the Township regulating the installation of any required improvement
or for any facility installed by any owner, subject to public use.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the
stripped surface. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and
a designated point of higher elevation of the final grade. The material
used to make the fill.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river,
stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete
inundation; or, any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
or runoff of surface water from any source.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
Right-of-way required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.
A.
§ 22-201 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-201
1:300
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of South Hanover
Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania. See "Board of Supervisors."
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or man-made drainageway or
parabolic or trapezoidal cross-section shaped to required dimensions
and vegetated for safe disposal of stormwater runoff.
HALF OR PARTIAL STREET — A street, generally parallel with and
adjacent to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than
required for improvement and used as a street in accordance with this
chapter.
HOLDING POND — A retention or detention pond.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Any type of man-made cover that restricts
infiltration and increases the volume or rate of runoff from any rainfall
event of the same magnitude, intensity and distribution.
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street for which the Township,
county or commonwealth has maintenance responsibility and which is
paved with an approved hardtop surface.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions and changes to the land
that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable lots.
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a
street into a block or across a block to another street.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
B.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling
or single family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(1)
C.
§ 22-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-201
1:301
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee having
a remaining term of not less than 40 years, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in the land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for
the purpose of this chapter.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT ADD-ON PLAN — A plan which proposes to alter the location of lot
lines between existing lots of separate ownership for the sole purpose
of changing the lot size or lot configuration of existing lots.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot
as shown on a subdivision plan excluding space within any street, but
including the area of any easement.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having
frontage on, an arterial street and minor street and with vehicular
access solely from the latter.
LOT, THROUGH OR DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot which abuts a street
on two or more nonadjacent sides.
MAJOR STREETS —
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The subdivision of a single lot, tract or parcel
of land into two lots, tracts or parcels of land, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building,
on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street or highway with fast or heavy
traffic volumes of considerable continuity and used primarily as a
traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A major street or highway which carries
traffic from minor streets to arterial streets including the principal
entrance of a residential development and streets for circulation
within such a development.
B.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A major street or highway which
carries large volumes of traffic at comparatively high speed with
access at designated points and not from abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street' which is parallel
and adjacent to limited access highways or arterial streets and
which provides access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
D.
MINOR STREET — A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
E.
§ 22-201 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-201
1:302
development, providing lots, tracts or parcels of land thereby created
have frontage on an improved public street or streets and providing
further that there is not created by the subdivision any new street,
streets, easement, easements of access or need therefore.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created
pursuant to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the
"Municipalities Authority Act of 1945."
ON-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The control of runoff to
allow water falling on a given site to be absorbed or retained on site
to the extent that after development the peak rate of discharge leaving
the site is not different than if the site had remained undeveloped.
OWNER — Any person having any title or interest whatsoever in any
land subdivision as the word "subdivision" is hereinafter defined in this
chapter.
PADER — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
PADOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
SPECIFICATIONS — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
specifications in force at the time that a preliminary plat is submitted
to the Township as provided herein. Any requirement of this chapter
that the design or construction of improvements be in accordance with
such specifications shall be deemed to require design or construction in
accordance with the specifications in force on the date of submission of
the preliminary plat as aforesaid.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, partnership or
corporation.
PLAN, CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT — A plan prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor showing the construction details of
streets, drains, sewers, bridges, culverts and other improvements as
required by this chapter.
§ 22-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-201
1:303
PLAN, OFFICIAL — The Comprehensive Plan and/or development
policy plan (master plan) and/or future land use plan and/or ultimate
right-of-way plan and/or Official Map or other plans or portions thereof,
as may be adopted, pursuant to statute, for the area of the Township in
which the subdivision is located.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, indicating salient existing features
of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed
subdivision.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The South Hanover Township Planning
Commission. See "Commission."
PLANNING COMMISSION STAFF — (See "Commission staff.")
PLAT, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan prepared for
official recording as required by statute.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan, in lesser detail
than the final plat, indicating the approximate proposed layouts of a
subdivision as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of the final
plat.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PROFILE LINE — The profile of the center line of the finished surface
of the street, which shall be midway between the sidelines of the street.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission, intended to
inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance
with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
October 15, 1988 (P.L. 729, No. 93), known as the "Sunshine Act," 65
Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq., as amended and supplemented.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUC — Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 22-201 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-201
1:304
RE-SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision or transfer of land, laid out on
a plan which has been approved by the Board of Supervisors which
changes or proposes to change property lines and/or public rights-ofway
not in strict accordance with approved plans.
RECORDS DRAWINGS — Set of prints of the original facilities showing
those changes made during the construction process.
RESERVE STRIP — A narrow parcel of ground separating a street from
other adjacent properties.
RESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER — Any individual maintaining a voting
address in the Township, and within 1,000 feet of the proposed
subdivision (owning real estate in his own or joint names). A tenancy
in common or any other means of joint ownership shall be considered
as an individual; however, the signature of a single joint owner shall be
considered as binding the others.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic
and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or however
designated.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but
runs off the surface of the land.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A temporary dam or barrier constructed across
a suitable location to intercept the runoff and to trap and retain the
sediment.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter
is accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once
this matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually
referred to as "sediment."
SEEPAGE PIT — A covered pit with open-jointed lining through which
the septic tank effluent may seep or leak into the surrounding soil.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight tank in which raw sewage is broken down
into solid, liquid and gaseous phases to facilitate further treatment and
final disposal.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (ON-SITE) — Any structure designed to
process sanitary sewage within the boundaries of the lot on which the
dwelling unit served by the system is located.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (PUBLIC) — A sanitary sewage collection
method in which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to
a central treatment and disposal plant.
SHOULDERS — The portion of the street, contiguous to the cartway, for
the accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use of parking,
or for lateral support of base and surface courses in the pavement.
§ 22-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-201
1:305
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per
100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
absorption capacity of soil to a specified depth in a given location
for the purpose of determining suitability of soil for on-site sewage
disposal.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment designed
to increase or maintain the stability of a mass of soil or otherwise to
improve its engineering properties.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way constructed to municipal
standards which affords primary vehicular traffic or pedestrian access
to abutting properties, and which includes avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, freeway, parkway and viaduct, but shall not include an alley.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
SUBDIVIDER (SEE APPLICANT AND DEVELOPER) — The owner or
authorized agent of the owner of a lot, tract or parcel of land to be
subdivided for sale or development under the terms of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — When in the judgment of the
Township Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required
improvements for which financial security was posted pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter) of those improvements required as a
condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied
or operated for its intended use.
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all present and
proposed grades and facilities for stormwater drainage.
SURVEYOR — A professional land surveyor licensed and registered
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in the
practice of land surveying.
§ 22-201 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-201
1:306
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression
used to carry surface water runoff.
TILE DISPOSAL FIELD — A system of open jointed or perforated pipes
laid in the upper strata of the soil for absorption.
TOP SOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are
fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter of humus
debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the A
Horizon.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of South Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, the Board of Supervisors, its agents or authorized
representatives.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not
been graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a
building.
UNIT — A part of the property, structure or building designed or
intended for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a
public street or way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a
public street or way, and includes a proportionate undivided interest in
the common elements which is assigned to the property, structure or
building.
WATER FACILITY — Any waterworks, water supply works, water
distribution system, or part thereof designed, intended or constructed
to provide or distribute potable water.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use
of groundwater and surface water resources within the Township.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other
body of water whether natural or man-made.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
§ 22-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-201
1:307

ARTICLE III
Plat Requirements and Processing Procedures
§ 22-301. General requirements. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 401, 7/12/
1977; Ord. No. 112-1980, § 1, 12/23/1980; Ord. No. 118-1981, 9/22/
1981; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995; Ord. No. 8-1999, § 2, 7/27/1999]
1. Whenever subdivision of land or land development is desired to be
effected in South Hanover Township, Dauphin County, a plat of the
layout of such subdivision or land development shall be prepared, filed
and processed with the Board of Supervisors according to the
requirements of this chapter.
A. The Board of Supervisors may waive the requirements of preapplication
plans and data and the preliminary plat requirements
and accept a "preliminary/final" plat provided the following
conditions exist:
(1) The applicant submits a written request to the Board.
(2) Where two lots are proposed to be subdivided from a tract of
land.
(3) Where land is being transferred to be combined with an
existing lot.
(4) Where the proposed subdivision is on an existing street and no
new streets or improvements are involved.
B. The Board of Supervisors may waive the requirements of preapplication
plans and data and the preliminary plat requirements
and accept a final plat as a "lot add-on plan," provided that the
following facts are found to exist with regard to the plan:
(1) Drainage easements or rights-of-way are not altered.
(2) Access to the affected parcels is not changed.
(3) Street alignments are not changed.
(4) No new building lots are created.
2. A subdivision plan or land development plan shall be presented to the
South Hanover Township Planning Commission for their review and
recommendations. When the plan is determined to meet the minimum
requirements, the plan shall then be presented to the Board of
Supervisors for approval.
A. A plan shall generally be developed through three distinct stages:
the pre-application (sketch) plan, the preliminary plat and the final
plat with the following exceptions:
(1) Subdivisions having 10 lots or more are strongly recommended
to submit a sketch plan; however, all pertinent data required
§ 22-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-301
1:309
for a sketch plan shall be contained within the plan submitted
for review.
3. Prior to submitting a subdivision or land development plan to the
Planning Commission, the applicant shall consult with the Dauphin
County Conservation District and obtain the information necessary to
prepare:
A. An erosion and sedimentation control plan which shall be in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Chapter 102,
"Erosion Control," P.L. 1787, June 22, 1937, as amended.
B. Any earth moving permits which may be required by the
Department of Environmental Resources.
C. Information concerning the area soil characteristics that will assist
the Commission's review of the proposed development regarding
any limitations of basement or foundation construction or park
areas construction and grading conditions.
4. Prior to submitting a subdivision or land development plan to the
Planning Commission, the applicant shall review: the South Hanover
Township Official Sewage Plan, Act 537, as amended, and determine
the sewer management district to be affected.
A. If the subdivision is within a sewerage district and there is an
existing sewage disposal system, the applicant shall show evidence,
in writing, illustrating:
(1) How and where a connection will be made to the system.
(2) The system has the capacity to accept additional flow.
B. If the subdivision is within a sewerage district and the sewage
disposal system does not have sufficient capacity or does not
extend to the proposed site, the applicant shall show evidence of
how improvements will be installed that shall be in accordance with
the requirements of Act 537.
C. If the subdivision is within an on-site sewer management district,
the applicant shall cause the area soil to be tested and evaluated by
the sewage enforcement officer (SEO), certified by the State of
Pennsylvania and retained by South Hanover Township. The
applicant shall then show evidence that a specific location within
each lot of the subdivision is acceptable for an on-site sewage
disposal system.
5. Prior to submitting a subdivision or land development plan to the
Planning Commission, the applicant shall meet the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Chapter 71, "Administration of the Sewage
Facilities Program," by submitting a completed "Sewage Facilities
Planning Module."
§ 22-301 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-301
1:310
A. Subdivisions having 10 lots or less that are created within property
lines which existed on May 1, 1972, will be considered to be a
minor subdivision and the appropriate "Sewage Facilities Planning
Module" may be obtained at the Township office.
B. Subdivisions having more than 10 lots and all land development
plans shall be considered to be major subdivisions and the
applicant will obtain a "mailer" from the South Hanover Township
Office and apply to the Department of Environmental Resources for
the documentation and forms applicable.
6. Prior to submitting a subdivision or land development plan to the
Planning Commission, the applicant shall review the South Hanover
Township Zoning Ordinance and Map [Chapter 27] and determine that
the proposed planned use meets the requirements of this article.
7. Prior to submitting a subdivision or land development plan to the
Planning Commission the applicants shall review the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Flood Hazard Boundary
Map for South Hanover Township and determine where the site lies in
relation to the one-hundred-year flood limit.
A. No plat shall be approved for which the Commission finds that
drainage or flood control protection is necessary until plans are
submitted showing that:
(1) Drainage and flood protection is satisfactorily provided for.
(2) It has been shown that the level of the land may be
satisfactorily raised above the floodplain.
B. Land subject to flooding and deemed topographically unsuitable
shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other
uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate
erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the subdivision or land
development shall be set aside on the plat for such uses as shall not
be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not
produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
C. To ensure that residents will have sufficient flood-free land upon
which to build a house, the Commission may require that elevation
and flood profiles be provided. Each lot shall contain a building site
which shall be completely free of the danger of floodwaters on the
basis of available information.
D. Except where specifically approved by the Board of Supervisors,
the Commission shall not approve streets subject to inundation by
flooding.
8. The Board of Supervisors shall act on any submitted plat within 90 days
of its being received and accepted for review. In the event a
modification of the requirements of this article is requested by the
§ 22-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-301
1:311
applicant or is deemed necessary by the supervisors for approval, the
modification and the reasons for its necessity shall be entered in the
records of the supervisors.
9. Before acting on any subdivision plat, the Board of Supervisors may
hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
10. The Board of Supervisors shall determine all plat approvals, approvals
with modifications or disapprovals and shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of its decision by communicating the same to the applicant
personally or by mailing the same to the applicant's last known address
not later than 15 days following the decision.
11. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirement which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of this article.
12. Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and to
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms
as presented; unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation or
communication of the decision, in which case, failure to meet the
extended time or change in manner of presentation or communication
shall have like effect.
13. The Planning Commission shall submit copies of the submission
together with all accompanying or supporting data to:
A. The Township Engineer, who shall advise the supervisors as to the
suitability of all engineering details and specifications.
B. The Board of Supervisors.
C. All affected public utilities who shall be requested to make
recommendations regarding the suitability of any utility
easements.
D. The local office of the Department of Transportation where the
subdivision or land development will front an existing or proposed
state highway or has a proposed street entering such highway.
E. Dauphin County Planning Commission.
F. The Township Zoning Officer.
14. A stormwater management plan shall be submitted for all subdivisions
having at least five acres or 10 dwelling units and for all land
development plans and shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer.
§ 22-301 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-301
1:312
§ 22-302. Pre-application (sketch) plan submission. [Ord. No.
74-1977, § 402, 7/12/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995; Ord. No.
2-2000, §§ 1, 2, 9/26/2000]
15. A water supply determination shall be submitted for all subdivisions
having 15 dwelling units or more and for all land development plans
and shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer.
16. Space for park and recreation facilities meeting the requirements of
this chapter shall be submitted for all subdivisions having 30 lots or
more.
1. A sketch plan is strongly recommended for all subdivisions having 10
lots or more and for all land development plans.
2. Space for park and recreation facilities meeting the requirements of
this chapter should be indicated for all subdivisions having 30 lots or
more.
3. All subdivision plans and land development plans containing 50
dwelling units or more shall be submitted by the applicant to the Lower
Dauphin School District for determination by the district of the effect
that the proposed subdivision or land development will have on the
school district.
4. All sketch plan submissions, at a minimum, should include the following
information in order to be accepted by the Planning Commission for
review:
A. Subdivisions involving 20 acres or less will be submitted on sheets
18 inches by 24 inches, subdivisions larger than 20 acres will be
submitted on sheets 24 by 36 inches. Larger sheets will not be
accepted for review.
B. The applicant, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission
and as part of the submission, shall present six copies of the
proposed layout preferably prepared by a registered land surveyor
or a professional engineer who is also a registered land surveyor. In
either case the preparer shall be registered to practice in the State
of Pennsylvania.
C. Acceptance of the sketch plan shall not constitute approval of the
preliminary plat or final plat by the supervisors.
5. The sketch plan title block should include:
A. The term "sketch plan" clearly labeled.
B. Name of the municipality.
C. The proposed name of the subdivision or land development.
§ 22-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-302
1:313
D. Name, address and telephone number for both the registered
owner and any equitable owner.
E. Name of the surveyor or engineer responsible for the preparation
of the map.
F. Map scale.
G. Date of preparation.
6. The sketch plan sheet should include:
A. A location map oriented to the north and showing the subdivision,
adjacent streets and other pertinent information.
B. A statement of tract zoning and proposed land use.
C. North arrow aligned to the top of the plat.
D. Property map showing the entire lot, tract or parcel to be affected
by the subdivision or land development.
E. The tract boundary showing bearings and distance drawn
according to the listed deed reference.
F. Streams, ponds, watercourses and wetlands.
G. Floodplain limits.
H. Wooded areas.
I. Existing buildings.
J. Existing utilities, pipelines and drainage pipes.
K. Existing streets with name and route designation.
L. Existing roadway easements.
M. Proposed subdivision lot layout with numbers.
N. Proposed use of each lot.
O. Proposed water supply.
P. Proposed sewage disposal.
Q. Proposed parks and recreational areas.
R. Proposed street locations and names.
S. Proposed parking areas.
7. All residential developments or subdivisions containing 20 or more
dwelling units or residential lots and all nonresidential developments
(with the exception of agricultural development) that generate 50 or
more new peak hour trips as defined by the ITE Highway Capacity
§ 22-302 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-302
1:314
§ 22-303. Preliminary plat submission. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 403, 7/
12/1977; Ord. No. 103-1980, § 23, 1/22/1980; Ord. No. 118-1981,
§ 2, 9/22/1981; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Manual shall provide a traffic impact study in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Article IIIA of this chapter.
1. Except as provided in § 22-304, a preliminary plat shall be submitted for
every subdivision.
2. All supporting material identified in § 22-301 and required for
submission to the various governing agencies shall be complete and
included with the preliminary plat.
3. The applicant, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission and
as part of a formal submission, shall present and file eight copies of the
proposed layout prepared by a registered land surveyor or a
professional engineer who is also a registered land surveyor. In either
case the preparer shall be registered to practice in the State of
Pennsylvania.
4. The applicant, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission and
as part of a formal submission, shall file three copies of any or all
protective covenants assigned to the subdivision.
5. Any preliminary plat that does not meet the minimum requirements of
this chapter and/or is not presented using sound engineering practices
for clarity and neatness shall not be accepted for review.
6. A stormwater management plan shall be submitted for all subdivisions
having five or more dwelling units or involving more than five acres and
for all land development plans and should be prepared by a registered
professional engineer.
7. A water supply determination shall be submitted for all subdivisions
having 15 dwelling units or more and for all land development plans
and should be prepared by a registered professional engineer.
8. Subdivisions involving 20 acres or less shall be submitted on sheets 18
inches by 24 inches. Subdivisions larger than 20 acres shall be
submitted on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches. Larger sheets will not be
accepted for review.
9. Plat submissions shall be clean, orderly and legible. All notes, text and
lettering shall be according to those drafting techniques and systems
currently in use by the engineering and surveying professions. Title
blocks, signature blocks and general notes shall be lettered using either
mechanical or electrical assisted devices. Typewritten material must be
10 picas or larger. Hand lettering must compare to the Ames Lettering
Guide Number 3 or larger. Stick-on notes and details must be legible,
free of excessive shadows and meet the lettering requirements of this
subsection.
§ 22-302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-303
1:315
10. The preliminary plat, at a minimum, shall include those requirements
suggested for the sketch plan submission.
11. The preliminary plat title and signature blocks shall be expanded to
include:
A. The term "preliminary plat" clearly labeled.
B. The municipality name and county.
C. The proposed name of the subdivision or land development.
D. Notarized signatures of the registered owner and any equitable
owner on each plat.
E. Preparing surveyor and engineer signature block with an original
signature and seal on each plat.
F. Township Engineer signature block.
G. Planning Commission signature block.
H. Board of Supervisors signature block.
I. Dauphin County Planning Commission signature block.
J. Dauphin County Recorder entry block.
K. Notary public signature block with an original signature and seal
on each plat.
L. The date of submission including dates of any revision requested by
the reviewing agencies.
12. The preliminary plat plan sheet shall also include:
A. A location map having a minimum scale of one inch equals 2,000
feet, oriented to the north, and showing the subdivision, adjacent
streets and other pertinent information.
B. Property map showing the entire lot, tract or parcel to be affected
by the subdivision or land development drawn to a scale no larger
than one inch equals 100 feet.
C. Locations of all installed property monuments, existing corners and
references with a notation indicating positive location in the field.
D. Identification of the primary control point.
E. Distance from the primary control point to the nearest street
crossing.
F. The existing property deed reference.
G. Adjacent property owners and deed references.
§ 22-303 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-303
1:316
§ 22-304. Lot add-on plat submission. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 3.01, 7/
12/1977; Ord. No. 8-1999, § 3, 7/27/1999]
H. Adjacent subdivisions and deed references.
I. Existing fire hydrants.
J. Existing utility poles and lines.
K. Existing road cartways.
L. Existing road profile at any proposed entrance.
M. Proposed lots with identifying numbers.
N. Metes and bounds for all proposed lots.
O. Acreage for the entire subdivision.
P. Acreage for all proposed lots.
Q. Right-of-way for all proposed streets.
R. Cartway for all proposed streets.
S. Shoulders/curbing for all proposed streets.
T. Sight distance data for all intersections.
U. Paving details.
V. Horizontal curve data.
W. Vertical curve data.
X. Acceptable soils analysis data for each on-lot sewage disposal
system.
Y. Location of all proposed utility mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater
sewers and water distribution system.
Z. Proposed roadway, utility and drainage easements.
1. Subdivisions meeting the criteria of § 22-301, Subsection 1B, for a lot
add-on plan may prepare a final plat for submission and review which
lot add-on final plat shall comply with the following requirements:
A. The lot add-on plan shall be prepared by a registered surveyor.
B. Drafting standards:
(1) The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn on eighteen-inch by
twenty-two-inch or twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets.
(2) Dimensions shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds with an
error of closure no greater than one foot in 10,000 feet.
§ 22-303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-304
1:317
C. Lot add-on plan specifications: The following information shall be
provided on the sheets to be recorded:
(1) The term "lot add-on final plat" and the project name.
(2) The name of the municipality in which the project is located.
(3) The name, address and telephone number for the record owner
and any equitable owner of the tract.
(4) The name and address of all adjacent landowners.
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the firm that
prepared the plan and the file or project number assigned to
the plan by that firm.
(6) Graphics scale, written scale, plan date and the dates of all
plan revisions.
(7) A location map, at a scale not less than one inch equal to 2,000
feet with sufficient information to locate the specific property
involved. All existing roads in the vicinity of the site shall be
identified.
(8) The total number of lots, total acreage, density of development,
present zoning classification and minimum lot area
requirements.
(9) The location, size and dimensions of existing rights-of-way,
easements and utilities on or adjacent to both the conveying
and receiving tracts.
(10) The plan book record numbers of all previously recorded plans
for projects adjacent to either the conveying or receiving tract.
(11) The source of title to the tract being subdivided.
(12) Property map showing entire lot, tract or parcel to be affected
by the subdivision draft to a scale no larger than one inch
equals 100 feet.
(13) Locations of all installed property monuments, existing corners
and lot line markers, including a note indicating when
proposed monuments and markers will be set.
(14) Lot numbers.
(15) A statement setting forth any modification of requirements
granted by the Board of Supervisors.
(16) A statement indicating that a Non-Building Waiver Form B has
been approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 22-304 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-305
1:318
§ 22-305. Final plat submission. [Ord. No. 74-1977, 7/12/1977; Ord.
No. 85-1978, 7/11/1978; Ord. No. 103-1980, 1/22/1980; Ord. No.
112-1980, 12/23/1980; Ord. No. 115-1981, 4/14/1981; Ord. No.
118-1981, 9/22/1981; Ord. No. 133-1986, 10/23/1986; Ord. No.
3-1987, 6/8/1987; Ord. No. 4-1990, 6/26/1990; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/
12/1995; Ord. No. 1-2010, §§ 1, 2, 10/12/2010]
1. Subdivisions meeting the criteria of § 22-301, Subsection 1A, with
written authority from the Board of Supervisors, may eliminate the
sketch plan and preliminary plan and prepare the final plat for
submission and review. Subdivisions meeting the requirements of
§ 22-303 may prepare a final plat for submission and review.
2. The applicant shall, not later than five years after the date of approval
of the preliminary plat, (but in no event prior to approval of the
preliminary plat by the supervisors) for that portion he intends to
develop, file with the supervisors a final plat. Such filing shall include as
part of the formal submission all the material and other data required
as listed in this chapter. Failure to comply with the time limitations as
herein provided shall make the approval of the preliminary plat null and
void unless an extension of time is requested by the applicant and for
good cause granted by supervisors.
3. The final plan shall incorporate all the changes and modifications
required by the supervisors; otherwise, it shall conform to the approved
preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the applicant proposes to record and develop at
the time; provided, that such position conforms with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
4. Prints, reproducible Mylar and electronic data requirements.
A. Eight prints and a reproducible Mylar of the final plat shall be filed
by the applicant at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Commission at which consideration is desired. Any submission of
the final plat to the Township at any time other than a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Commission shall not be considered an
official submission except that the Commission shall, at its first
meeting immediately following any submission which is not made
in accordance with this section, accept said submission as having
been officially made at said meeting.
B. In addition to the prints and reproducible Mylar, a certified copy of
the associated electronic data file (disk) shall be filed with the
Township in order to expedite entering the land development into
the Township's records. The disk shall be in a compatible format to
the current version of AutoCAD.
The electronic data file (disk) shall contain all cross reference items
listed in the Table of Layers shown below, which table may be
revised from time to time by the Township Engineer.
§ 22-305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-305
1:319
Table of Layers
Item Layer
Boundary
Property Line
Road Center Line
Road R.O.W.
Road Edge
Curb
Sanitary Sewer Mainlines
Sanitary Sewer Manholes
Sanitary Sewer Laterals
Sanitary Sewer Force Mains
Sanitary Sewer Pumping
Stations
Sanitary Sewer Grinder Pumps
Sidewalks
Signs
Contours
Wetlands
Fencing
Paving (Parking Lots/Driveways)
Storm Sewer Mainlines
Storm Sewer Manholes
Storm Sewer Inlets/Catch
Basins
Stormwater Drainage Swales
Stormwater Detention Basins
Outlet Structures
Headwalls and Endwalls
Water Mains
Hydrants
Valves
Electric, Gas, Communication
Utilities
Easements
§ 22-305 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-305
1:320
The electronic data file must meet the following requirements:
(1) Electronic data shall be in a format compatible with the
current version of AutoCAD.
(2) All text shall appear only on a separate "TEXT" layer and shall
not be attached to the "ITEM" layers.
(3) A drawing layer name shall be provided for all cross-reference
items (see Table above).
(4) Horizontal (x and y coordinates) and vertical (z coordinates)
data must be provided for all items, as appropriate. Invert
elevations of structures and utilities must also be provided. All
layers must be separate and distinct.
5. Before acting on any subdivision plat, the supervisors may hold a public
hearing thereon pursuant to notice.
6. The supervisors shall act on the final subdivision or land development
plan within 90 days of the date of acceptance and as described in this
article.
7. No change, erasure, modification or revision shall be made on any final
plat of a subdivision or land development plan after approval has been
given by the supervisors and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless the
plat is first resubmitted to the supervisors.
8. Whenever plat approval by the supervisors is required, the Recorder of
Deeds of the county shall not accept any plat for recording unless such
plat officially notes the review of the County Planning Commission.
9. Within 90 days after the date of approval of a final plat by the
supervisors, a Township official shall record an approved duplicate copy
thereof in the office of the recorder or deeds of Dauphin County.
10. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof prerequisite to final
plat approval.
A. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such
plat have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by
this chapter and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire
hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and other improvements as may be required by this chapter have
been installed in accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the
completion of any improvements required as a condition for the
final approval of a plat, including improvements or fees otherwise
required by this chapter, the developer may deposit with the
Township financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the
costs of such improvements or common amenities including basins
and other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open
§ 22-305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-305
1:321
space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be
required.
B. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing,
the Board of Supervisors, shall furnish the developer with a signed
copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent
upon the developer obtaining satisfactory financial security. The
final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the
financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or
letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be
revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within
90 days unless a written extension is granted by the Board of
Supervisors; such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld
and shall be placed in writing at the request of the developer.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Township may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in
such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial
security for the purposes of this section.
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by
the party posting the financial security, provided said bonding
company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such
business within the commonwealth.
E. Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the
public, the completion of any improvements which may be required
on or before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or
accompanying agreement for completion of the improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually, the Township may adjust the
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost
for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the ninetieth-day after either the original date
scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion.
Subsequent to said adjustment, the Township may require the
developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
§ 22-305 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-305
1:322
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate
of such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good
cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the Township are
unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer
licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the
Township and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified
by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and
shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally
by the Township and the applicant or developer.
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond
the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an
amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years
the Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plats by
sections or stages of development subject to such requirements or
guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time to time,
of such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to
the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such
requests shall be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors,
and the Board of Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of
such request within which to allow the Township Engineer to
certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such portion of
the work upon the improvements has been completed in
accordance with the approved plat. Upon such certification the
Board of Supervisors shall authorize release by the bonding
company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the
Township Engineer fairly representing the value of the
improvements completed or, if the Board of Supervisors fails to act
within said forty-five-day period, the Board of Supervisors shall be
deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The
Board of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time of
completion and certification by its engineer, require retention of
10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
§ 22-305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-305
1:323
K. Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of
the required improvements following completion, the Board of
Supervisors may require the posting of financial security to secure
structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning
of said improvements in accordance with the design and
specifications as depicted on the final plat for a term not to exceed
18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial
security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this
section with regard to installation of such improvements, and the
amount of the financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual
cost of installation of said improvements.
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public
utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from the
Township, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the
regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal authority
and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise
required by this section.
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a
plat as set forth in this section, the Township shall not condition the
issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the
erection or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon
the lots or land as depicted upon the final plat upon actual
completion of the improvements depicted upon the approved final
plat. Moreover, if said financial security has been provided,
occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected shall
not be withheld following the improvement of the streets providing
access to and from existing public roads to such building or
buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or
beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are
necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or
buildings.
11. Release from improvement bond.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of
Supervisors, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall,
within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the
Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements.
The Township Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report in writing,
with the Board of Supervisors, and shall promptly mail a copy of the
§ 22-305 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-305
1:324
same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report
shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board
of Supervisors; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate
approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in
part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not
be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said
report shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer, within 15 days
of receipt of the engineer's report, in writing by certified or
registered mail of the action of said Board of Supervisors with
relation thereto.
C. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to
comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all
improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the
developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or
shall be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall
proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Board of Supervisors or the
Township Engineer.
F. Where herein reference is made to the Township Engineer, he shall
be as a consultant thereto.
G. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Township for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors as may be from time to time
amended. Such expense shall be reasonable and in accordance
with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the Township
Engineer or consultant for work performed for similar services in
the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the engineer or consultant to the Township when fees
are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements the
applicant shall, within 30 days of the date of billing, notify the
Township that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or
§ 22-305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-305
1:325
any approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant's request over disputed engineer expenses.
(2) If, within 45 days from the date of billing, the Township and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Township
shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another
professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to review the said expenses and make a
determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable
and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such
evidence and review such documentation as the professional
engineer in his or her sole opinion deems necessary and render
a decision within 50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall
be required to pay the entire amount determined in the
decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree
upon the professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days
of the request for an appointment of an arbitrator, then, upon
application of either party, the President Judge of the Court of
Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the Township is
located (or if at the time there be no President judge, then the
senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such engineer,
who, in that case, shall be neither the Township Engineer nor
any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Township or the applicant within
the preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining
the reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the
applicant if the amount of payment required in the decision is
equal to or greater than the original bill. If the amount of
payment required in the decision is less than the original bill by
$1,000, or more, the Township shall pay the fee of the
professional engineer, but otherwise the Township and the
applicant shall each pay one-half of the fee of the appointed
professional engineer.
12. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. In the event that any
improvements which may be required have not been installed as
provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final plat the
Board of Supervisors is hereby granted the power to enforce any
corporate bond, or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If the proceeds of such bond, or other security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the improvements covered by said security, the Board of
Supervisors may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all
or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute
§ 22-305 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-305
1:326
appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary
to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds,
whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable
action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for
the installation of the improvements covered by such security, and not
for any other Township purpose.
13. Final plat supporting documents. The final plat shall be accompanied by
the following data and plans as prescribed by the Commission or as
required by the laws of the commonwealth:
A. Profiles of all proposed streets and alleys showing grades, vertical
curve data and subsurface utilities.
B. Typical cross-sections of all proposed streets, showing the right-ofway
width, yardway width, location and width of sidewalks, if
required, and the location and size of all utility mains.
C. Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary sewers and stormwater
sewers, with the type of pipe, grade and pipe size indicated.
D. Plans of any proposed water distribution system indicating the type
of pipe and pipe sizes with valves and fire hydrant locations
indicated.
E. A report identifying the stormwater management plan and
describing how the subdivision or development affects the
watersheds of the Township in accordance with this chapter.
F. A report identifying the groundwater management plan and
describing how the subdivision or development affects the targeted
aquifers of the Township and in accordance with this chapter.
G. A final erosion and sedimentation control plan, together with the
report, indicating that the plan has been prepared in accordance
with Title 25, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control" of the Pennsylvania
Code and that the plan has been reviewed and approved by the
Dauphin County Conservation District and showing site specific
locations and types of erosion and sediment controls.
H. A copy of an application for a permit for earth moving activity or a
permit issued and signed by the Department of Environmental
Resources if the Department directs that such permit is necessary.
I. A copy of the Department of Environmental Resources sewage
facilities planning module completed and approved by the
Department in accordance with Title 25, Chapter 21, "Sewage
Facilities Planning Program" of the Pennsylvania Code. Where the
Department finds that an applicant meets the requirements of 35
P.S. 750.7(b)(5), as amended, the supervisors may approve a final
subdivision plan without the Department's approval of the sewage
facilities planning module.
§ 22-305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-305
1:327
J. An agreement to construct improvements within the subdivision
using the format provided in Appendix A of this chapter.
K. A letter of credit meeting the requirements of Subsection 10 and
using the format, provided in Appendix A of this chapter.
L. Such other certificates, affidavits, enforcements or dedications as
may be required by the supervisors in the enforcement of these
regulations.
14. Final plat general notes. The final plat shall include the following
statements or covenants on the plans as prescribed by the Commission
or as required by the laws of the commonwealth and as outlined in
Appendix A of this chapter.
A. In the case of subdivision plans proposed for the sale of lots only,
the subdivider shall include a covenant on the final plat running
with the land assuring the implementation by the lot owners of the
approved erosion and sedimentation control plan.
B. A statement setting forth the manner in which the plan is in
compliance with or has been exempted from specifically listed
provisions of this article.
C. A statement that the number of lots created by this subdivision,
when added to previously approved lots, represent no more than 10
lots created by subdivision since May 15, 1972.
D. A statement that all protective covenants assigned by the developer
to this subdivision are on file with the Township.
E. A statement that no building permit or sewage permit will be issued
until the sewage facilities planning module has been approved by
the Department of Environmental Resources.
F. A statement that a Department of Transportation highway
occupancy permit is required of all driveways, sewer connections,
water connections or similar disturbances affecting designated
state highways and that such permit shall be approved and
obtained prior to access onto any state highway. Each final plat
shall be marked to indicate that access to the state highway shall
be only as authorized by a highway occupancy permit.
15. Final-plat specifications.
A. The final plat, at a minimum, shall include those requirements
listed for the sketch plan and preliminary plat submissions.
B. The final plat title and signature blocks shall be expanded to
include:
(1) The term final plat or "preliminary/final" clearly labeled.
§ 22-305 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-305
1:328
(2) Notarized signatures of the registered owner and any
equitable owner on each plat.
(3) Preparing surveyor and engineer signature block with an
original signature and seal on each plat.
(4) Township Engineer signature block.
(5) Planning Commission signature block.
(6) Board of Supervisors signature block.
(7) Dauphin County Planning Commission signature block.
(8) Dauphin County Recorder entry block.
(9) Notary public signature block with an, original signature and
seal on each plat.
(10) The date of submission including dates of any revision
requested by the reviewing agencies.
C. The final plat plan sheet shall include:
(1) The approved text of all protective covenants required by
either the subdivider or state or municipal authorities.
(2) A statement of property ownership and dedication of
improvements to the Township signed by the owner or the
equitable owner, as applicable.
(3) The original property deed book and page reference.
(4) The building setback lines for all lots within the subdivision or
development.
(5) Location of all existing utility and roadway easements.
(6) Location of all proposed fire hydrants.
(7) Location of all proposed wells.
(8) Location of all percolation and probe sites, both primary and
secondary sites.
(9) The proposed grading plan using two feet contours for all
subdivisions having more than 10 lots or having new streets
off-street parking, commercial buildings or other similar
improvements.
(10) Construction drawings, plans and profiles and design
calculations for all proposed roadways and parking areas,
including center line traverses, bearings and distances with all
horizontal and vertical alignment calculations generally
associated with such work.
§ 22-305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-305
1:329
(11) Construction details for roadway paving, curbing, gutters,
shoulders and sidewalks.
(12) Construction drawings, plans and profiles and design
calculations for all proposed sanitary sewer and storm sewer
lines.
(13) Construction details for sanitary sewer, water lines and storm
sewer pipe installation and trench backfilling.
(14) Construction details for inlets, manholes, endwalls, pavement
underdrains, spring boxes, valves and cleanout installations.
(15) A legend of all symbols and lines used to identify the
subdivision with a complete explanation of the meaning of each
symbol and line.
16. Record drawings — Developer submission.
A. Record drawings. Before the work related to construction and
installation of the required improvements will be accepted by the
Township or its representative, the developer must submit two sets
of prints and one set of Diazo Mylar reproducibles of all working
drawings modified as necessary to show the facilities as
constructed. Additionally, the developer shall submit a certified
copy of the associated electronic data file (disk). The disk shall be
in a format compatible with the current version of AutoCAD.
The submission shall include a certificate from the developer's
engineer with the record reproducibles attesting to the correctness
of all information shown on the drawings. The Township and the
Township authority intend to use prints of the reproducibles to
provide information to designers and contractors as required by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 287, as amended.
The record drawings must be approved by the Township authority
before the Township authority will release the sanitary sewer
improvements to the Township to perform the line acceptance
tests.
The certified correct copy of the record drawings in electronic data
file format (disk) compatible with the current version of AutoCAD
(no add-on packages) required to be submitted by the developer
shall be accompanied with a layering cross-reference for, at a
minimum, the following items:
Item Layer
Boundary
Property Line
Road Center Line
§ 22-305 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-305
1:330
Item Layer
Road R.O.W.
Road Edge
Curb
Sanitary Sewer Mainlines
Sanitary Sewer Manholes
Sanitary Sewer Laterals
Sanitary Sewer Force Mains
Sanitary Sewer Pumping Stations
Sanitary Sewer Grinder Pumps
Sidewalks
Signs
Contours
Wetlands
Fencing
Paving (Parking Lots/Driveways)
Storm Sewer Mainlines
Storm Sewer Manholes
Storm Sewer Inlets/Catch Basins
Stormwater Drainage Swales
Stormwater Detention Basins
Outlet Structures
Headwalls and Endwalls
Water Mains
Hydrants
Valves
Electric, Gas, Communication
Utilities
Easements
Text shall not be attached to the identified layers. Horizontal
(x and y coordinates) and vertical (z coordinates) data must be
provided for all items as appropriate. Invert elevations of
structures and utilities must also be provided. All layers must be
separate and distinct.
§ 22-305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-306
1:331
§ 22-306. Requirement to reference any subdivision or land
development plan to three fixed monuments established in South
Hanover Township. [Ord. No. 2007-1, § 1, 4/24/2007]
1. Three fixed monuments shall be referenced.
2. The three fixed monuments to be referenced are defined and attached
hereto.
§ 22-306 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-306
1:332
ARTICLE IIIA
Traffic Impact Study
§ 22-3A01. Traffic impact study required. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 301A,
7/12/1997; Ord. No. 2-2000, § 3, 9/26/2000]
All residential developments or subdivisions containing 20 or more dwelling
units or residential lots and all nonresidential developments (with the
exception of agricultural development) that generate 50 or more new peak
hour trips shall provide studies and reports in accordance with the
requirements of this section. All applicants with developments that do not
meet the above stated criteria shall submit the information required in
Subsection 2D.
1. The applicant is responsible for assessing the traffic impacts associated
with a proposed development that meets any condition set forth above.
The Township will review the applicant's assessment and supply
available data upon request to aid the applicant in preparing the study.
The applicant shall be responsible for all data collection efforts required
in preparing a traffic impact study including peak period turning
movement counts. In addition, the applicant is responsible for ensuring
that any submitted development plans meet the minimum state and
local standards for geometric design. The study shall be conducted by a
professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and having specific training in traffic and transportation engineering.
The study shall be prepared according to Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation guidelines and Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation sources must be referenced in the study. Upon
submission of a draft study, the Township may review the data sources,
methods and findings and provide comments in written form. The
applicant will then have the opportunity to incorporate necessary
revisions prior to submitting a final study.
2. Traffic impact study contents. A traffic impact study prepared for a
specific site development proposal shall follow the basic format shown
below. Additions or modifications should be made for a specific site,
when appropriate. This basic format allows for a comprehensive
understanding of the existing site, future conditions without the
proposed use and the impacts associated with the proposed
development plan. Following is a brief narrative for each section of a
traffic impact study:
A. Introduction. This section identifies the land use and transportation
setting for the site and its surrounding area.
(1) Site and study area boundaries. A brief description of the size
of the land parcel, general terrain features, legal right-of-way
lines of the highway, and the location within the jurisdiction
and the region should be included in this section. In addition,
the roadways that afford access to the site and are included in
the study area should be identified. The exact limits of the
§ 22-3A01 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-3A01
1:333
study area should be based on engineering judgement and an
understanding of existing traffic conditions at the site. In all
instances, however, the study limits must be mutually agreed
upon by the developer, its engineer and the Township.
(2) Site description. This section should contain a brief narrative
that describes the proposed development in terms of its
function, size and near and long term growth potential. This
description should be supplemented by a sketch which clearly
shows the proposed development within the site boundaries,
its internal traffic circulation pattern and the location and
orientation of its proposed access points.
(3) Existing and proposed site uses. The existing and proposed
uses of the site should be identified with reference to the
applicable zoning classification or classifications of the site. In
addition, identify the specific use upon which the study is
premised, since a number of uses may be permitted under the
existing ordinances.
(4) Existing and proposed nearby uses. Include a complete
description of the existing land uses in the vicinity of the site as
well as their current zoning. The applicant should also state
the proposed uses for adjacent land, if known. This latter item
is especially important where large tracts of underdeveloped
land are in the vicinity of the site and within the prescribed
study area. The Township will provide information to the
applicant regarding proposed subdivisions and land
developments of which the Township has knowledge and which
shall be included in the study by the applicant.
(5) Existing and proposed roadways and intersections. Within the
study area, describe existing roadways and intersections
(geometries and traffic signal control) as well as improvements
contemplated by government agencies.
B. Analysis of existing conditions. This section describes the results of
the volume/capacity analysis to be completed for the roadways and
intersections in the study area under existing conditions as well as
any data collection efforts that are required:
(1) Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes. Provide schematic
diagrams depicting daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes for
roadways within the study area. Turning movement and
mainline volumes are to be presented for the three peak hour
conditions (a.m., p.m. and site generated). Mainline volumes
are only required to reflect daily traffic volumes. Include the
source and/or method of computation for all traffic volumes.
Non-site traffic counts shall be based on actual counts not
more than two years old. Traffic may be required to be counted
seven days per week during, or adjusted to reflect the months
§ 22-3A01 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-3A01
1:334
of June through September in areas that are seasonably
affected by the local tourist industry.
(2) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Utilizing techniques
described in the most current version of the Transportation
Research Board Highway Capacity Manual, highway capacity
software, or derivative nomographs, include an assessment of
the relative balance between roadway volumes and capacity.
Perform the analysis for existing conditions (roadway and
geometry and traffic signal control) for the appropriate peak
hours.
(3) Level of service at critical points. Based on the results obtained
in the previous section, levels of service (A through F) are to be
computed and presented. This section should also include a
description of typical operating conditions at each level of
service. The recommended level of service analysis procedures
detailed in the most recent edition of the Transportation
Research Board Highway Capacity Manual must be followed.
This source must be referenced in the study.
C. Analysis of future conditions without development. This section
describes the anticipated traffic volumes without the proposed
development or subdivision request. The future year(s) for which
projections are made will be specified by the Township and will be
dependent on the timing of the proposed development.
(1) Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volume. Clearly indicate the
method and assumptions used to forecast future traffic
volumes in order that the Township can duplicate these
calculations. The schematic diagrams depicting future traffic
volumes will be similar to those described in Subsection 2B(1)
in terms of location and times (daily and peak hours).
(2) Volume/capacity analysis at critical locations. Describe the
ability of the existing roadway system to accommodate future
traffic (without site development). If roadway improvements or
modifications are committed for implementation, present the
volume/capacity analysis for these conditions.
(3) Levels of service at critical points. Based on the results
obtained in the previous subsection, determine levels of
service (A through F).
D. Trip generation. Identify the amount of traffic generated by the site
for daily and the three peak hour conditions (a.m., p.m. and site
generated). The trip generation rates used in this phase of the
analysis shall be justified and documented to the satisfaction of the
Township. The trip generation rates used for the proposed
development activity must be from the latest edition of the Trip
Generation Manual by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE). This
source must be referenced in the study.
§ 22-3A01 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-3A01
1:335
E. Trip distribution. Identify the direction of travel for site generated
traffic for the appropriate time periods. As with all technical
analysis steps, the basic method and assumptions used in this work
must be clearly stated in order that the Township can replicate
these results.
F. Traffic assignment. Describe the utilization of study area roadways
by site generated traffic. The proposed traffic volumes should then
be combined with anticipated traffic volumes from Subsection 3 to
describe mainline and turning movement volumes for future
conditions with the site developed as the applicant proposes.
G. Analysis of future conditions with development. This section
describes the adequacy of the roadway system to accommodate
future traffic with development of the site.
(1) Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes. Provide mainline and
turning movement volumes for the highway network in the
study area as well as driveway and internal circulation
roadways for the appropriate time periods.
(2) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Perform a volume/
capacity analysis for the appropriate peak hours for future
conditions with the site developed as proposed, similar to
Subsections 2B(2) and C(2).
(3) Levels of service at critical points. As a result of the volume/
capacity analysis, compute and describe the level of service on
the study area roadway system.
H. Highway capacity evaluation. All highway capacity evaluations
shall consider the overall intersection level of service and delay,
and evaluate each approach and movement to identify any
substantial values which need to be improved.
I. Recommended improvements.
(1) In the event that the analysis indicates unsatisfactory levels of
service will occur on study area roadways, a description of
proposed improvements to remedy deficiencies should be
included in this section. These proposals would not include
committed projects by the state and local jurisdictions that
were described in Subsection 1 and reflected in the analysis
contained in Subsections 2B and C.
(2) The proposed development access or driveway shall be
designated to provide level of service C or better in the design
year. Off-site intersections affected by the proposed
development should also provide a minimum level of service C
for the future design year with the development.
Improvements shall be proposed to provide future off-site
intersections level of service of at least C for the design year. In
§ 22-3A01 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-3A01
1:336
the event that the intersection/driveway accesses which are
the subject of the study do not meet warrants for a traffic
control device in accordance with the standards of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or cannot be
improved to achieve a level of service C due to existing
physical limitations, the proposed future intersection with
development shall provide no deterioration of level of service
beyond what is projected for the future no-build condition.
(a) Proposed recommended improvements. Describe the
location, nature and extent of proposed improvements to
assure sufficient roadway capacity. Provide preliminary
cost estimates, sources of funding, timing and likelihood of
implementation for the proposed improvement.
(b) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Another
iteration of the volume/capacity analysis will be described
which demonstrates the anticipated results of making
these improvements.
(c) Levels of service at critical points. As a result of the
revised volume/capacity analysis presented in the previous
section, present levels of service for the highway system
with improvements.
J. Conclusion. The last section of the report should be a clear concise
description of the study findings. This concluding section should
serve as an executive summary.
§ 22-3A01 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-3A01
1:337

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 22-401. Streets. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 501, 7/12/1977; Ord. No.
112-1980, 12/23/1980; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995; Ord. No. 1-1997,
§ 2, 1/28/1997; Ord. No. 11-1999, § 1, 12/14/1999; Ord. No. 1-2004,
2/10/2004]
1. General standards. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade
and location of all streets shall conform to the transportation plan in the
Comprehensive Plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing
and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience
and safety, and shall be appropriate to the proposed uses of the land to
be served by such streets. Where not shown on the Official Map or
Township Comprehensive Plan, the arrangement and other design
standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found herein.
A. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas.
Intersections having opposing streets shall be in alignment with
each other unless the Board of Supervisors, in its discretion,
determines that conditions do not permit such alignment, in which
event offset street intersections shall have a minimum distance
between opposing center lines of 125 feet.
B. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of
streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the proper
projection of streets to the boundaries of the tract to be subdivided.
C. All lands subdivided and/or all lots developed which are to be the
site of 10 or more dwelling units shall provide for at least two street
connections to existing public streets. Where the land to be
subdivided and/or developed adjoins two or more public streets,
the two street connections required by this section shall be made so
that not more than one connection is made to each of the adjoining
public streets.
D. Names of streets shall not duplicate or approximate existing or
platted streets names or approximate such names by the use of
suffices such as "lane," "way," "court," or "avenue." In approving
the names of streets, cognizance may be given to existing or platted
names within the postal delivery district served by the local post
office. New streets shall bear the same name or number of any
continuation or alignment with an existing or platted street.
E. Any new street which is proposed to connect to an existing public
street shall connect to a street with the lowest classification.
2. Intersection design.
A. Intersections with streets of the Township shall be at right angles
whenever possible and in no case shall be less than 75°.
§ 22-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-401
1:339
B. Intersections with streets of the Commonwealth shall comply with
the most recent revisions of PennDOT Publication 70M "Guidelines
for the Design of Local Roads and Streets" and meet all
requirements from PennDOT as part of the Highway Occupancy
Permit."
C. Intersections involving the junction of more than two streets and/or
driveways are prohibited.
D. Intersections shall maintain appropriate sight distance triangles
within which buildings, signs or obstructions higher than 3 1/2 feet
above the intersection center line shall be prohibited.
(1) New streets within a new subdivision shall have a triangle
measured 75 feet along each street center line.
(2) New driveways intersecting with streets of the commonwealth
shall meet the sight distance requirements identified in the
most recent revision of PaDOT Title 67, Chapter 44, "Access to
and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads."
E. Intersections having opposing streets not in alignment with each
other shall have a minimum distance of 125 feet between the
opposing center lines.
3. Cul-de-sac or dead end street design.
A. Unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Supervisors, culs-desac
or dead end streets designed to be so permanently shall not
exceed 600 feet in length.
B. Unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Supervisors, temporary
culs-de-sac will not be permitted. The developer shall provide
substantial documentation indicating that such cul-de-sac is
temporary and that the condition requiring the facility is to be
corrected within a reasonable period of time. Any street presented
by the developer to have a temporary cul-de-sac shall be designed
as if the roadway will be a collector street.
4. Street width design.
A. Minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths shall be as
follows:
§ 22-401 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-401
1:340
Cartway
Street
Type Row W/O Curbs With Curbs Shoulders
Arterial
Streets
As determined by the Board of Supervisors and
Planning Commission and following consultation with
PaDOT.
Collector
Streets
60' 24' 34' 6'
Minor
Streets
50' 22' 32' 6'
Cul-de-Sac 60' 24' 34' 6'
Cul-de-Sac
Diameter
120' 100' 110' 6'
Alley/
Service
Drive
22' 22'
B. Except where proven to be necessary, alleys shall not be permitted
in residential districts.
C. The dedication of half streets at the perimeter of new subdivisions
is prohibited.
D. The dedication of right-of-way along any existing street designated
as a Township road or road of the commonwealth shall include both
the frontage of the property being subdivided and the frontage of
any remaining parts of the parent parcel.
E. The Board of Supervisors, in its discretion, may determine that five
foot shoulders are acceptable for minor streets if the cartway is
extended to 24 feet.
F. Provision for additional street width by expanding the right-of-way
and/or cartway may be required by the Board of Supervisors in
specific cases for:
(1) Public safety and convenience.
(2) Parking in commercial and industrial areas and in areas of high
density development.
(3) Widening of existing streets where the width does not meet the
requirements of the preceding paragraphs.
5. Street geometry design.
A. Unless specifically authorized by the Board of Supervisors the
design speeds for streets in rolling terrain shall be as follows:
§ 22-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-401
1:341
(1) Collector: 40 mph.
(2) Minor: 30 mph.
B. Horizontal curves shall meet the minimum requirements
established by the most recent revision of the PaDOT Highway
Design Manual, Rural Design Criteria.
(1) Where connecting street lines deflect from each other more
than 10° at any one point, the line shall be connected with a
true, circular curve.
(2) Straight portions of the street must be tangent to the
beginning or end of curves.
(3) Except for minor streets, there shall be a 100 feet tangent
between reverse curves.
C. Vertical curves shall meet the minimum requirements established
by the most recent revision of the PaDOT Highway Design Manual,
Rural Design Criteria.
(1) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade when the
algebraic difference exceeds 1% and shall be designed for
maximum visibility.
(2) Where grades in an intersection grade exceed 7%, the
approaches to that intersection shall have a minimum sixtyfoot
level area, measured from the intersection of the center
lines, within which no grade shall exceed 4%.
(3) Profile grades of vertical curves shall meet the minimum and
maximum requirements established by this section with the
exception that when specific design conditions warrant, flatter
profile grades may be used if the resulting vertical curve meets
the minimum requirements.
D. Profile grades of streets shall not be less than 0.75% nor more than
the maximum requirements as follows:
Street Type Maximum Grade
Collector 7%
Minor 10%
Alleys 12%
Grades on minor streets and alleys that equal or exceed 10% shall
not be longer than 400 feet.
E. Sight distance shall be provided with respect to both horizontal and
vertical alignment. Measured along the center line, four feet above
grade, the distance will be as follows:
§ 22-401 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-401
1:342
Street Type Sight Distance
Collector 200'
Minor 100'
F. Roadway cross slopes shall meet the minimum requirements
established by the most recent revision of the PaDOT Highway
Design Manual, Rural Design Criteria.
6. Shoulder and curb design.
A. Unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Supervisors, new
subdivision streets shall provide cast-in-place concrete curbing at
the edge of the shoulder. Bituminous or temporary precast curbing
are not permitted alternatives. Curbing installation shall meet the
requirements described in Article V of this chapter.
B. Shoulders shall meet the width, thickness and material composition
described in Articles IV and V of this chapter. Shoulder cross slopes
shall be 6% away from the cartway.
C. The Board of Supervisors at its discretion and upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission and the engineer
may elect to waive the requirement for curbing and/or paved
shoulders.
7. Slope of banks along streets.
A. Fill embankment slopes shall be no steeper than two feet horizontal
for each vertical foot (2h:lv).
B. Cut excavation slopes shall be no steeper than two feet horizontal
for each vertical foot (2h:1 v).
8. Private streets.
A. Private streets shall be permitted only as a modification of the
requirements of this chapter granted by the Board of Supervisors.
In the event that the Board of Supervisors shall grant a
modification of requirements to permit a private street, it shall do
so subject to the following conditions:
(1) In fee simple lot developments, private streets shall not be
permitted to serve more than seven lots. Appropriate
restrictive covenants to run with the land providing for the
maintenance and use of the private street shall be prepared by
the developer, shall be submitted with the developer's
preliminary plan to the Township Planning Commission and
shall be approved or denied by the Township.
(2) In developments subject to common or joint use, such as
townhouse, patio homes, garden apartments and condominium
developments, the developer shall provide restrictive
§ 22-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-401
1:343
covenants running with the land with terms submitted to the
Township Planning Commission for review and approved or
denied by the Township providing for maintenance and repair
of the private streets by a legally constituted homeowners'
association or condominium association.
(3) A street that intersects with two public streets shall not be
permitted as a private street.
(4) The following notation shall appear on the recorded final plat:
"Approval by the Township of the subdivision as set forth
herein shall not subject the Township to liability for and it shall
not be responsible in any manner for the development of said
premises, the development of the subdivision, the subdivision
of the subject premises, nor for the installation, construction,
maintenance, repair, plowing or salting of the private streets
or private rights-of-way depicted on the subdivision plat."
B. The design standards for private streets shall be in accordance
with the design standards for streets as set forth in this article of
this chapter. In addition, permitted private streets shall conform to
the following standards:
(1) Private streets in fee simple lot developments.
(a) Private streets shall have a minimum private right-of-way
of 50 feet. The lot configurations and yard requirements
shall be as required by this chapter, Zoning Ordinance
[Chapter 27] and other applicable ordinances and
regulations. The private right-of-way shall act as the street
right-of-way for determining the required setbacks and lot
widths.
(b) For private streets that access three or fewer lots, the
developer may request relief from the design standards,
provided that the private street is constructed to a sound,
all weather surface reasonably smooth and free from mud,
dust or standing water. The design of such private street
shall be to standards approved by the Board of
Supervisors, which shall consult with the Township
Engineer and such approval shall be on a case by case
basis.
(2) In developments subject to common or joint use, such as
townhouses, patio homes, garden apartments and
condominiums:
(a) Private streets shall have a minimum private right-of-way
of 50 feet. The yard requirements shall be as required by
this chapter, Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] and other
§ 22-401 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-401
1:344
applicable ordinances and regulations. The private rightof-
way for determining the required setback.
(b) Parking for townhouses and other similar types of
dwellings shall be permitted to access the private streets
through individual parking spaces provided that the
spaces/driveways are in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27]
for single-family and two-family dwellings. The required 12
feet separations between driveways shall be measured
from edge of driveway to edge of driveway.
(c) Parking for multifamily residences other than townhouses
or similar dwelling types shall not have individual
driveways accessing private streets. The parking shall be
provided in a parking area/lot configuration with a dual
driveway access from the parking lot to the private street.
The driveway access to the parking areas/lots shall be in
accordance with the applicable sections of the South
Hanover Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27]. The
parking areas/lots shall be designed to allow for safe
vehicular movement and to allow uninhibited movement of
emergency vehicles.
(d) Parking for multifamily residences other than townhouses
or similar dwelling types shall not be within 25 feet of the
center line of a private street.
(e) Parking areas leading to private or public streets shall not
have an access drive of more than 100 feet in length unless
a provision is made for a second access drive to
accommodate emergency vehicles.
C. All private streets and improvements appurtenant thereto shall be
completed prior to final plan approval or, in lieu thereof, the
developer shall provide financial security to cover the costs thereof
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Municipalities Planning Code. All private streets and improvements
appurtenant thereto shall be subject to inspection by and the
approval of the Township Engineer to the same extent and in the
same fashion as required for public streets and improvements.
9. Multi-Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan.
A. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all subdivision and
land development activity occurring within that portion of South
Hanover Township situated within the Multi-Creek Watershed shall
comply with the provisions of the Multi-Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan for the Beaver Creek, Bow Creek,
Manada Creek and Kellock Run Water Sheds as approved by the
Dauphin County Board of Commissioners and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 22-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-401
1:345
§ 22-402. Easements. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 502, 7/12/1977; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 22-403. Blocks. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 503, 7/12/1977; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length and shall be of sufficient depth
to permit two tiers of lots, except as otherwise provided for herein.
§ 22-404. Lots. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 504, 7/12/1877; Ord. No.
97-1979, § 1, 5/22/1979; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 22-405. Erosion and sedimentation control. [Ord. No. 74-1977,
§ 505, 7/12/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
B. In areas of South Hanover Township not governed by an approved
Act 167 Stormwater Plan, all land development activities shall meet
the stormwater regulations as set forth in this chapter.
1. The minimum width of easements shall be 10 feet for underground
public utility facilities, overhead public utility facilities and drainage
facilities and, wherever possible, easements for public utilities shall be
centered on side or rear lot lines. Additional width may be required by
the supervisors on recommendation of the Commission and/or engineer
depending on the purpose and use of the easement.
2. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse, drainage
way, channel or stream, and of such width as will be adequate to
preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage or for the purpose of
widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such
drainage facilities, or for the purpose of installing a stormwater sewer.
1. The arrangement and other design standards of lots shall conform, to
the following requirements:
A. Layout of lots. Every lot shall abut a street and wherever any lot
within a proposed subdivision plan is to abut an existing street the
Board of Supervisors may require the developer to improve said
existing street in accordance with the design standards and
specifications set forth herein as shall be deemed appropriate by
the Board of Supervisors. Side lot lines should be substantially at
right angles or radial to streets.
B. Double frontage. Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except that,
where desired along collector streets, reverse frontage lots may
face on an interior street and back on such thoroughfares. Interior
lots having frontage on two streets shall be avoided except where
unusual conditions make it necessary.
§ 22-401 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-405
1:346
1. General standards.
A. In the event that any person shall intend to make changes in the
contour of any land or engage in earth moving activity, whether for
subdivision, land development or any purpose, such person, who is
required to obtain a permit, shall obtain such a permit from the
Department of Environmental Resources in accordance with the
requirements of the Rules and Regulations, Chapter 102, Erosion
Control, authorized under P.L. 1987, June 22, 1937, as amended or
supplemented.
B. Further, under the requirements noted above, any local governing
body which issues building permits shall notify the Department
immediately upon receipt of an application for a building permit
involving earth moving activity which affects five acres or more of
land.
C. A local governing body shall not issue a building permit to those
engaged in earth moving activities requiring a Department of
Environmental Resources permit until the Department has issued
the permit.
D. An erosion and sedimentation control plan must be prepared for a
single lot or more where subdivision, land development or other
earth moving activity is proposed. The plan must be submitted:
(1) As required by the rules and regulations of the Department of
Environmental Resources as noted in Subsection 1A above.
(2) As required by the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act 222,
July 31, 1970, as amended.
E. Such erosion and sedimentation control plan must be submitted to
the county conservation district directors for review, and a copy of
the plan and conservation district directors' review shall be
submitted to the Commission as part of the final plat submission
requirements of this chapter.
F. In the preparation of erosion and sedimentation plans, the person
preparing such plans shall consult the county conservation district
to determine the erosion and control measures needed to control
erosion and reduce sedimentation. The PaDER Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual will be helpful in the
preparation of such plans. Copies are available in the conservation
district offices in each county.
§ 22-405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-405
1:347

ARTICLE V
Construction Requirements
§ 22-501. General requirements. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 601, 7/12/
1977; Ord. No. 122-1982, § 1, 5/25/1982; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
§ 22-502. Notice of improvements. [Ord. No. 74-1977, 7/12/1977;
Ord. No. 92-1978, § 2, 12/12/1978; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
None of the improvements required by these regulations or by the Board
of Supervisors shall be commenced without first giving the Board of
Supervisors or its authorized representative or the engineer at least 24
hours' written notice of the time when such work shall commence and
without receiving from the Board of Supervisors or its authorized
representative or the engineer written authorization for commencement of
the required improvements. The place for filing the written notice is the
registered office of the Township.
§ 22-503. Monuments and markers. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 602, 7/12/
1977; Ord. No. 112-1980, 12/23/1980; Ord. No. 115-1981, § 21, 4/14/
1981; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. The developer shall notify the Township prior to starting grading,
beginning trench excavation, placing any formwork or paving or
performing other improvements to the subdivision or land
development.
2. The developer shall not start additional work or cover pipes, inlets or
manholes or begin any overlay until the previous work has been
completely inspected and approved by the Township Engineer.
3. No construction of any improvements shall begin until all erosion and
sedimentation control devices are in place and properly functioning.
1. Prior to approval of the subdivision's preliminary plat, the landowner/
developer shall have monuments placed at the following points:
A. The intersection of all street right-of-way lines.
B. At all corners and angles of the subdivision perimeter.
C. At the point of curve (PC) and/or point of tangent (PT) located on
the subdivision perimeter.
2. Prior to approval of the subdivision's final plat the landowner/developer
shall have monuments placed at the following points:
A. All other monuments not affected by street construction or final
grading.
§ 22-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-503
1:349
§ 22-504. Street surfacing. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 704, 7/12/1977;
Ord. No. 119A-1981, 12/22/1981; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
B. The developer shall include the placement of permanent
monuments as part of the financial security provisions of this
chapter.
3. Prior to acceptance of the completed roadway within the subdivision
the landowner-developer shall have monuments placed at the following
points:
A. All interior street right-of-way lines, including the intersection with
other right-of-way lines, all corners and angles.
B. All other monuments not placed at the final plat approval.
4. Markers shall be set:
A. At all internal subdivision corners except those monumented.
B. Markers shall not be placed at points specified for monuments.
C. Markers shall be in place prior to the time the parcel is offered for
sale.
5. Monument and marker specifications.
A. Monuments shall be:
(1) Size: six inches square or four inches in diameter.
(2) Length: 30 inches.
(3) Material: Precast concrete, cut stone or steel or cast iron pipe
filled with concrete.
(4) Scored plate: Copper plate, brass plate or dowel set in
concrete.
B. Markers shall be:
(1) Size: 3/4-inch square or 3/4-inch in diameter.
(2) Length: 15 inches.
(3) Material: Iron pipe, iron bar or steel base.
6. Monuments and markers must be placed in such a manner that the
scored or marked point coincides exactly with the intersection point of
those lines being referenced.
7. Monuments and markers shall be set so that the top is level with the
finished grade of the surrounding ground.
1. Subgrade.
§ 22-503 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-504
1:350
A. General.
(1) Construction of the subgrade shall be in accordance with § 210
of the PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408, as amended
and supplemented.
(2) Shape subgrade of roadways, intersections, approaches,
entrances and adjoining pedestrian walkways to no more than
0.10 of a foot above or below the design elevation.
B. Roadways.
(1) Excavate to roadway depths as required and cut drainage
channels and waterways as detailed on the drawings.
(2) Remove rock encountered in roadway excavation to a depth six
inches below finished subgrade elevation.
(3) Excavate unsuitable material. Refill such areas to required
elevation with acceptable material.
(4) Do not excavate beyond the finished grade line unless
authorized by the Township Engineer for the removal of
unsuitable material.
(5) Suitability of material for subgrade purposes shall be
determined by nonmovement of the material under compaction
equipment.
(6) Where the finished subgrade elevation is less than one foot
below the existing grade elevation the earth work shall be
considered embankment.
C. Embankment.
(1) Construction of embankment shall be in accordance with § 206
of the PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408, as amended
and supplemented.
2. Pavement.
A. Arterial roads or highways shall be governed by the current
revision of the PennDOT Pavement Policy Manual, Publication 242,
latest edition.
B. The Board of Supervisors, with the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, shall determine if collector street or arterial
street design is required as a direct result of subdivision
construction or by any proposed future expansion or phasing of the
subdivision. In either case, the applicant shall be responsible for
any additional roadway construction costs.
§ 22-504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-504
1:351
§ 22-505. Curbs, gutters and underdrains. [Ord. No. 74-1977, 7/12/
1977; Ord. No. 112-1980, 12/23/1980; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
C. All street construction, improvements and materials shall be in
accordance with the current revision of PennDOT Specifications,
Publication 408.
(1) The Board of Supervisors may, upon written request, permit
the developer to utilize an alternate base design as specified in
this chapter.
(2) No revisions or alterations of the roadway thickness shall be
permitted without the written approval of the Board of
Supervisors and shall comply with the minimum thickness and
structural coefficients specified by the most current revision of
the PennDOT Pavement Policy Manual, Chapter 9.
(3) No base course shall be placed along any proposed street
unless the subgrade material has been properly graded and
compacted and approved by the engineer.
D. Minor and collector streets.
(1) Primary pavement design:
Base Course 8": No. 2A Coarse Aggregate
Base Course 4 1/2": Bituminous Concrete Base Course (BCBC)
Wearing Course 1 1/2": ID-2; SRL-M
(2) Alternate design:
Base Course 10": No. 2A Coarse Aggregate
Binder Course 3": ID-2; SRL-L
Wearing Course 2": ID-3; SRL-M
E. Shoulders.
(1) The shoulder pavement design shall be the same design as the
cartway pavement design (Subsection 2D).
(2) A white dividing line shall divide shoulders and cartways in
accordance with PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408.
1. Vertical curbing shall be provided for all subdivisions where new streets
are proposed unless an alternate design has been requested in writing
from the Board of Supervisors and approval has been granted.
A. Vertical curbing will be plain cement concrete in accordance with
the most current revision of PaDOT Standards for Roadway
Construction, RC-64, and will be six inches wide at the top, seven
§ 22-504 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-505
1:352
§ 22-506. Driveway entrances. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 603, 7/12/1977;
Ord. No. 112-1980, 12/23/1980; Ord. No. 131-1986, § 1, 4/29/1986;
Ord. No. 2-1989, 4/25/1989; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
inches wide at the roadway surface and have a minimum overall
depth of 18 inches.
B. Mountable curbing, when approved by the Board of Supervisors,
will be plain cement concrete in accordance with the most current
revision of the PaDOT Standards for Roadway Construction, RC-65,
Type A, except that the minimum overall depth will be 18 inches.
C. Curbing having an alternate design shall be presented to the Board
of Supervisors for approval.
D. Curb cuts at driveway entrances will have a one inch reveal to the
final roadway surface.
(1) The curb cut will taper from the driveway edge to the design
height at the rate of three horizontal units for each vertical unit
(3h:1v).
(2) The curb cut width will be 20 feet maximum for residential
driveways and 40 feet for commercial or industrial driveways.
2. Gutters, or combination curbs and gutters shall be presented to the
Board of Supervisors for approval.
3. Underdrains and pavement base drains shall be installed on all roads
where subsurface water is a problem and shall include along hillside cut
sections, springs, swamps, marshy areas and other problem areas
designated by the Township Engineer. Underdrain shall be installed in
accordance with the most current revision of the PaDOT Specifications,
§§ 610 and 615, and the Standards for Roadway Construction, RC-30
and RC-31.
4. All curbs, curb cuts, gutters, underdrains, pavement base drains and
similar facilities shall be shown on the subdivision plat with the
necessary details and specifications.
1. Driveway entrances or aprons shall be paved for at least 50 feet from
the edge of the cartpath or from the cartpath to the right-of-way line,
whichever is greater, and shall be paved to their full width. In no case
shall the width of a driveway or apron be less than 10 feet for
residential developments and 20 feet for commercial or industrial
developments.
A. Driveway entrances along streets where curbs are not required
shall be constructed to provide proper drainage along the streets
by the continuation of gutters, swales or ditches. Such continuation
may be provided by having an approved pipe cross at such
driveway. Under no condition shall a driveway entrance be
§ 22-505 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-506
1:353
§ 22-507. Sidewalks, lights and alternate multi-use pedestrian
walkways/bicycle paths. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 607, 7/12/1977; Ord.
No. 112-1980, 12/23/1980; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995; Ord. No.
1-2003, § 1, 2/11/2003]
constructed in such a manner that the intended drainage pattern is
obstructed or dammed.
B. Driveway entrances along streets where curbs are not required
shall be constructed so that the driveway meets the edge of the
cartpath as a continuation of the slope from the crown of the street
for not less than five feet.
2. Where proposed driveways provide access onto a highway of
Pennsylvania (state route, Pennsylvania route or United States route)
the design of such driveway access and drainage shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of Pa-DOT and shall be subject to the
approval and issuance of permits by the Department.
3. Where a driveway or access road gives access to a Township road
approval by the Board of Supervisors shall be required.
4. Where a lot has frontage on a minor street and a collector or arterial
street, the driveway entrance shall be from the minor street and not
from the collector or arterial street. The driveway entrance shall not be
less than 55 feet from the curbline or cartpath of the collector or
arterial street.
1. Sidewalks.
A. The Board of Supervisors, on the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may require the installation of sidewalks in any
subdivision where the evidence indicates that sidewalks are
necessary for public safety and convenience.
B. Sidewalks shall be required in all R-MT zoning districts.
C. The developer shall install sidewalks whenever:
(1) The subdivision or land development plan has at least three
lots or the equivalent thereof.
(2) The subdivision or land development is within 1,000 feet of a
recorded subdivision or land development plan having
sidewalks.
D. Sidewalks shall be placed on both sides of any proposed street and
along the related side of any abutting state or Township street
abutting the subdivision.
E. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with PaDOT
Specifications and the Standards for Roadway Construction except
as modified by this chapter.
§ 22-506 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-507
1:354
(1) Sidewalks shall be constructed within the street right-of-way
and shall extend from the right-of-way line toward the curbline.
(2) Sidewalks widths shall be:
(a) Residential: four feet.
(b) Shopping centers, schools, recreation areas and similar
facilities: five feet.
2. Streetlights. Streetlights may be required by the Board of Supervisors.
When such requirement is determined, the developer shall consult with
the Planning Commission and the local power company regarding the
design and installation of such a system. The local power company's
specifications and regulations shall prevail.
3. Pedestrian walkways/bicycle paths.
A. The Board of Supervisors may grant a waiver to the requirement
for the installation of sidewalks if the applicant can demonstrate
that an alternate system of multi-use pedestrian walkways/bicycle
paths located off the street right-of-way would provide for a more
efficient path of pedestrian/bicycle circulation. This section shall
not be construed as a mechanism for developers to merely parallel
street right-of-way lines with pedestrian walkways, but shall be
construed as a mechanism where, owing to unusual physical
constraints or building placements, an on0site multi-use walkway/
bicycle path system would be beneficial. When authorized, the
multi-use walkways/bicycle paths shall meet the following
minimum standards:
(1) The walkway system shall be constructed of concrete or
asphalt and shall have a minimum width of six feet. Concrete
walkways shall be constructed to the same specifications as set
forth in this section for concrete sidewalks. Asphalt walkways
shall be constructed was a four inch compacted stone base, a
two inch ID 2 binder course and a 1/2 inch ID 2 wearing
course. A public access easement 12 feet in width shall be
provided for all such walkways.
(2) The walkway system shall provide direct access between each
property on the side of the street where the walkway is
constructed and the street system adjacent to those lots.
(3) Handicapped access curb cuts and ramps shall be provided at
pedestrian crosswalks to make the transition from street to
walkway easily negotiable for handicapped persons in
wheelchairs and for other persons who may have difficulty in
making step up or down from curb level to street level. These
facilities shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual,
Part 2, Chapter 6, "Pedestrian Facilities" - 1982 as the same
§ 22-507 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-507
1:355
§ 22-508. Sanitary sewers. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 604, 7/12/1977; Ord.
No. 119A-1981, 12/22/1981; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
may be amended from time to time, and in accordance with
PennDOT Roadway Construction Standards.
1. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary
sewer system if:
A. An existing public sanitary sewer system is within 1,000 feet of the
proposed subdivision.
B. Construction plans approved by the Township will provide
installation of public sanitary sewer facilities within 1,000 feet of
the proposed subdivision limits.
C. Such a system is not presently available but in the opinion of the
Board of Supervisors will become available in a reasonable time.
2. A sanitary sewer system design shall be designed by a registered
professional engineer and approved by the Township Engineer and
shall include at a minimum as the particular design conditions dictate:
A. Collector main installed within the cartway or approved right-ofway
lines of streets or within established sewer easements and
having adequate design to insure proper flow from the subdivision
to a collector pipe with sufficient capacity to accommodate all
upstream flow.
B. Lateral installations to the right-of-way of streets, lot or parcel
property lines or to sewer easements.
C. Sewage treatment plants, pumping stations and interceptor lines.
D. Design criteria shall be determined using the most current revision
of the PaDER Sewage Facilities Planning Module.
3. The Township Engineer will insure that said sewer system coordinates
and has congruity with the Township's overall comprehensive sewer
plan. The engineer shall review and approve all sanitary sewer
construction plans, documents and specifications proposed by the
developer and shall inspect the construction of all sanitary sewer
facilities which at a minimum will include transmission lines,
interceptors, pumping stations and treatment plants.
4. All system termini shall be kept in such a manner that will insure that
all mains, laterals and house connections shall be watertight pending
connection with the public sanitary sewer system.
5. Where the provisions of § 22-508, Subsection 1, do not apply to a
proposed subdivision and the proposed subdivision is located within a
sanitary sewer district as identified by the South Hanover Township
Official Sewage Plan Update, Act 537, dated May 9, 1989, and any
§ 22-507 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-508
1:356
§ 22-509. Public water supply. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 604, 7/12/1977;
Ord. No. 119A-1981, 12/22/1981; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
revisions or supplements thereto, as approved by the PaDER, the
subdivider shall:
A. For all such subdivisions comprised of four lots or less, pay a fee in
an amount as established, from time to time, for each lot, or such
other amount as the Board of Supervisors may fix by resolution
hereafter from time to time, to the Township. Said fee shall be
retained by the Township and credited toward the sewer
connection fee due to be paid by the owner of the lot at the time a
public sanitary sewer system becomes available to the lot and the
lot owner is required to connect to such system.
B. For all such subdivisions of five lots or more, the subdivider shall
provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system in
compliance with the provisions of § 22-508, Subsection 2, above;
provided, however, that if the Board of Supervisors determines that
the installation of such sanitary sewers is not practical due to the
unavailability or excessive costs to secure the necessary
engineering data for the proper location and installation of such
sanitary sewer system or if the Board of Supervisors finds the
installation is impractical for any other reason, the developer shall
pay a fee to the Township in such amount as determined by the
Township Engineer to reasonably represent the cost, as of the date
of submission of the final subdivision plan, to provide and install
the following facilities, collector main and lateral installations to
the right-of-way lines of streets, lot or parcel property lines or
sewer easement right-of-way lines, whichever is applicable.
(1) Such monies shall be retained by the Township and applied
toward the costs of installing a public sanitary sewer system in
the area of the subdivision at such time as a sanitary sewer
system is extended to the subdivided area.
(2) When a public sanitary sewer system is installed and capped by
the applicant or when a fee in lieu of installation of such system
has been paid the applicant may also install on-site sewage
disposal facilities provided that the system is designed to
provide connection to the public sewer when it becomes
operable.
1. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete public
water supply if:
A. An existing public water supply system is within the established
minimum distance of the proposed subdivision.
§ 22-508 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-509
1:357
B. Construction plans approved by the Township will provide
installation of public water supply facilities within the established
minimum distance of the proposed subdivision limits.
C. Such a system is not presently available but, in the opinion of the
Board of Supervisors, will become available in a reasonable time.
2. A public water main supply system design shall be designed by a
registered professional engineer and approved by the Township
Engineer and shall include, at a minimum, as the particular design
conditions dictate.
3. Water supply mains shall be installed within the cartway or approved
right-of-way lines of streets or within established easements and shall
have adequate design to insure the proper supply to the subdivision
from a main with sufficient capacity to accommodate all upstream flow.
4. For purposes of this section the term "equivalent residential
consumption" (ERC) shall mean the amount of water typically used by a
residential unit during a one-day period. Each ERC shall constitute up
to 160 gallons per day. Each residential or nonresidential use shall have
a minimum of one ERC. Each fraction over 160 gallons per day will be
considered as an additional ERC.
5. All nonresidential land development plans, other than agricultural, shall
submit a report to the Board of Supervisors that will identify each type
of water use and the anticipated daily requirement.
6. Each residential and nonresidential development shall be connected to
an existing public water supply system if the service is available and is
within the following distances:
ERC Value Distance
1 ERC 200 feet
2 ERC 400 feet
3 ERC 600 feet
4 ERC 800 feet
5 ERC 1,000 feet
6 ERC 100 additional feet for each ERC
7. Where a public water supply system is to be provided to an area within
a ten-year period as indicated in an Official Map, Comprehensive Plan
or other official document the Board of Supervisors may require
installation of dry main lines within either the street right-of-way or any
easement established for such purpose.
8. Any proposal for a new public water supply, extensions to existing
supply systems, installation of dry lines or other community system as
defined by the most current PaDER Public Water Supply Manual shall
§ 22-509 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-509
1:358
§ 22-510. Stormwater drainage. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 605, 7/12/
1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
be approved by the Township or the officially designated governmental
agency.
9. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public
water supply system may exist unless such actual or potential crossconnections
are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the public
water supplier.
10. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed prior to the
first branch line leading off each service line to a consumer's water
system where, in the judgment of the Township or the public water
supplier, an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system
exists. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a consumer's water system where the following
conditions exist:
A. Systems having an auxiliary water supply.
B. Systems where any substance is handled in such a fashion that an
actual or real hazard is created.
C. Systems having internal cross-connections that are not correctable.
D. Systems where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions, it is impossible to make a cross-connection survey.
E. Systems having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
1. Whenever the evidence available to the Board of Supervisors or
recommendation by the Planning Commission indicates that natural
surface drainage is inadequate, the subdivider shall install storm
sewers, culverts and related facilities as necessary to:
A. Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
B. Ensure the drainage of all low points along the line of streets.
C. Intercept stormwater runoff along the line of streets at intervals
related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
D. Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal
facilities.
2. A stormwater system shall be designed by a registered professional
engineer and approved by the Township Engineer and shall include, at a
minimum, as the particular design conditions dictate:
A. Stormwater design criteria will utilize the most recent revisions of
the PADOT Highway Design Manual and Standards for Roadway
§ 22-509 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-510
1:359
§ 22-511. Conditions for acceptance of portions of streets. [Ord. No.
74-1977, 7/12/1977; Ord. No. 99-1979, 10/23/1979; Ord. No.
115-1981, § 3, 4/14/1981; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The Board of Supervisors may accept a portion of a street not less than 500
feet in length for maintenance and operation if all improvements thereon
have been completed, and if a financial security of the same type previously
described in this chapter has been posted for an amount not to exceed 15%
of the original cost of construction and for a maximum of 18 months from
the date of acceptance. If such acceptance is denied, the reason or reasons
therefore shall be set forth in writing and given to the applicant within 30
days of such denial.
Construction and also this chapter with regard to stormwater
management.
B. Where existing storm sewers having adequate discharge capacity
are readily accessible, the subdivider must connect the stormwater
facilities to those existing storm sewers.
C. The design of storm drainage facilities shall give special
consideration to preventing excess runoff onto adjacent properties
and shall comply with the stormwater management requirements
of this chapter.
§ 22-510 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-511
1:360
ARTICLE VI
Stormwater and Groundwater Management Plan
§ 22-601. Stormwater management; general provisions. [Ord. No.
74-1977, 7/12/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995; Ord. No. 3-1997,
§ 1, 12/9/1997]
1. The purpose of this article is to promote the general health, welfare and
safety of the community by regulating the modification of the natural
terrain and alteration of existing drainage from new subdivision and
development in order to control erosion and sedimentation of soils and
to preserve stream channels through the design, construction and
maintenance criteria of permanent on-site stormwater management
facilities. This section does not imply that areas within or outside any
identified flood-prone area will be free from flooding or flood damage.
2. Act 167 of October 4, 1978, the Stormwater Management Act,
authorizes the regulation of land and water use for flood control and
stormwater management purposes, imposing duties and conferring
powers on the Department of Environmental Resources, municipalities
and counties and providing for enforcement. In addition, the
Department of Environmental Resources Rules and Regulations, Title
25, Chapter 102, Erosion Control, imposes requirements on
earthmoving activities which create accelerated erosion and which
require planning and implementation of effective soil conservation
measures. Refer to Chapter 26, Stormwater Management, § 26-610, et
seq.
3. Applicability. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business
or corporation to undertake any of the following activities without
written approval from the Township.
A. Earth disturbing activity affecting five acres or more (except
agricultural activity when operated in accordance with a
conservation plan approved by the Dauphin County Conservation
District).
B. Diversion of piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
C. Installation of a stormwater collection system or appurtenances
thereto.
D. Placement of fill, structure or pipes in the floodplain as designated
on the official floodplain map and as may be documented by other
pertinent sources of floodplain information used by the Township.
E. Land development.
F. Land subdivision.
G. Installation of impervious cover as follows:
§ 22-601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-601
1:361
(1) Any earth disturbance activity on a property where 60% of the
property is already covered with impervious surfacing and the
area disturbed is 1,000 square feet or more.
(2) Any earth disturbance activity where less than 60% of the
property is covered with impervious surfacing and the area to
be disturbed will be 10% or more of the property's total area or
7,500 square feet, whichever is less.
4. Municipal liability. The degree of stormwater management sought by
the provisions of this section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes. This section shall not create liability on the part of the
Township, any appointed or elected official of the Township, the
Dauphin County Conservation District or any officer, engineer or
employee thereof for any erosion, sedimentation or flood damages that
result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
5. Plan content. The erosion and sedimentation control/stormwater
management plan (hereafter referred to as "ESC/SWM") shall consist of
maps and a narrative prepared in accordance with Pennsylvania
Regulations, Title 25, Chapter 102, Erosion Control, Department of
Environmental Resources Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual and shall further include the requirements of this
section. The ESC/SWM shall be prepared under the direction of a
professional engineer registered in Pennsylvania with experience in
ESC/SWM. For subdivision and land development activities the plan
shall be included as part of the total land subdivision and development
submission(s) to the Township. The ESC/SWM plan shall include:
A. A general statement of the project, including the date the project is
expected to begin and expected date of final stabilization
completion.
B. A 7 1/2 minute USGS topographic map, or equivalent, clearly
showing the project location and its watershed(s), and additional
maps, as necessary, to clearly show the delineation of all drainage
areas, both on-site and contributing off-site areas, used to develop
all hydrological runoff calculations for all stormwater management
and drainage facilities.
C. Topographic maps of the project prepared at a maximum scale of
one inch is 100 feet and including storm drainage facilities,
stormwater management facilities, areas of cut and fill and limits of
earth disturbance.
(1) Subdivision plan showing boundaries, lots, streets, curbing,
stormwater inlets and pipes, parking areas and recreation
areas.
(2) Areas of cut and fill with limits of earth disturbance clearly
shown.
§ 22-601 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-601
1:362
(3) Stormwater management facilities.
(4) Existing proposed contours at two-foot intervals.
(5) Existing floodplains, lakes, streams, springs, ponds and
drainage easements.
D. The staging of earth disturbance activities must be described in the
narrative, detailing the sequence of erosion control installation in
relation to the improvements. Erosion controls shall be in place
prior to beginning any earth disturbance.
E. Temporary and permanent control measures and facilities,
including holding facilities and swales, must be shown on the map
and described in the narrative. Drainage easements and access
roads shall be required from detention ponds/retention ponds to
public roads when said ponds do not abut a public street.
F. A maintenance program for control facilities must be included in
the narrative, describing the disposal method of materials removed
from the control facilities or from the subdivision.
6. Runoff calculations for control facilities. Design storm frequencies for
stormwater management measures/facilities shall be as follows:
A. Unless otherwise directed by the Township Engineer, the design
storm for stormwater management facilities shall be the ten-year,
twenty-four-hour storm event. The stormwater management
facilities shall be designed to reduce the peak rate of stormwater
runoff discharging from the site, during a ten-year postdevelopment
storm event, to less than or equal to the peak rate of
stormwater runoff discharging from the site during a two year
predevelopment storm event.
B. The stormwater calculations shall include the entire drainage area
contributing to or draining through the site.
C. The primary control structure in a stormwater management facility
shall be designed to pass the design storm without any discharge
over the emergency spillway. The emergency spillway shall be
designed to pass the one-hundred-year post-development storm,
while maintaining a minimum of one foot freeboard.
D. All projects meeting the requirements of the NPDES individual
construction permit shall use the design criteria established by
Title 25, Chapter 102, Erosion Control.
7. Methods of analysis.
A. Watersheds having five acres or more shall calculate the design
storm peak runoff using the Soil Cover Complex Method of the Soil
Conservation Service, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,"
Technical Release No. 55 (TR-55), dated June 1986 or later.
§ 22-601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-601
1:363
B. Watersheds having less than five acres may calculate the design
storm peak runoff using the rational method to determine peak
runoff rate only if this method provides results that compare
reasonably to the TR-55 method and will be utilized to design
isolated, small area stormwater inlets, pipes, culverts or drainage
channels within the site. The rational method shall not be used in
the analysis of stormwater runoff from the subdivision or
development in its entirety or in conjunction with the design of any
stormwater management facility except as approved by the
Township Engineer.
(1) The runoff coefficient (C) shall be determined from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual,
Part 2, Highway Design, Chapter 10.
(2) The rainfall intensity (I) shall be determined from Intensity-
Duration-Frequency (I-D-F) Curve data presented by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual,
Part 2, Highway Design, Chapter 10.
C. Open channel hydraulic designs shall be calculated using
Manning's equation.
D. Retention ponds/detention ponds shall be designed using standard
engineering hydraulic procedures established to determine flood
routing.
E. Time of concentration shall be computed by the segmental
approach where the time of concentration is the sum of the
segments for sheet flow, shallow flow and channel flow. Sheet flow
will be that segment in the upper reaches of the watershed where
flow paths are poorly defined and less than 300 feet in length.
Shallow flow will be that segment when flow is assumed to be onetenths
foot deep and continues to the point that an established
channel begins.
F. Design storms shall be events having a period of 24 hours of
rainfall and a Type II distribution and described in the U.S.
Department of Commerce Technical Paper No. 40 or as follows:
Frequency
Rainfall
(inches)
2 year 2.95
5 year 3.90
10 year 4.75
25 year 5.10
50 year 5.90
100 year 6.50
§ 22-601 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-601
1:364
8. Construction standards of ESC/SWM facilities shall be in accordance
with the submitted plans, drawings and specifications as they have
been approved by the Board of Supervisors. Construction standards as
outlined by the most recent revision of the Pennsylvania Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Program Manual shall be the minimum acceptable
standard.
A. Grassed waterways may be utilized in place of conduit piping in
those areas where soil conditions allow recharge of ground water.
The usage of grassed waterways is not permitted in year round or
seasonably high ground water table areas unless provision is made
to handle long-duration flows. Subsurface drainage or stone
centered waterways are permissible alternates in high water table
regions.
B. In areas underlain with limestone geology, ponds shall be limited to
the detention (self-draining) type unless the developer can show a
special need for retention. Retention ponds, if permitted, shall have
a geomembrane liner approved by the Township Engineer.
(1) Detention ponds shall be prohibited in areas of known
sinkholes unless the pond design includes an approved
geomembrane liner.
(2) In the event a sinkhole appears in any pond or channel prior to
acceptance by the Township, the subsidence shall be cleaned
and repaired and geomembrane liner installed. Geomembrane
designs shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for
approval prior to its installation.
C. All erosion control devices shall be in place prior to beginning
construction of any pond.
D. Ponds having slopes steeper than 3:1 side slopes shall be enclosed
by a minimum six feet high chain-link fence.
E. The Board of Supervisors may waive, when petitioned in writing,
requirements for ponds in areas within close proximity of a
floodplain if the pond will pose an obstruction to stream flooding.
F. Ponds shall have the following features, at a minimum:
(1) Principal spillway outlet structure designed, at a minimum, to
release the predevelopment storm.
(2) Antivortex devices, anti-seep collars, clean-out devices and
trash racks when specified.
(3) Emergency spillway.
(4) Sediment retention device(s).
(5) Protected discharge channels for each spillway.
§ 22-601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-601
1:365
G. Pond bottoms shall be graded to a smooth texture and slope
sufficiently in the direction of the principal spillway to insure
positive flow.
9. Maintenance of all ESC/SWM facilities during development of a project
shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or landowner and shall
include but not be limited to:
A. Removal of silt from all sediment basins, traps or other structures
or measures when the level reaches the identified clean-out or
when 30% of the design capacity is filled with silt and sediment.
B. Periodic maintenance of temporary control facilities as cleaning,
mowing, repairing or replacement as the condition of the device
dictates.
C. Establishment or re-establishment of permanent vegetation using
lime, fertilizer, seeding or sodding and mulch to restore bare or
scoured areas.
D. Installation of necessary controls to correct unforeseen problems
caused by storm events within the established design frequencies.
E. Removal of all temporary measures and installation of permanent
measures upon completion of the project.
10. Except where the Board of Supervisors has specifically exempted a
project from maintenance of erosion controls and prior to the
acceptance of a completed project by the Township that project shall be
properly maintained to include:
A. Liming and fertilizing vegetated channels and other areas
according to the current Department of Environmental Resources
"Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual."
B. Re-establishment of vegetation by seeding and mulching or sodding
of scoured areas or areas where vegetation has not been
successfully established.
C. Mowing to maintain adequate stands of grass and to control weeds.
Chemical weed control may be used if state and local regulations
are met. Selection of seed mixtures should reflect the type of
maintenance desired by the Township and the Dauphin County
Conservation District.
D. Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt or
sediment to the design parameters submitted in the project's
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
11. It shall be the responsibility of the Township to inspect all permanent
facilities and determine that corrective action is taken where and when
necessary.
§ 22-601 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-602
1:366
§ 22-602. Stormwater management; administration. [Ord. No.
74-1977, 7/12/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. An ESC/SWM plan for any activity and determined to be complete in
detail, shall be submitted for acceptance, with the appropriate fees, to
the Township at a regularly scheduled Township Planning Commission
meeting.
2. In the case of subdivision and land development activities, the
submission requirements and procedures of the ESC/SWM plan shall be
in accordance with the applicable sections of this chapter.
A. The ESC/SWM plan will be submitted to the Township with the
subdivision plan and will be made a part of the final plat reflecting
all review comments made by the Board of Supervisors, Dauphin
County Planning Commission and the Dauphin County
Conservation District.
B. Evidence shall be submitted that the Dauphin County Planning
Commission and the Dauphin County Conservation District has
reviewed the plan and that their review comments have been
acknowledged by the developer.
C. Recommendations of the Planning Commission will be considered
by the Board of Supervisors in any action considered for
subdivision and land development plans.
3. The final ESC/SWM plan approved by the Township shall become a
supplement to the final subdivision and land development plan and be
subject to all rules, regulations and procedures pertaining thereto, as
well as requiring the landowner/developer to provide financial security
to the Township as stipulated in Act 247 (Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code).
4. In the case of all other land disturbance activities, the submission
requirement and procedures for a plan shall be in accordance with
Pennsylvania Regulations, Title 25, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control."
5. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to undertake any
earthmoving activity on any property except as provided in the ESC/
SWM plan approved pursuant to this article. It shall also be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the ESC/SWM plan
pursuant to this article or to allow the property to remain in a condition
which does not conform to the approved ESC/SWM plan.
6. The following activities are specifically exempt from planning
provisions of this article:
A. Land disturbance associated with existing one- and two-family
dwellings.
B. Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
§ 22-602 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-602
1:367
§ 22-603. Groundwater management; general provisions. [Ord. No.
74-1977, 7/12/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
C. Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan
approved by the Dauphin County Conservation District.
1. The applicant shall provide an adequate and potable water supply and
distribution system to service the proposed subdivision or land
development through one of the following methods, listed in the order
of preference:
A. Connection to a public water supply system where such a system is
within the minimum distance requirements established by Article V
of this chapter. A distribution system shall be designed to furnish
an adequate supply of water to each lot. A copy of the approval of
such system by the appropriate public authority or utility company
shall be submitted with the final plan.
B. Where such a public water supply system is farther than the
established minimum distances to the proposed development and
the Board of Supervisors deems it reasonably probable that further
growth in the area will require an expansion of the existing public
water system, the feasibility of constructing a separate water
supply system shall be investigated and a report setting forth the
findings shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors for their
review and approval.
(1) Approval of a separate water supply system shall be contingent
upon the developer providing assurances to connect to public
water when the system is within the minimum distances to the
development limits.
(2) If the Board of Supervisors grants approval for a separate
water supply system, the applicant shall file an application for
a public water system permit which shall be reviewed and
approved by the Department of Environmental Resources and
suitable agreements including financial guarantees for
installation and establishment of ownership, operation and
maintenance of the system.
2. All water supply systems in floodplains or flood-prone areas, whether
public or private, shall be floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
3. In subdivisions or land developments proposing to utilize an on-lot well
water supply, the Board of Supervisors reserves the right to require the
applicant to drill and test a well(s) and have a report prepared on the
quality and quantity of ground water found at the site. Such
requirement for a test well(s) and report may be invoked at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors in situations where:
§ 22-602 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-603
1:368
§ 22-604. Groundwater management; on-lot wells. [Ord. No.
74-1977, 7/12/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
A. The area is known to have actual water yield and/or quality
problems.
B. The Pennsylvania State Water Plan or U.S. Geological Survey Water
Resource Reports or other technical study indicates a potential low
yield area or inadequate water quality area.
C. The development consists of 15 proposed lots or units having an
average density of one unit per acre or involves a total water
withdrawal exceeding 10,000 gallons per day from within the
development limits.
1. When individual on-lot wells are proposed in a subdivision, the
subdivider shall either install such facilities or shall place a restriction
in the deed of each lot indicating that no building intended for
residential, commercial or industrial use shall take place on said lot
until such time that a satisfactory well is provided or as a condition of
the sale of each parcel within the same subdivision or land
development, that the facilities can be installed by the purchaser of
such lot and have minimum yield of potable water of 500 gallons per
day prior to sale. The owner or subdivider shall provide the Board of
Supervisors with proof of compliance with this section.
2. An individual on-lot well shall be subject to the following standards:
A. Construction of wells for individual wells shall conform to the most
recent revision of the DER Manual "Construction Standard,
Individual Water Supplies."
B. The source of supply shall be from a water bearing formation not
less than 25 feet from the ground surface.
C. Cap wells shall be located at a point free from flooding and at a
higher elevation and at the following minimum isolation distances
to existing or potential sources of pollution:
Source
of
Pollution
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
(1) Lakes, ponds, streams or other
surface waters
25
(2) Storm drains, retention ponds,
stormwater stabilization ponds
25
(3) Preparation area or storage area
for hazardous spray materials,
fertilizers or chemicals, salt piles
300
§ 22-603 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-604
1:369
Source
of
Pollution
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
(4) Gravity sewer lines and drains
carrying domestic sewage or
industrial waste (except when the
sewer line is cast iron pipe with
either watertight lead caulked
joints or joints filled with neoprene
gaskets or if solvent welded
Schedule 40 (or the SDR equivalent
or better) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
pipe; then the distance will be 10
feet)
50
(5) Sewage drains carrying domestic
sewage or industrial waste under
pressure (except welded steel pipe
or concrete encased pipe; then the
distance will be 10 feet)
50
(6) Septic tanks or aerobic tanks 50
(7) Subsurface sewage disposal
systems, elevated sand mounds
100
(8) Sewage seepage pits, cesspools 100
(9) Farm silos, barnyards 100
(10) Rainwater pits 25
(11) Spray irrigation site, sewage
sludge and septage disposal sites
300
(12) Property lines of right-of-way 10
(13) Dedicated road right-of-way 15
(14) Building foundations (except for
buildings intended solely for water
well or water well pump
enclosures)
(15) Any other source of pollution not
described in this listing shall have a
minimum isolation distance
determined by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 22-604 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-604
1:370
ARTICLE VII
Mobile Home Parks
§ 22-701. Purpose, authority and jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 74-1977,
§ 701, 7/12/1977]
The purpose, authority and jurisdiction for land development as a mobile
home park are the same as contained in Article I of this chapter.
§ 22-702. Location of mobile homes. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 703, 7/12/
1977]
Mobile homes shall be permitted to be placed upon land other than in a
mobile home park following removal of the tongue and the installation of full
skirting around the mobile home and upon the compliance with the same
provisions and restrictions of this chapter that are placed upon the erection
of a single-family dwelling on the same parcel of land. The parking of only
one unoccupied mobile home in an accessory private garage is permitted
provided that no utilization is made of the interior of the mobile home for
living quarters, business practices or any other purpose while said mobile
home is so stored without the necessity of complying with the previous
restriction.
§ 22-703. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking. [Ord. No.
117-1981, § 1, 8/11/1981]
Emergency or temporary stopping or parking of a mobile home is permitted
on any street, alley or highway for no longer than six hours subject to any
other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the
traffic and parking regulations or ordinance [see Chapter 15] as for that
street, alley or highway.
§ 22-704. Restrictive covenants prohibiting mobile homes. [Ord. No.
122A-1982, § 1, 2/23/1982]
The validity of restrictive covenants prohibiting the placement of a mobile
home or homes on any piece of property located in South Hanover Township
shall not be affected by this chapter. In the event that a landowner,
protected by restrictive covenant, files proof of the same in the form of
a copy of a recorded deed or recorded covenant to the land upon which
the placement of a mobile home is prohibited by such covenant, including
the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County recording reference, with the
Township, then this filing shall have the effect of prohibiting the location of
a mobile home on a single-family lot as provided in § 22-702 of this article
and the prohibiting of the issuance of a building permit for the placement of
a mobile home on the property.
§ 22-701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-705
1:371
§ 22-705. Subdivision restrictions. [Ord. No. 122A-1982, § 1, 2/23/
1982]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the placement of a
mobile home in a major subdivision of 10 lots or more, that is specifically
designated by reference on the subdivision plan as being intended for
residential dwellings only, shall be prohibited.
§ 22-706. Definitions. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 703, 7/12/1977; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
For the definition of words related to land development as a mobile home
park, the definitions contained in Article II of this chapter shall apply, for
convenience, the definitions related to mobile homes are repeated here.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
§ 22-707. Plat requirements and processing procedure. [Ord. No.
74-1977, § 704, 7/12/1977]
The plat requirements and processing procedure for land development as a
mobile home park shall be in accordance with the requirements contained
in Article III of this chapter.
§ 22-708. Permits required to operate or maintain mobile home
park. [Ord. No. 117-1981, § 1, 8/11/1981; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
1. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person, firm
or corporation to operate or maintain any premises, area, tract or piece
of land for use as a mobile home park, without first obtaining a permit
from the Township Code Enforcement Officer and paying the fee herein
prescribed.
2. Where a mobile home park is proposed, a certification of registration
shall be obtained from the Department of Environmental Resources in
accordance with Title 25, Chapter 179.
§ 22-705 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-709
1:372
§ 22-709. Submission of plan, description and map. [Ord. No.
117-1981, § 1, 8/11/1981]
§ 22-710. Design standards. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 705, 7/12/1977;
Ord. No. 117-1981, 8/11/1981]
1. Any person, firm or corporation, from and after the passage of this
chapter, proposing to operate or maintain any premises, area or tract or
piece of land for use as a mobile home park shall first submit to the
Township Code Enforcement Officer a plan for the layout and design
thereof, including a legal description and map clearly setting forth the
following information:
A. The extent and area to be used for park purposes.
B. Driveways, entrances and exits, roadways and walkways.
C. Location of sites for mobile homes.
D. Location and number of proposed sanitary conveniences, including
proposed toilets, washrooms, laundries, laundry drying space and
utility rooms.
E. Method and plan of sewage disposal.
F. Method and plan of garbage and solid waste disposal.
G. Plan of water supply.
H. Plan of electric lighting.
I. Children's play area.
1. The arrangement and other design standards of streets, easements,
blocks, lots, recreation areas and erosion and sedimentation control
shall be in accordance with the requirements contained in Article IV of
this chapter except as specified below:
A. Street widths in mobile home parks.
(1) The minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths of public
or private streets shall be as follows:
Street Right-of-Way and Cartway Widths
Street Type Width
Collector Streets
Right-of-way 60 feet
Cartway 22 feet
Minor Streets
Right-of-way 50 feet
§ 22-709 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-710
1:373
Street Right-of-Way and Cartway Widths
Street Type Width
Cartway 22 feet
(2) Provision for additional street width (right-of-way, cartway, or
both) may be required when determined to be necessary by the
Board of Supervisors upon the recommendation of the
Commission in specific cases for:
(a) Public safety and convenience.
(b) Where the number of mobile homes proposed to be located
in a mobile home park exceeds 100 units.
(c) Widening of existing streets where the width does not
meet the requirements of the preceding subsections.
B. Lots in mobile home parks.
(1) On land laid out as a mobile home park, not served by public or
mobile home park water system and public or park sewerage
collection and treatment system, the land meeting the
necessary percolation and soil survey requirements and
approved by the Department of Environmental Resources, the
lots shall not be less than 100 feet measured at the minimum
required setback line not less than 15,000 square feet in area,
per mobile home unit, exclusive of streets and other public
uses with a minimum depth of 40 feet.
(2) On land laid out as a mobile home park, served by public or
mobile home park water system and not by public or park
sewerage collection and treatment system, the land meeting
the necessary percolation and soil survey requirements and
approved by the Department of Environmental Resources, the
lots shall not be less than 85 feet wide measured at the
minimum required setback line, not less than 10,000 square
feet in area, per mobile home unit exclusive of streets and
other public uses, with a minimum depth of 40 feet.
(3) On land laid out as a mobile home park, served by both public
or mobile home park water system and public or mobile home
park sewerage collection and treatment system acceptable to
the Department of Environmental Resources, the lots shall be
not less than 60 feet wide measured at the minimum required
setback line nor less than 7,200 square feet, in area, per
mobile home unit exclusive of streets and other public areas
with a minimum depth of 40 feet.
C. Building setback lines.
§ 22-710 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-710
1:374
(1) In a mobile home park, the setback lines must conform to the
Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
(2) In a mobile home park, the setback lines on a private street
shall be as follows:
Street Type
Minimum Setback from the
Required Right-of-Way
Collector Street 15 feet
Minor Street 10 feet
D. Side and rear building lines. In a mobile home park, side and rear
building lines shall be not less than 15 feet from the side and rear
lot lines of each mobile home lot, and not less than 25 feet from the
mobile home park property lines on the sides and rear and not
adjacent to a dedicated public street right-of-way.
E. Off-street parking requirements. In a mobile home park, paved offstreet
parking areas shall be provided at the rate of at least 1 1/2
vehicular parking spaces for each mobile home lot. Access to each
lot shall be from park roadways only and not from public streets or
highways. All roads within the park shall be surfaced and conform
with the Township specifications and shall not be less than 24 feet
with concrete curbs. Said road shall be adequately lighted as shall
the walkways to the various buildings in the park area. Such
walkways shall be of a hard surface.
F. Open space requirements.
(1) In a mobile home park, not less than 10% of the total land area
shall be provided for usable open space. Such space shall be so
located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the
topography permits, be centrally located and easily accessible
to all park residents.
(2) Adequate play areas must be provided for children. A minimum
of 3,000 square feet of play space shall be provided for parks of
10 or less mobile home lots. An additional 200 square feet of
play space shall be provided for each mobile home lot in parks
containing more than 10 mobile home lots.
(3) Such open space shall be paved or protected with a vegetation
growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the
emanation of dust during dry weather.
G. Park areas for nonresidential uses. In a mobile home park, no part
of the park shall be used for a nonresidential purpose except such
uses that are specifically required for the direct servicing and wellbeing
of park residents and for management and maintenance of
the park.
§ 22-710 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-711
1:375
§ 22-711. Improvement and construction requirements. [Ord. No.
74-1977, 7/12/1977; Ord. No. 117-1981, § 1, 8/11/1981]
1. In a mobile home park all improvements, construction requirements,
and engineering specifications for the improvements required shall be
provided in accordance with Article V of this chapter and shall also
provide the following additional improvements:
A. Buffer strips. In a mobile home park, a suitably screened or
landscaped buffer strip at least 10 feet wide, approved by the
supervisors, shall be provided by the developer along all of the
property lines separating the mobile home park from adjacent uses.
B. Signs and lighting.
(1) Signs may be permitted subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission.
(2) All means of ingress, egress, walkways, streets and parking
lots shall be adequately lighted.
C. Other site improvements.
(1) An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be
erected around the entire base of each mobile home. Such
enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay
and deterioration of the structure.
(2) Tie downs to prevent the movement of the mobile home by
natural cause (wind, etc.) shall be provided for each mobile
home.
(3) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a four inch
concrete slab on a stable surface at least 10 feet in size for use
as a terrace and so located so as to be adjoining and parallel to
the mobile home and not extend into the front, side, or rear
yard. Such slab shall contain an electrical outlet to which the
electrical system of the mobile home shall be connected.
(4) Individual tenants at the mobile home park may construct
attached enclosures or covered patios to individual mobile
homes, provided that such enclosure does not exceed the slab
area noted in Subsection 1C(3) above and does not encroach
into the front, side or rear yard areas.
(5) Provision shall be made by the park operator to have garbage
and waste collected at least once every week. Any refuse
disposal site proposed within the mobile home park shall be
subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
(6) Waste from showers, toilets and laundries shall be disposed of
into a public sewer system or into a private sewer disposal
§ 22-711 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-711
1:376
§ 22-712. Fees. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 707, 7/12/1977; Ord. No.
168-1981, § 1, 8/11/1981; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
plant septic tank system, and in any case, the method of
disposal shall be one meeting the state and local health
requirements.
(7) All kitchen sinks, wash basins or lavatories, bath shower tubs
in any mobile home park located in any park shall empty into a
disposal system which shall meet the state and local health
requirements.
(8) Toilets and water closets in mobile homes shall be connected
with a public sewer system or to private sewer and disposal
plant septic tank system, and in any case the method of
disposal shall be one meeting the state and local health
regulations.
(9) Drinking water, flush toilets, washing and bathing facilities
shall be provided in accordance with state and local
requirements and regulations.
(10) Laundry facilities shall be provided at the ratio of one double
tray and ironing board for every 15 mobile home lots. Where
washing machines are available, laundry trays shall be
provided at the ratio of one double tray for each 20 mobile
home lots. Adequate clothes drying facilities shall be provided
adjoining the laundry facilities.
(11) Each mobile home shall be connected with a central water
supply system of pure drinking water for drinking and
domestic purposes.
(12) Each mobile home shall be provided with an electrical outlet
supplying 110-120/220-240 volts. Each mobile home and
electrical outlet shall be grounded in accordance with
Underwriters Laboratories standards.
(13) There shall be provided in each mobile home park such other
improvements as the supervisors may require where and by
such requirements shall at all times be in the best interest of
park residents.
1. At the time of filing the preliminary plat and final plat for the
development of a tract of land for a mobile home park, the applicant
shall be required to pay to the Township fees in accordance with the
requirements of Article X of this chapter and secure a permit.
2. It shall be incumbent upon the proprietor of a mobile home park to keep
a register and to report therein the name of the person or head of family
occupying each said mobile home, showing date of entry on said land,
license number of automobile, serial number, and make and size of
§ 22-711 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-712
1:377
trailer, the last permanent address of the person or head of family using
said mobile home, and the names of all persons using or living in said
mobile home park. Any changes in occupancy shall be reported to the
county Tax Assessor's office within one month.
3. Said register and mobile home park shall be subject to inspection by the
county tax assessment officer upon his request or upon the request of
the county Board of Commissioners or upon the written request of the
municipality in which the mobile home is located.
4. Mobile home park permits. Any person intending to develop a tract of
land as a mobile home park shall have a permit from South Hanover
Township for each such park, issued in accordance with the following
requirements:
A. Such permit shall be issued by the South Hanover Township Code
Enforcement Officer, upon proper application and submission of
evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all
other applicable legal requirements, and upon the payment in
advance at the time of application of such amount as shall be from
time to time set by resolution of the South Hanover Township Board
of Supervisors.
B. Each permit shall be valid for one year, from the date of issue.
C. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee, as
established by the Board of Supervisors, from time to time, by
resolution. The permit fee shall constitute the license fee for the
first year commencing with the date of notice of approval of the
application.
D. The first application for a permit for a mobile home park proposed
for development, following the effective date of this chapter, shall
be made to the South Hanover Township Code Enforcement Officer
on a form provided by him and shall be submitted together with
copies of the following:
(1) A copy of the approved final plat signed by the proper officials.
(2) A receipt signed by the Recorder of Deeds, showing that the
mobile home park plat has been publicly recorded.
(3) A permit issued by the Department of Environmental
Resources as required by Chapter 179, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Mobilehome Parks.
E. The first application for a permit for a mobile home park existing on
the effective date of this chapter shall be made to the South
Hanover Township Code Enforcement Officer on a form provided
by him and shall be submitted together with copies of the following:
§ 22-712 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-712
1:378
(1) A copy of the plan submitted to the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources as required by Chapter 179, Title
25, Rules and Regulations, Mobilehome Parks.
(2) A permit issued by the Department of Environmental
Resources as required by Chapter 179, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Mobilehome Parks.
(3) A receipt signed by the Recorder of Deeds showing that the
mobile home park plat has been publicly recorded together
with the deed book and page number indicated and two copies
of the recorded plat.
F. Application for the annual renewal of a license shall be made by the
holder of the license to the South Hanover Township Code
Enforcement Officer on a form provided by him, within 14 days
preceding expiration of the preceding license period, shall be
accompanied by a fee as required in Subsection 4C above and by
any changes since the preceding license was issued. The South
Hanover Township Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect each
mobile home park prior to the issuance of a license for
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and all of the
applicable legal requirements.
G. It shall be incumbent upon the proprietor of a mobile home park to
keep a register and to report therein the name of person or head of
family occupying each said mobile home, showing date of entry on
said permit shall have the following information and be
accompanied by a permit fee in such amount as shall from time to
time be set by resolution of the South Hanover Township Board of
Supervisors.
(1) The street address of mobile home.
(2) Names of the owners and occupants in the mobile home.
(3) Evidence of payment of all taxes duly assessed by the
Township, County of Dauphin and the Lower Dauphin School
District.
H. Motor homes are hereby exempt from the removal permit
requirements provided that said motor home has not been utilized
within the Township for living or commercial purposes on and other
than a temporary basis. Any such utilization of the motor home for
a period in excess of 48 hours shall be deemed to be for occupancy
or use for more than a temporary period.
I. The permit fees for mobile home parks containing from one to 49
mobile homes shall be established by the Board of Supervisors from
time to time by resolution.
§ 22-712 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-712
1:379
§ 22-713. Modification of requirements. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 708, 7/
12/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The application for any modification of requirements shall be in accordance
with the requirements of Article XI of this chapter.
§ 22-714. Enforcement, penalties, and amendments. [Ord. No.
74-1977, § 709, 7/12/1977]
The enforcement, penalties and amendments shall be in accordance with
the rules and regulations of this chapter.
J. The permit fees for mobile home parks containing from 50 to 100
mobile homes shall be established by the Board of Supervisors from
time to time by resolution.
K. The permit fees for mobile home parks containing over 100 mobile
homes shall be established by the Board of Supervisors from time
to time by resolution.
§ 22-712 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-714
1:380
ARTICLE VIII
Special Provisions Applying in Flood-Prone Areas
§ 22-801. General provisions. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 801, 7/12/1977]
§ 22-802. Application procedures and plat requirements. [Ord. No.
74-1977, § 802, 7/12/1977]
1. Purpose. The specific purpose of these special provisions is:
A. To regulate the subdivision and/or development of flood-prone land
areas in order to promote the general health, welfare and safety of
the community.
B. To require that each subdivision lot in flood-prone areas be
provided with a safe building site with adequate access; and that
public facilities which serve such uses be designed and installed to
preclude flood damage at the time of initial construction.
C. To protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for
use because of flood hazards by prohibiting the subdivision and/or
development of unprotected flood-prone lands.
2. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any
ordinance currently in effect in flood areas. However, any underlying
ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. Refer to Chapter 5, Division 2, Flood
Control Provisions, § 5-211, et seq.
3. Township liability. The grant of a permit or approval of a subdivision
and/or land development plan in the identified flood-prone and/or
mudslide-prone area(s) shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Township of South Hanover
or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of
the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the Township, its
officials or employees.
1. Pre-application procedures.
A. Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is suggested that
prospective developers consult with the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources concerning soil suitability when onsite
sewage disposal facilities are proposed.
B. Prospective developers shall consult the county conservation
district representative concerning erosion and sediment control
and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development.
At the same time a determination should be made as to whether or
not any flood hazards either exist or will be created as result of the
subdivision or development.
§ 22-801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-802
1:381
§ 22-803. Design standards and improvements. [Ord. No. 74-1977,
§ 803, 7/12/1977]
2. Preliminary plan requirements. The following information shall be
required as part of the preliminary plan and shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor:
A. Name of engineer, surveyor, or other qualified person responsible
for providing the information required in this section.
B. A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development with respect to the Township's flood-prone areas
including information on, but not limited to, the regulatory flood
elevations, boundaries of flood-prone areas, proposed lots and
sites, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities, and areas subject to
special deed restrictions.
C. Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely in the flood-prone areas, or where the subdivision and/
or land development borders on the flood-prone areas, the
preliminary plan map shall include detailed information giving the
location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities, and
building sites. All such maps shall also show contours at intervals of
two or five feet depending upon the slope of the land and identify
accurately the boundaries of the flood-prone areas.
3. Final plan requirements. The following information shall be required as
part of the final plan and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
surveyor:
A. All information required for the submission of the preliminary plan
incorporating any changes requested by the Board of Supervisors.
B. A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed
buildings, structures, roads and public utilities to be constructed in
flood-prone areas. All such maps shall show contours at intervals of
two feet and identify accurately the boundaries of the flood-prone
areas.
C. Whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a watercourse
within the floodplain district, as defined in the Township Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 27], the developer shall notify in writing by
certified mail all adjacent communities and the Pennsylvania
Department of Community Affairs of all such intended activities
prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse, and shall
submit copies of such notifications to the federal insurance
administrator. The developer shall also assure the Township, in
writing, that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse in question will be
maintained.
1. General.
§ 22-802 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-803
1:382
A. Where not prohibited by this chapter or any other laws or
ordinances, land located in flood-prone areas may be platted for
development with the provision that the developer construct all
buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance
with this or any other laws or ordinances regulating such
development.
B. Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or
accommodation shall not be permitted in any floodway area. Sites
for these uses may be permitted outside the floodway area if the
sites or dwelling units are elevated to a height at least 1 1/2 feet
above the elevation of the regulatory flood. If fill is used to raise the
elevation of a site, the fill area shall extend laterally for a distance
of at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the proposed structures.
C. Building sites for structures or buildings other than for residential
uses shall also not be permitted in any floodway area. Also such
sites for structures or buildings outside the floodway shall be
protected as provided for in Subsection 1B above. However, the
Board of Supervisors may allow the subdivision and/or
development of areas or sites for commercial or industrial uses at
an elevation less than 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood if the
developer otherwise protects the area to that height or assures that
the buildings or structures will be floodproofed and watertight at
least up to that height.
D. If the Board of Supervisors determines that only a part of a
proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit development to
that part and shall require that development proceed consistent
with this determination.
E. When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and
the Board of Supervisors determines that additional controls are
required to insure safe development, it may require the developer
to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed
restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every
recorded plat.
2. Excavation and grading. Where any excavation or grading is proposed
or where any existing trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover will be
removed, the developer shall consult the county conservation district
representative concerning plans for erosion and sediment control and
to also obtain a report on the soil characteristics of the site so that a
determination can be made as to the type and degree of development
the site may accommodate. Before undertaking any excavation or
grading, the developer shall obtain a grading and excavation permit if
such is required by the Township.
3. Drainage facilities.
A. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of
surface waters without damage to persons or property. The system
§ 22-803 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-803
1:383
shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal
sites.
B. Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Board of Supervisors may require a primarily underground
system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface
system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans
shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The
facilities shall be designed to prevent the drainage of excess runoff
onto adjacent properties.
4. Streets. The finished elevation of proposed streets shall be no more
than two feet below the regulatory flood elevation. The Board of
Supervisors may require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of
streets to determine compliance with this requirement. Drainage
openings shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows without unduly
increasing flood heights.
5. Sewer facilities. All sanitary sewer systems located in flood-prone
areas, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed up to a point 1 1/
2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
A. The Board of Supervisors may prohibit installation of sewage
disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems where such
systems will not function due to high ground water, flooding, or soil
characteristics. The Board of Supervisors may require that the
developer note on the face of the plat and in any deed of
conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited in designated
areas.
B. The Board of Supervisors may prescribe adequate methods for
waste disposal. If a sanitary sewer system is located on or near the
proposed subdivision and/or land development, the Board of
Supervisors shall require the developer to provide sewage facilities
to connect to this system where practical, and shall prescribe the
procedures to be followed by the developer in connecting to the
system.
6. Water facilities. All water systems located in flood-prone areas whether
public or private, shall be floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet above the
regulatory flood elevation. If there is an existing public water supply
system on or near the subdivision, the Board of Supervisors shall
require the developer to connect to this system where practical, and
shall prescribe the procedures to be followed by the developer in
connecting to the system.
7. Other public utilities and facilities. All other public and/or private
utilities and facilities shall be elevated or floodproofed to a point 1 1/2
feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 22-803 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-804
1:384
§ 22-804. Definitions. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 804, 7/12/1977; Ord. No.
79-1977, §§ 1, 2, 12/13/1977]
[The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning hereby ascribed thereto, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:]
BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure other than a boundary fence
occupying more than four square feet of area.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, streets,
and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or
drilling operations.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and contents of buildings.
FLOODWAY — The designated part of the area inundated by the regulatory
flood required to carry and discharge the floodwaters of the regulatory flood
without causing a rise in the elevation of that flood of more than one foot,
which is shown on the South Hanover Township Official Floodplain Map.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or a
1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. For the purpose of
this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood (base flood) as defined by Federal
Insurance Administration, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, in Flood Insurance Study, South Hanover Township, Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania.
REGULATORY FLOOD — The flood which has been selected as the basis
for floodplain management regulations. For the purposes of this article, the
one-hundred-year flood (base flood) as defined by the Federal Insurance
Administration, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in
Flood Insurance Study, South Hanover Township, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation of the regulatory flood
at a point. For the purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood
(base flood) elevation shall be as contained in the flood insurance study for
South Hanover Township. Within the approximate floodplain, the regulatory
flood elevation shall be established at a point on the boundary of the
approximated floodplain which is nearest to the construction site in
question.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a mobile home.
§ 22-804 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-804
1:385

ARTICLE IX
General Provisions for Suitable and Adequate Recreation
§ 22-901. General provisions. [Ord. No. 74-1977, §§ 801, 802, 7/12/
1977; Ord. No. 83-1978, § 1, 7/11/1978; Ord. No. 103-1980, § 1, 1/
12/1980; Ord. No. 1-1988, § 1; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/18/1995; Ord. No.
9-1999, § 1, 7/27/1999]
1. Purpose. All residential subdivision or land development plans shall
provide for suitable and adequate recreation in order to:
A. Insure adequate recreational areas and facilities to serve the future
residents of the Township.
B. Maintain compliance with recreational standards as developed by
the National Recreation and Park Association.
C. Reduce increasing usage pressure on existing recreational areas
and facilities.
D. Comply with the South Hanover Township Comprehensive
Recreation, Park and Open Space Plan with regard to size and
distribution of recreation areas.
E. Allow for acquisition and development of additional recreational
areas as outlined by the Comprehensive Plan.
F. Insure that all present and future Township residents have the
opportunity to engage in many and varied leisure pursuits.
G. Reduce the possibility of the Township becoming overburdened
with the development and maintenance of many very small,
randomly planned and widely separate recreation areas.
H. Provide for the opportunity of combining small lots of dedicated
land from several subdivisions into larger, more usable tracts.
2. Definitions.
ACCESSIBLE TO THE DEVELOPMENT — Any area which can be easily
approached, entered and used by the citizens of a particular residential
development provided that the area is within six air miles of the
development.
ACTIVE RECREATION — Any activity that requires some physical
exertion on the part of the participant. See Subsections 2A(1) and (2)
for general examples.
ACTIVE RECREATION AREA — Any area developed in such a manner
as to be conducive to those activities that fall within the range of active
recreation. Examples: Athletic fields and hard-surfaced courts, pools,
large dams, bicycle and walking trails, open turf areas, and apparatus
areas.
§ 22-901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-901
1:387
LEISURE — Time not committed to making a living or involved with
other necessary support functions; discretionary or "free" time.
PASSIVE RECREATION — Any activity that requires little or no physical
exertion on the part of the participant. See Subsections 2A(2) and (3).
PASSIVE RECREATION AREA — Any area developed in such a manner
as to be conducive to those activities that fall within the range of
passive recreation. Examples: Scenic vistas, natural areas, craft areas,
meeting areas, sitting areas, walkways, sunbathing, gardens, streams
and impoundments, social events, picnicking and spectating areas.
RECREATION — Any activity, whether structured or not, in which
individuals voluntarily engage during their leisure. Examples would
include:
RECREATION AREA REQUIRED — The amount of land in any given
subdivision that would be dedicated for recreation were the fee in lieu
of land dedication provision not being utilized.
Active: Sports (individual, dual, team, co-recreational, and
combative), athletics; both land and water-based.
A.
Passive: Arts and crafts, spectating, picnicking, nature study and
board games.
B.
Either active or passive, depending on specifics: Dance, drama,
music, games, skills, social recreation, special events, hiking/
walking, cycling, hobbies, outdoor educational activities, and
cultural activities.
C.
3. Exemptions. The following are exempt or partially exempt from the
provisions of this section: Any residential subdivision or land
development plan that contains less than 30 dwelling units may be
exempted by the Board of Supervisors from dedicating land for
recreational purposes, but shall pay the fee in lieu of dedication as
provided in Subsection 6.
4. Land requirements of proposed recreation areas.
A. The amount of land required to be provided for recreational
purposes for residential subdivisions or land development plans not
exempted from the provisions of this section shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family detached and semidetached dwelling
developments. In these developments or subdivisions, the
developer shall provide a minimum of 1,500 square feet per lot.
(2) Single-family attached, two family, multiple-family and garden
apartment developments. In these developments, a minimum
contiguous area of 20% of the total area of the development
shall be provided for recreation exclusive of roadways of the
land being developed.
§ 22-901 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-901
1:388
B. Such land set aside shall be suitable to serve the purpose of active
and/or passive recreation by reason of its size, shape, location and
topography and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission, the Parks and Recreation Commission and the Board
of Supervisors, after having conferred with the Zoning Officer.
C. All or part of recreation areas may be offered for dedication to the
Township, but the Township shall not be obligated to accept the
same. All such recreation areas not accepted by the Township shall
be irrevocably conveyed to a duly incorporated property owner's
association, which shall be responsible to properly maintain
perpetually all of such recreation areas, pay all taxes assessed with
regard to the land and any improvements thereon and supervise all
activities conducted thereon. The Township shall have no
obligation whatsoever in connection with such recreation areas
other than the normal municipal services provided to the public in
general.
D. The deed of conveyance of such recreation areas to a property
owner's association shall contain a restrictive covenant limiting the
use of such land and improvements to the common use of the
property owners within the development for the purposes initially
approved by the Township. Said deed shall also contain a
restriction that said lands and improvements may not be sold or
disposed of by the association, except to another organization
formed to own and maintain said recreation areas without first
offering to dedicate the land and improvements to the Township.
5. Criteria for proposed recreation areas. The Planning Commission and
the Board of Supervisors in exercising their duties regarding the
approval of subdivision and land development plans, shall consider the
following criteria in determining whether to approve the proposed
location of recreation areas in the developer's subdivision or land
development plan:
A. The site or sites should be easily and safely accessible from all
areas of the development to be served, have good ingress and
egress and have access to a public road; however, no public road
shall traverse the site or sites.
B. The site or sites should have suitable topography and soil
conditions for use and development as a recreation area.
C. The size and shape of the site or sites should be suitable for
development as a particular type of park. Sites will be categorized
by the Township using the guidelines established by the National
Recreation and Park Association, Recreation, Park and Open Space
Standards and Guidelines, 1983 edition.
D. The design and development of these recreation areas shall be
done according to the guidelines established by the National
Recreation and Park Association, Recreation, Park and Open Space
§ 22-901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-901
1:389
Standards and Guidelines, 1983, copies of which may be obtained
from the Township office.
E. The site or sites should, to the greatest extent practical, be easily
accessible to essential utilities, including water, sewer and power.
F. The site or sites should meet minimum size in respect to usable
acreage with respect to National Recreation and Park Association
standards with 75% of such area having a maximum slope of 75%.
G. A maximum of 25% of the total required land area to be provided
for recreation may consist of floodplain areas.
H. The site or sites should be compatible with the objectives,
guidelines and recommendations set forth in the South Hanover
Township Comprehensive Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan.
6. Dedication to the Township.
A. When the Township requires that recreation areas be dedicated
and neither the developer wishes to maintain ownership nor is a
property owner's association a viable alternative, then the required
recreation area may be dedicated to the Township for public use.
B. When the Board deems it to be in the public interest to accept
dedicated land, such acceptance shall be by means of a signed
resolution to which the property description of the dedicated
recreation area shall be attached, and a deed shall be recorded for
the dedicated land which deed shall contain the following
restrictive clause:
"This land was acquired for perpetual recreation, public park, and
open space purposes through the implementation of the South
Hanover Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
C. Recreation areas of less than three acres proposed to be dedicated
to the Township shall not normally be accepted, unless,
opportunities exist to combine them with those of another
subdivision.
D. Areas dedicated to the Township for public use shall be suitable for
recreational purposes by reasons of size, shape, location,
topography and access.
E. The Board of Supervisors, after having conferred with the Planning
Commission and the parks and recreation board may find
dedication of land for recreation to be impractical because of the
size, shape; location, access, topography, drainage or other
physical features of the land, or that such dedication would
adversely affect the subdivision or land development and its future
residents or occupants, or that there is no other land area within
the proposed subdivision which is practical for dedication to the
public because of size, access, topography, or other physical
§ 22-901 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-901
1:390
characteristics. In such cases the Board of Supervisors shall
require payment of a fee in lieu of land dedication.
F. All approved recreation areas shall be completed and dedicated
before 50% occupancy has been reached in any applicable
subdivision. Withholding of building permits may occur to insure
compliance with this provision.
7. Recreation facility development.
A. Developers required to dedicate land for recreation shall also
develop the recreation areas, according to the Recreation Park and
Open Space Standards and Guidelines published by the National
Recreation and Park Association in 1983.
B. Specific facilities to be constructed shall conform to the previously
referenced standards based upon the size of the recreation area
being dedicated.
C. In cases where the opportunity exists to combine dedicated
recreation with another subdivision, the developer shall be
required to escrow funds that will pay for later construction of
facilities on a combined recreation area according to the
subdivision's percentage contribution to the ultimate combined
recreation area. The Township will then develop the combined
recreation area with the escrowed funds when all portions thereof
have been deeded over to the Township.
D. Actual size, number, placement and other specifications of
recreation facilities to be developed shall be recommended by the
Parks and Recreation Board to the Planning Commission and Board
of Supervisors after discussions with the developers.
E. Final subdivision and/or land development plans shall indicate
location and specifications of all recreation facilities to be
constructed and metes, bounds and acreage(s) of the recreation
area(s).
F. As a condition for the final approval of any plan, the Township may
require either the actual completion of any and all requirements set
forth under this section or the deposit with the Township of a
corporate bond, or other security acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors, in an amount sufficient to guarantee that such
completion may be carried out as required.
G. The developer shall install, as a minimum, the following recreation
facilities, or the equivalent if approved by the Township, on the land
which has been set aside for this purpose:
§ 22-901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-901
1:391
Dwelling
Units Play Areas
BB/VB1
Courts
Tennis
Courts
Ball2
Diamonds Pavilions
Soccer/FB3
Fields
30 or less — — — — — —
31 to 49 1 1 — — — —
50 to 99 1 1 — — —
100 to 199 2 2 1 1 1 —
200 to 299 2 2 2 1 1 1
300 to 400 2 2 2 2 2 1
Over 400 3 2 2 2 2 2
The mix of facilities shall be determined by the Township.
1 Basketball and/or volleyball court.
2 Softball and/or baseball diamond.
3 Soccer and/or football field.
H. Designs of recreation areas shall be reviewed by the parks and
recreations board, Planning Commission and the Township
Supervisors.
8. Fee-in-lieu of dedication.
A. When the Board of Supervisors decides that because of size, shape,
location, access, topography or other physical features it is
impractical for the developer to dedicate land for recreation areas
as required by this section, the Board shall require payment of a
fee-in-lieu of land dedication. Such fee-in-lieu of dedication
payments shall be payable to South Hanover Township prior to
approval of each final section of the overall plan by the Board.
B. Fee-in-lieu payments shall be arrived at by annual resolution
adopted by the Board of Supervisors that will set the fee-in-lieu
amounts for the calendar year. Amounts established shall remain in
effect until a succeeding resolution establishing other rates is
adopted.
C. All monies paid to the Township pursuant to this section shall be
kept in a capital reserve fund. Monies in such fund shall be used
only for the acquisition of land and/or capital improvement or
development for park and recreation purposes within the Township
and accessible to the development.
D. Disposition of fee in lieu funds.
(1) Fee-in-lieu money authorized by this section shall, upon its
receipt by the Township, be deposited in an interest bearing
account, clearly identifying the specific recreation facilities for
§ 22-901 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-901
1:392
which the fee was received. Interest earned on such accounts
shall be expended only for the purpose of providing park or
recreation facilities accessible to the development from which
the funds were generated.
(2) Upon request of any person who paid any fee-in-lieu under this
section, the Township shall refund such fee, plus interest
accumulated thereon from the date of payment, if the
Township has failed to utilize the fee paid for the purposes set
forth in this section within three years from the date such fee
was paid.
§ 22-901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-901
1:393

ARTICLE X
Fees
§ 22-1001. Filing fee. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 1001, 7/12/1977; Ord.
No. 3-1990, 6/26/1990; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 22-1002. Engineering review fees. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 1002, 7/
12/1977; Ord. No. 92-1978, § 2, 12/12/1978; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/
1995]
1. A minimum fee shall be paid at the time of the filing of the preliminary
plat as established by the Board of Supervisors from time to time by
resolution. For any subdivision containing more than 15 lots there shall
be paid, in addition to the minimum fee, additional fee as established by
the Board of Supervisors from time to time by resolution per lot for
every lot over 15.
2. Park and recreation fee. As established by the Board of Supervisors
from time to time by resolution per dwelling unit.
1. On or before the date on which the final plat is to be considered by the
supervisors, the applicant shall pay by check, payable to the Township,
a review fee to be determined as follows:
A. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by
the Township's professional consultants or engineer for review and
report to the Township, and shall be set by resolution. Such review
fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary charges by the Township Engineer or consultant for
similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees
exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant to
the Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed
on applicants.
B. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the applicant shall, within 30 days of the billing date, notify
the Township that such fees are disputed, in which case the
Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application due to the applicant's request over
disputed fees.
C. In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary,
then the fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Township and the applicant or developer.
The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair
and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a
third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer
shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant or
developer.
§ 22-1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-1002
1:395
§ 22-1003. Fees. [Ord. No. 106A-1980, § 3, 5/13/1980]
The Board of Supervisors shall prescribe from time to time, by resolution,
such fees as shall be deemed necessary for the proper administration and
enforcement of this article.
2. Other fees. Fees for all the permits required for and by South Hanover
Township for opening roads, connecting to Township sewer, building
construction, etc., and such amount determined by the engineer for
inspecting required improvements during installation at times other
than regular working hours of the engineer, which overtime fees shall
be paid promptly to South Hanover Township by applicant.
3. Applicant, at the time of application shall agree to cover the cost of
advertising the ordinance, accepting the deed of dedication and its
recording and registration costs.
§ 22-1002 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-1003
1:396
ARTICLE XI
Modification of Requirements
§ 22-1101. Modification of requirements. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 1101,
7/12/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of these regulations will result in unreasonable hardship, the supervisors
may make such reasonable modification thereto as will not be contrary
to the public interest and so that the spirit of these regulations shall be
observed and substantial justice done.
§ 22-1102. Application for modification. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 1102,
7/12/1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Applications for any modification of requirements shall be submitted in
writing by the applicant at the time the preliminary plat is filed with the
Planning Commission. The application shall state fully the grounds and all
facts relied upon by the applicant.
§ 22-1103. Granting of application. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 1103, 7/12/
1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In granting any modification of requirements, the Board of Supervisors
shall record its action and the grounds for granting any modification to the
applicant applying for the modification.
§ 22-1104. Denial of application. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 1104, 7/12/
1977; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Whenever a request for the modification of requirements is denied, the
supervisors shall record its action and grounds for such denial in its
minutes. The supervisors' action and the grounds for such denial should be
sent to the applicant.
§ 22-1101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-1104
1:397

ARTICLE XII
Enforcement, Penalties, Amendments
§ 22-1201. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. No. 74-1977,
§ 1201, 7/12/1977]
§ 22-1202. Amendments. [Ord. No. 74-1977, § 1202, 7/12/1977]
Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice as defined herein and in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code of 1968, as amended,
Act 247, Article V, § 505.
§ 22-1203. Preventive remedies. [Ord. No. 74-1977, 7/12/1977; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. The Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors shall have the duty
and authority for the administration and general enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, as specified or implied herein.
2. Officials of South Hanover Township having regulatory duties and
authorities connected with or appurtenant to the subdivision, use or
development of land shall have the duties and authorities for the
controlling enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, as specified or
implied herein or in other ordinances of South Hanover Township.
3. Permits required by South Hanover Township for the erection or
alteration of buildings, the installation of sewers or sewage disposal
systems, or for other appurtenant improvements to, or use of, the land,
shall not be issued by any South Hanover Township official responsible
for such issuance until he has ascertained that the site for such
building, alteration, improvement, or use is located on a subdivision
approved and publicly recorded in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter regulating the subdivision of land.
4. Such permits shall be issued only after it has been determined that the
site for such building, alteration, improvement or use conforms to the
site descriptions as indicated by the approved and recorded final plat or
other land description acceptable in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, and that it is in compliance with all applicable provisions of
this chapter.
5. The South Hanover Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall
require that applications for sewage disposal permits contain all the
information necessary for him to ascertain that the site for the proposed
system is acceptable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental
Resources and any requirements of South Hanover Township
pertaining to the issuance of such permit.
§ 22-1201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-1203
1:399
§ 22-1204. Enforcement remedies. [Ord. No. 74-1977, 7/12/1977;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
2. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
A. The owner of record at the time of such violation.
B. The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
C. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
D. The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
3. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Township may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefore in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has
§ 22-1203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-1204
1:400
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis
for the person, partnership, or corporation violating this chapter to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth
day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district
justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
2. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
3. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
4. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
under this section.
§ 22-1204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 22-1204
1:401
Chapter 23
(RESERVED)
Chapter 24
TAXATION, SPECIAL
§ 22-1204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 22-1204
1:402
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
§ 24-101. Short title and effective date. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 1, 1/25/
1966]
This article shall be known as the "South Hanover Township Earned Income
Tax Ordinance." The provisions hereof shall first become effective March 1,
1966.
§ 24-102. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 2, 1/25/1966]
The following words and phrases, when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association, or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily "domicile," for "domicile" is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. "Domicile" is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed
the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until
some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In
the case of businesses or associations, the domicile is that place considered
as the center of business affairs and the place where its functions are
discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent, and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as public assistance, or unemployment compensation
§ 24-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-102
1:403
payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including, but not limited to, programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — A person, employee or private
agency designated by the Board of Supervisors of South Hanover Township
to collect and administer tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all
costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on
a cash or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in
such business, profession, or other activity, but without deduction of taxes
based on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the Township of South Hanover.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the Township of South Hanover.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association, or any other entity,
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 24-103. Imposition of tax. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 3, 1/25/1966]
1. A tax for general revenue purposes of 1% is hereby imposed and shall
be applied as follows:
A. To earned income earned by residents of the Township of South
Hanover during the calendar year 1966 and during each calendar
year thereafter.
B. To earned income earned by nonresidents of the Township of South
Hanover in the Township of South Hanover during the calendar
year thereafter.
C. To net profits earned by residents of the Township of South
Hanover during the calendar year 1966 or taxpayer fiscal year
beginning in the calendar year 1966, and during each calendar
year or taxpayer fiscal year thereafter.
§ 24-102 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-103
1:404
§ 24-104. Declaration and payment of tax. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 4, 1/
25/1966]
D. To net profits earned in the Township of South Hanover by
nonresidents of the Township of South Hanover during the
calendar year 1966 or taxpayer fiscal year beginning in the
calendar year 1966, and during each calendar year or taxpayer
fiscal year thereafter.
1. Net profits.
A. Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or
approved by the officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits
during the period beginning January 1, and ending December 31, of
the current year, and pay to the officer in four equal quarterly
installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at
the time of filing the declaration, and the other installments on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year, and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
B. Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year, or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
C. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the officer a final return showing he amount of net profits earned
during the period beginning January 1 of the current year, and
ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment.
Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment
of his estimated tax, elect to make and file with the officer, on
or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the final return as
hereinabove required.
D. The officer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits,
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required
anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
§ 24-103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-104
1:405
§ 24-105. Collection at source. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 5, 1/25/1966]
E. Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
2. Earned income.
A. Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year, and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due
thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon
that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the
collection at source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing
the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or
shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
B. Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source, shall make and file with the officer
on a form prescribed or approved by the officer, a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year, and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the officer may require. Every, taxpayer making
such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the
amount of tax shown as due thereon.
1. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the Township of South Hanover who
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation, who has not
previously registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer,
register with the officer his name and address and such other
information as the officer may require.
2. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, ranch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Township of South Hanover who
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a
salary, wage, commission, or other compensation, shall deduct at the
time of payment thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned
income due to his employee or employees, and shall, on or before April
§ 24-104 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-105
1:406
30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the
current year, and January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and
pay to the officer the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding
three-month periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of
the current year, September 30 of the current year, and December 31
of the current year, respectively. Such return unless otherwise agreed
upon between the officer and employer shall show the name and Social
Security Number of each such employee, the earned income of such
employee during such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted
therefrom, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such
employee, the total earned income of all such employees during such
preceding three-month period, and the total tax deducted therefrom
and paid with the return.
3. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has
failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the Township of South Hanover, may
be required by the officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In
such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the officer on or the last
day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
4. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the officer:
A. An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid
to the officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year,
and ending December 31 of the current year.
B. A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year, and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period,
the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the
tax upon such employee, the amount of tax paid to the officer. Every
employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to the
employee for whom it is filed.
5. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
6. Every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes
have not been recovered from the employee.
7. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
§ 24-105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-105
1:407
§ 24-106. Powers and duties of the officer. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 6, 1/
25/1966]
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
1. It shall be the duty of the officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing amount received by him from each person or business
paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
2. The Income Tax Officer, before entering upon his official duties under
this article, shall give and acknowledge a bond to the Township of South
Hanover such as will comply with the provisions of Section 13(V)(b) of
Act 511 of the 1965 Session of the Pennsylvania General Assembly,
approved December 31, 1965.
3. The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce, rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns, and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any period of
time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by resolution by the Board of Supervisors
of South Hanover Township. A copy of such rules and regulations
currently in force shall be available for public inspection.
4. The officer shall refund, on petition of, and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
5. The officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers, and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, is hereby
directed and required to give to the officer, or to any agent designated
by him, the means, facilities, and opportunity for such examination and
investigations, as are hereby authorized.
6. Any information gained by the officer, his agents, or by any other official
or agent of the Township of South Hanover, as a result of any
declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
§ 24-105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-106
1:408
§ 24-107. Suit for collection of tax. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 7, 1/25/1966]
§ 24-108. Interest and penalties. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 8, 1/25/1966]
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 0.5%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
or authorized by this article, shall be confidential, except for official
purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as
otherwise provided by law.
7. The officer is authorized to establish different filing; reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
1. The officer may sue in the name of the Township of South Hanover for
the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
2. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later.
Provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
A. Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
B. Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
C. In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
D. Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the officer,
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
E. This section shall not be construed to limit the Township of South
Hanover from recovering delinquent taxes by any other means
provided by law.
3. The officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided such
suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit
may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund
was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
§ 24-106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-108
1:409
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefore shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 24-109. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 9, 1/25/1966; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 24-110. Credit or deduction for payment of tax to other political
subdivisions or states. [Ord. No. 1-1966, § 10, 1/25/1966]
Taxpayers under this article shall be allowed such credit or deduction from
their liability for the tax imposed by this article for taxes paid to other taxing
authorities as is provided by the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511, of the
1965 Session of the Pennsylvania General Assembly, approved December
31, 1965.
§ 24-108 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-110
1:410
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
§ 24-201. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5-1998, § 1, 12/22/1998]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms have, for the
purpose of this article, the meaning herein indicated:
COLLECTOR — The person elected or designated by South Hanover
Township to collect or receive the tax imposed by this article.
PERSON — Any natural person.
RESIDENT — Any person maintaining a residence within the Township of
South Hanover, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
TAXPAYER — Any person required hereunder to pay the per capita tax.
§ 24-202. Imposition of tax. [Ord. No. 5-1998, § 2, 12/22/1998; Res.
No. 13-2013, §§ 1 — 4, 12/23/2013; Res. No. 10-2014, §§ 1 — 4, 12/
30/2014]
§ 24-203. Failure to receive notice. [Ord. No. 5-1998, § 3, 12/22/
1998]
The failure or omission of the collector to send, or any taxpayer to receive,
the notice of the per capita tax due shall not relieve the taxpayer from the
payment of the tax.
1. A tax is hereby levied on residents 18 years and older at $5 per capita.
2. For the special purpose for which the Board of Supervisors of said
Township are authorized by law to levy and collect taxes, pursuant to
(Section 905.2, Second Class Township Code), rates are hereby levied
for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2015 as follows: The sum of
0.2630 mill(s) on each dollar of assessed valuation on those real
properties, within the Township for general Township purposes.
3. For the special purpose for which the Board of Supervisors of said
Township are authorized by law to levy and rates are hereby levied for
the fiscal year ending December 31, 2015 as follows: The sum of 0.1700
mill(s) on each dollar of assessed valuation on those real properties
within the Township having access to fire hydrants.
4. For the special purpose for which the Board of Supervisors of said
Township are authorized by law to levy and collect taxes, pursuant to
(Section 905.4, Second Class Township Code), rates are hereby levied
for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2015 as follows: The sum of
0.1981 mill(s) on each dollar of assessed valuation on those real
properties within the Township for the purpose of purchasing,
maintaining, and making appropriations for fire protection.
§ 24-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-204
1:411
§ 24-204. Discounts and penalties. [Ord. No. 5-1998, § 4, 12/22/
1998]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the tax under this article shall be
entitled to a discount of 2% on the amount of such tax upon making payment
of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of the tax
notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such tax imposed
against them within four months after the date of the tax notice shall be
charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the tax by the
collector and collected by him. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment
of the tax imposed against them within seven months after the date of the
tax notice shall be charged a further penalty of 15% of the basic tax which
penalty shall be added to the tax and the initial penalty by the collector and
collected by him. The collector shall furnish a receipt to any taxpayer paying
such tax if so required.
§ 24-205. Recoverable by law. [Ord. No. 5-1998, § 5, 12/22/1998]
All taxes levied under this article, together with all penalties, shall be
recoverable by the collector in the manner authorized by law.
§ 24-206. Effective date. [Ord. No. 5-1998, § 6, 12/22/1998]
The tax imposed by this article shall become effective 30 days from the date
of the adoption of this article and shall remain in effect until January 1,
2000. In accordance with Section 4 of the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L.
1257, as amended (the Local Tax Enabling Act), this article shall apply to all
subsequent tax years unless sooner repealed or amended by the Board of
Supervisors of South Hanover Township.
§ 24-207. Collection. [Ord. No. 5-1998, § 7, 12/22/1998]
This tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector of
the Township of South Hanover and the taxables that are delinquent as of
February 1 shall be collected by the delinquent Tax Collector designated by
the Board of Supervisors.
§ 24-208. Delinquent tax collector. [Ord. No. 5-1998, 12/22/1998; as
amended by Ord. No. 2-2002, § 1, 2/12/2002; and by Ord. No.
2-2019, 3/12/2019]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of South Hanover shall appoint
a delinquent tax collector from time to time by resolution of the Board.
Collection of delinquent taxes by a delinquent tax collector shall be in
accordance with and the delinquent tax collector shall have the same
powers, rights, privileges, duties and obligations as are set forth in Section
686 of the Act of March 10 of 1949 (P.L. 30, No. 14), known as the "Public
School Code 1949," as amended and supplemented.
§ 24-204 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-208
1:412
ARTICLE III
Real Estate Taxes
§ 24-301. Short title. [Ord. No. 64-1997, § 1, 3/8/1977]
This article shall be known as the "Tax Discount and Penalty Rate
Ordinance."
§ 24-302. Incorporation of statutes. [Ord. No. 64-1997, § 2, 3/8/
1977]
Any applicable provisions of the Local Tax Collection Law and the Second
Class Township Code are incorporated herein by reference. Where options
are provided by such statutes, this article designates the options selected,
except that the Township of South Hanover reserves the right to change
the option(s) regarding penalties by action duly taken by its Board of
Supervisors, by regulation, resolution or ordinance, as the case may
require.
§ 24-303. Imposition of discount rates. [Ord. No. 64-1997, § 3, 3/8/
1977]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the general real estate tax
assessment as levied by the Township of South Hanover for the year 1977
and every year thereafter, shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the
amount of such tax upon making payment of the whole amount thereof
within two months after the date of the tax notice.
§ 24-304. Penalties. [Ord. No. 64-1997, § 4, 3/8/1977; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 24-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-304
1:413

ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
§ 24-401. Short title. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of South
Hanover Township."
§ 24-402. Authority. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are
made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101 et seq.
§ 24-403. Definitions. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms have, for the
purpose of this article, the meaning herein indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form
of unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more
persons other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys,
transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise
of title of real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of
trust or other instruments of like character given as security for a debt
and deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the
legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total consideration
specified in the contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof
unless the consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding 30
years, or instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility
easement. "Document" shall also include a declaration of acquisition
required to be presented for recording under § 24-402.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75%
of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least
75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by
members of the same family. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
§ 24-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-403
1:415
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's
parents and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any
of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of
any of the foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption
shall be treated as if they were related by whole blood.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of South Hanover.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or
imprisonment, or both. The term "person," as applied to associations,
shall include the responsible members or general partners thereof, and
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is
primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real
estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or
fewer persons and which:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township,
including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance
of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and
equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or
occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate.
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of
the value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible
B.
§ 24-403 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-403
1:416
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an
established market.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time,
the termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific
number of years, including without limitation an estate in fee
simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold.
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consist of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold
interest or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy
agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or
possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration
therefore, paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances
thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby,
whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and
ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where such liens
or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are
charged against real estate; provided, that where such documents
shall set forth a nominal consideration, the "value" thereof shall be
determined from the price set forth in or actual consideration for
the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary
worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement,
a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or
the real estate of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth
of the real estate determined by adjusting the assessed value of the
real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common level
ratio factor developed by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue
for Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value
of which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual
monetary worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures
D.
§ 24-403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-403
1:417
§ 24-404. Imposition of tax; interest. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/
1972; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 24-405. Exempt parties. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
or other permanent improvements to real estate between the
grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not
removed thereby or between the grantor, the agent or principal of
the grantor of a related corporation, association or partnership and
the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
1. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
2. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
3. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by the Board of Supervisors under the
authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be one-half of the rate
and such one-half shall become effective without any action on the part
of the Board of Supervisors provided, however, that the Township and
any other political subdivision which impose such tax on the same
person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective
rates to one-half of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
4. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due, shall be added and collected.
§ 24-403 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-406
1:418
§ 24-406. Excluded transactions. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. The tax imposed by § 24-404 shall not be imposed upon:
A. A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
B. A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
§ 24-406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-406
1:419
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
K. A transfer (i) for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party; or (ii) from or to an agent or
straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no
tax would be imposed under this article.
Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired
by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there
is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of
the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an
exemption from taxation under this clause.
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
M. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
N. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
O. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i) the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and (ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
P. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
§ 24-406 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-406
1:420
§ 24-407. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof. [Ord. No.
15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Except as otherwise provided in § 24-406, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders and shareholders.
§ 24-408. Acquired company. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Q. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
R. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 [68A
Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural
or open space opportunities.
S. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
T. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
U. A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less.
V. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
2. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
1. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, of the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
§ 24-406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-408
1:421
§ 24-409. Credits against tax. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
2. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
3. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
1. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
2. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
3. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
4. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
5. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 24-408 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-410
1:422
§ 24-410. Extension of lease. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 24-411. Proceeds of judicial sale. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972;
Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 24-412. Duties of Recorder of Deeds. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/
1972; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
1. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983, (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Township
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Township.
2. In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
3. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the
Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to
the county.
4. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or
record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state
and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 24-410 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-413
1:423
§ 24-413. Statement of value. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord.
No. 3-1995, 9/12/1995]
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 24-414. Civil penalties. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
§ 24-415. Lien. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord. No. 3-1995, 9/
12/1995]
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharged by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to
file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of [name] County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
1. If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this article is due
to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
2. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefore, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 24-413 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-416
1:424
§ 24-416. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
All taxes imposed by this article together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 24-417. Regulations. [Ord. No. 15-1972, 12/11/1972; Ord. No.
3-1995, 9/12/1995]
The Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 24-416 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 24-417
1:425
Chapter 25
(RESERVED)
Chapter 26
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 24-417 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 24-417
1:426
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 26-101. Short title. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/20187]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "South Hanover
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 26-102. Statement of findings. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. The governing body of South Hanover Township finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff
resulting from development throughout a watershed increases
flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams
and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to
convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain
management and flood-reduction efforts in upstream and
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
threatens public health and safety, and increases non-point-source
pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety,
welfare, and the protection of the people of South Hanover
Township and all the people of the commonwealth, their resources,
and the environment.
C. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff
resulting from land development and redevelopment throughout a
watershed can also harm surface water resources by changing the
natural hydrologic patterns; accelerating stream flows (which
increase scour and erosion of streambeds and stream banks,
thereby elevating sedimentation); destroying aquatic habitat; and
elevating aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings such as
sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, and pathogens. Groundwater
resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities
7. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Ch. 26, Stormwater
Management, adopted 7/25/2006 by Ord. No. 1-2006 and 12/14/2010 by Ord. No. 3-2010.
§ 26-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-102
1:427
§ 26-103. Purpose. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from
their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
G. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer
systems can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth.
1. The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare
within South Hanover Township, Dauphin County, by minimizing the
harms and maximizing the benefits described in § 26-102 of this chapter
through provisions intended to:
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93, to protect, maintain,
reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters
of the commonwealth.
B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation
problems close to their source, by regulating activities that cause
these problems.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems to the maximum extent
practicable.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water
resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and
prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a
minimum of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
H. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
I. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and best
management practices (BMPs) that are constructed and
implemented.
J. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
K. Implement an "illegal discharge detection and elimination
program" within MS4-permitted urbanized areas to address
nonstormwater discharges into South Hanover Township's
separate storm sewer system.
§ 26-102 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-104
1:428
§ 26-104. Statutory authority. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
§ 26-105. Applicability. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. Primary authority. South Hanover Township is empowered to regulate
these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864
(Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act," and the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 67701 et seq.
2. Secondary authority. South Hanover Township also is empowered to
regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act
of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.8
1. This chapter shall apply to all areas of South Hanover Township, any
regulated activity within South Hanover Township, and all stormwater
runoff entering into South Hanover Township's separate storm sewer
system from lands within the boundaries of South Hanover Township.
2. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
3. "Regulated activities" are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. "Regulated activities" include, but
are not limited to, the following listed items:
A. Earth disturbance activities.
B. Land development.
C. Subdivision.
D. Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces.
E. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
F. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
G. Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
H. Installation of stormwater BMPs.
4. See § 26-302 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 26-104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-106
1:429
§ 26-106. Repealer. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
Any ordinance, ordinance provision(s), or regulation of South Hanover
Township inconsistent with any of the provision(s) of this chapter is hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 26-107. Severability. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section(s) or
provision(s) of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of any of the remaining section(s) or provision(s) of this chapter.
§ 26-108. Compatibility with other requirements. [Ord. No. 6-2018,
10/23/2018]
Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes,
laws, rules, statutes, or ordinances. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more-rigorous or -stringent requirements for stormwater management, the
specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
§ 26-109. Duty of persons engaged in development of land. [Ord.
No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 26-110. Township liability. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
The degree of stormwater management sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter shall
not create liability on the part of South Hanover Township, any appointed
or elected official of South Hanover Township, the Dauphin County
Conservation District or any officer, engineer or employee thereof for any
erosion, sedimentation or flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 26-106 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-110
1:430
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 26-201. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
§ 26-202. Definitions. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural; and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or
maintained."
1. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activity and natural processes at
a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture,
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy-use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, tillage,
land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops,
or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed
an application for approval to engage in any regulated activities at a
project site within South Hanover Township.
§ 26-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-202
1:431
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "nonstructural" or "structural."
"Nonstructural" BMPs are measures referred to as operational and/
or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas "structural" BMPs are
measures that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed
to capture and treat stormwater runoff. "Structural" BMPs include, but
are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from largescale
wet ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground
treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design,
bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian
or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured
devices. "Structural" stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances
to the project site.
BMP MANUAL — The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual as published by the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Watershed Management, Document Number:
363-0300-002, effective date: December 30, 2006, and as revised.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank used for storing
rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Dauphin County Conservation
District (DCCD). The Dauphin County Conservation District has the
authority under a delegation agreement executed with the Department
of Environmental Protection to administer and enforce all or a portion
of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream
and/or stormwater runoff under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event, measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a twenty-five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in
the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see
"return period."
DESIGNEE — The agent of South Hanover Township and/or agent
of the governing body involved with the administration, review or
§ 26-202 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-202
1:432
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by contract or
memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released during or after a storm event into waters of the commonwealth
at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or
other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed. Also see "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or piped flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to convey stormwater runoff, and shall include
streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage,
or conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch,
pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which surface water
flows.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land
development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting
activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the
moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth
materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL-VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality,
which satisfy Pa. Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93,
Water Quality Standards, 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is not
§ 26-202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-202
1:433
forested or undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered as
"meadow," unless the natural land cover is documented to generate
lower curve numbers or rational "C" coefficients, such as forested
lands.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — The remaining portions of the 100-year floodplain
outside of the floodway boundary.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration,
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as being a special flood hazard area.
Included are lands adjoining a river or stream that have been or may
be inundated by a 100-year flood. Also included are areas that comprise
Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for Sewage
Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by
PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the 100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and Flood Insurance
Studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the 100-year frequency floodway, it is
assumed - absent evidence to the contrary - that the floodway extends
from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground,
specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
(TO) GRADE — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment
or bottom of excavation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED — (Hydrologic Engineering Center
Hydrologic Modeling System) A computer-based hydrologic modeling
§ 26-202 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-202
1:434
technique adapted to the watersheds in Dauphin County for the Act
167 Plan. The model has been calibrated by adjusting key model input
parameters.
HIGH TUNNEL — A structure which meets the following:
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pa. Code Title
25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards,
93.4b(a).
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into one of four HSGs (A, B, C, and
D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for
bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture defines
the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United
States and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest
may be identified from a soil survey report from the local NRCS office
or the Dauphin County Conservation District.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but are not limited to: roofs, additional indoor
living spaces, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any
new streets and sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas
are not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
Any surface area proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall
be assumed to be impervious, unless designed as an infiltration best
management practice (BMP).
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, etc.).
Is used for the production, processing, keeping, storing, sale or
shelter of an agricultural commodity as defined in Section 2 of
the Act of December 19, 1974 (P.L. 973, No. 319), known as the
"Pennsylvania Farmland and Forest Land Assessment Act of 1974,"9
or for the storage of agricultural equipment or supplies.
A.
Is constructed consistent with all of the following:
(1) Has a metal, wood, or plastic frame.
When covered, has a plastic, woven textile, or other flexible
covering.
(2)
Has a floor made of soil, crushed stone, matting, pavers or a
floating concrete slab.
(3)
B.
9. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5490.1 et seq.
§ 26-202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-202
1:435
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain; a structure at the
diversion end of a conduit; the upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, steepsided
hills, underground drainage and caves. Karst is formed on
carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomites and sometimes
gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) —
LIMIT OF DISTURBANCE — A line provided on the SWM site plan
that indicates the total area to be disturbed during a proposed earth
disturbance activity.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Dauphin County Act 167
Watershed Hydrologic Model(s).
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPALITY — South Hanover Township, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — The federal government's system for issuance of permits
under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in
Pennsylvania.
NOAA ATLAS 14 — Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, United States Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of,
or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features;
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.10
C.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 26-202 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-202
1:436
(2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
NON-POINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resources Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes not under pressure.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking
areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
PERVIOUS SURFACE (PERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that allows
infiltration of water into the ground. Pervious surfaces (or areas) shall
include, but are not limited to: soil, plant or vegetative cover, and
anything not considered an impervious surface. Pervious areas also
include patios, pervious bituminous paved areas, and pervious concrete
areas, provided the area incorporates an infiltration best management
practice (BMP) to address and manage the volume increase from the
two-year, twenty-four-hour storm pursuant to provisions of this chapter,
and provided further that the materials do not prevent stormwater from
absorbing into the ground.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of South
Hanover Township.
A. Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
"Point source," as described in 40 CFR 122.2, at the point where
the South Hanover Township's storm sewer system discharges to
surface waters of the commonwealth.
B.
§ 26-202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-202
1:437
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to: any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be
expected from the most-severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in South Hanover Township are planned, conducted, or
maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 92,
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.11
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of
runoff from a site or subwatershed area to which the post-development
peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which postdevelopment
flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of
predevelopment flows as required to meet the plan requirements and
the goals of Act 167.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any
one given year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands, that serves as a protective filter to
11.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 26-202 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-202
1:438
help protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land
uses.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches, and other similar activities. Road maintenance
activities that do not disturb the subbase of a paved road, such as
milling and pavement overlays, are not considered earth disturbance
activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured
(retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth
during or after a storm event.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or detention basin located and
designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by stormwater runoff.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, Township streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called "Curve Number (CN)."
§ 26-202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-202
1:439
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a
pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law,
including, but not limited to:
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage), with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm
"event" occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years.
See also "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but exclude
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation, snow, or ice melt.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants than
are found in typical stormwater runoff.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which is listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained, under
state regulations.
A.
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special-protection streams.
B.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological, and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After earth disturbance
activities are complete, these characteristics can be impacted by
addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes in habitat
through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of changes
in land surface area from those activities. Therefore, permanent
discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect the
stream bank, streambed, and structural integrity of the waterway,
to prevent these impacts.
C.
Protection and maintenance of water quality in special-protection
streams pursuant to 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93.
D.
§ 26-202 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-202
1:440
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure, natural
or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to:
detention basins, wet ponds, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and
infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Dauphin County
Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff in
Dauphin County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."12
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) — The
plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance
with this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length, upstream to downstream, which encloses
regulated waters of the commonwealth.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land, by any means, into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or
building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision
by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than
10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwellings, shall be exempt [Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247].
SUBWATERSHED AREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria has been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most-distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
12.Editor’s Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 26-202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-202
1:441
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WATERSHED — A region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water, whether natural or artificial.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes,
but is not limited to, wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan,
the United States Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania,
the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area
designated by a river basin commission. This definition is used by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.)
§ 26-202 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-202
1:442
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 26-301. General requirements. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in § 26-302:
A. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
B. No regulated activities shall commence until South Hanover
Township issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will
be provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements as
described under §§ 26-303 and 26-304 of this chapter.
D. The SWM site plan approved by South Hanover Township shall be
on site throughout the duration of the regulated activities.
2. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code (including, but not limited to, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control) and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
3. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, conform
to the state water quality requirements, and meet all requirements
under the Storm Water Management Act and any more-stringent
requirements as determined by South Hanover Township.
4. South Hanover Township may, after consultation with PADEP and/or
DCCD, approve measures for meeting the state water quality
requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet
the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law,
including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
5. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
A. Protect health, safety, and property.
B. Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
§ 26-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-301
1:443
(1) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands.
(2) Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect
existing forested buffers.
(3) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(4) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(5) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(6) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(7) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(8) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(9) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(10) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas wherever possible, and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
C. Applicants are encouraged to incorporate the techniques for lowimpact
development practices described in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual) to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter
and the state water quality requirements.
6. Impervious areas.
A. The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
B. For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
C. For projects that add impervious area to a developed parcel, the
new impervious area is subject to the requirements of this chapter;
and any existing impervious area that is within the new proposed
limit of disturbance is also subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
7. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
§ 26-301 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-301
1:444
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge.
A. The applicant must provide an executed easement for newly
concentrated flow across adjacent properties.
8. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
9. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
(with a minimum width of 20 feet) shall be provided conforming to the
line of such watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within
the easement, may be required, except as approved by the appropriate
governing authority.
10. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code,
Chapter 105, through the joint permit application process or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.
11. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands),
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code,
Chapter 105, through the joint permit application process or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility
of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be
obtained from PADEP.
12. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger
than the 100-year event.
13. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on, or discharged onto, state highway rights-of-way shall
be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
§ 26-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-301
1:445
§ 26-302. Exemptions/modifications. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
14. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the stormwater analysis shall be
submitted to the downstream municipality's Engineer for review and
comment.
15. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., is encouraged, where soil
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
16. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
17. The design of facilities over karst shall include an evaluation and
implementation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
18. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
South Hanover Township shall permit it on a case-by-case basis.
1. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
A. Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
B. Protect health, safety, and property.
C. Meet special requirements for high-quality (HQ) and exceptionalvalue
(EV) watersheds.
2. South Hanover Township, at its discretion, may require an applicant to
demonstrate that the following BMPs are being utilized to the maximum
extent practicable to receive consideration for the exemptions:
A. Limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes over
30%, existing native vegetation, and other sensitive and specialvalue
features.
B. Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
C. Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
D. Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
E. Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
§ 26-301 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-302
1:446
F. Direct runoff to pervious areas.
3. South Hanover Township, at its discretion, may require an applicant to
demonstrate that the proposed development/additional impervious area
will not adversely impact the following:
A. Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
B. Velocities and erosion.
C. Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
D. Existing known problem areas.
E. Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
F. Downstream property owners.
4. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 26-302, Subsections 1, 2 and 3, may be exempted
from various requirements of this chapter according to the following
table:
New Impervious Area
[Since December 19, 2010]
(square footage)
Applicant Must Submit to South
Hanover Township
0 to 1,000 No submission required
1,000 to 5,000 Volume controls and SWM site plan
and report
> 5,000 Rate controls, volume controls, SWM
site plan and report and record
drawings
5. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting
(when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear
set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is
subject. South Hanover Township may accept alternative stormwater
management controls, provided that:
A. The applicant, in consultation with South Hanover Township,
PADEP and/or DCCD, states that meeting the requirements of the
volume controls or rate controls of this chapter is not possible or
creates an undue hardship.
B. The alternative stormwater management controls proposed by the
applicant are documented to be acceptable to South Hanover
Township, PADEP and/or DCCD for NPDES requirements
pertaining to post-construction stormwater management
requirements.
§ 26-302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-302
1:447
C. The alternative stormwater management controls are in
compliance with all other sections of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, § 26-301, Subsection 4, and § 26-302, Subsections 1,
2 and 3.
6. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from rate and
volume control requirements and SWM site plan preparation
requirement of this chapter, provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102. It should be
noted that temporary roadways are not exempt.
7. Activities that increase the impervious coverage, but the increase is
accounted for and managed by a stormwater management best
management practice designed and installed under an previously
approved subdivision or land development plan, are exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
8. Agricultural activities are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter, provided the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
9. High tunnels are exempt from the requirements of this chapter,
provided that the high tunnel or its flooring does not result in an
impervious area exceeding 25% of all structures located on the owner's
total contiguous land area and the high tunnel meets one of the
following:
A. The high tunnel is located at least 100 feet from any perennial
stream or watercourse, public road or neighboring property line.
B. The high tunnel is located at least 35 feet from any perennial
stream or watercourse, public road or neighboring property line
and located on land with a slope not greater than 7%.
C. The high tunnel is supported with a buffer or diversion system that
does not directly drain into a stream or other watercourse by
managing stormwater runoff in a manner consistent with
requirements of this chapter.
10. Linear roadway improvement projects that create additional
impervious area are not exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
However, alternative stormwater management strategies may be
applied at the joint approval of South Hanover Township and the
Dauphin County Conservation District (if an NPDES permit is required)
when site limitations (such as limited right-of-way) and constraints (as
shown and provided by the applicant) preclude the ability of the
applicant to meet the enforcement of the stormwater management
standards in this chapter. All strategies must be consistent with
PADEP's regulations, including NPDES requirements.
11. South Hanover Township may, after an applicant has demonstrated
compliance with § 26-302, Subsections 1, 2 and 3, grant a modification
§ 26-302 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-302
1:448
§ 26-303. Volume controls. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
of the requirements of one or more provisions of this chapter if the
literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the
purpose and intent of the chapter is observed.
A. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall state in
full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on
which the request is based, the provision or provisions of the
ordinance involved, and the minimum modification necessary.
1. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
and in Appendix B of this chapter13 shall be utilized for all regulated
activities to the maximum extent practicable.
2. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method. For regulated activities
equal to or less than one acre, this chapter establishes no preference
for either method; therefore, the applicant may select either method on
the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations on
applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each
methodology, and other factors.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume
when compared to the predevelopment total runoff volume for
the two-year/twenty-four-hour storm event.
(2) For hydrologic modeling purposes:
(a) Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations.
(b) 20% of existing impervious area, when present on the
proposed project site, and contained within the new
proposed limit of disturbance, shall be considered meadow
(good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
greater than one acre. For new impervious surfaces:
13.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-303
1:449
§ 26-304. Rate controls. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into surface waters of the
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
3. All applicable worksheets from Chapter 8 of the BMP Manual must be
used when establishing volume controls.
4. Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed elevation of
the stormwater BMPs are required for all proposed infiltration
facilities. Infiltration tests shall be conducted in accordance with the
BMP Manual. Acceptable soil will have an infiltration rate of at least 0.1
inch per hour and not more than 10 inches per hour (after application of
the appropriate safety factor from the BMP Manual). The stabilized
infiltration rate is to be determined in the same location and within the
same soil horizon as the bottom of the infiltration facility. South
Hanover Township shall be notified 24 hours prior to infiltration tests
being conducted so as to provide an opportunity for South Hanover
Township to witness the tests.
1. For all lands contained within South Hanover Township, the postdevelopment
peak discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
peak discharge rates for the one-, two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and
100-year storms.
2. Lands contained within Dauphin County that have had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 stormwater management plan:
A. Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, fifty-, and 100-year
storms.
B. For the two-, ten-, and twenty-five-year storms, the postdevelopment
peak discharge rates shall be in accordance with the
approved release rate map for the individual watershed.
§ 26-303 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-304
1:450
ARTICLE IV
Erosion and Sedimentation (E&S) Standards
§ 26-401. Erosion and sedimentation requirements during earth
disturbance activities. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code,
Chapters 92 and 102, as required and applicable as follows:
A. The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
B. Development of written plans.
C. Submission of plans for approval.
D. Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits.
E. Maintaining plans and permits on site.
2. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the Dauphin County Conservation
District must be provided to South Hanover Township.
3. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the Dauphin County Conservation
District, shall be available at the project site at all times if required
under Chapter 102.
4. Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction,
timber harvesting, etc.) shall comply with all applicable standards for
erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations
under 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 102 and 105. The erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Dauphin County
Conservation District for approval and shall address the following, as
applicable:
A. Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads,
landing areas, trails, and storage and staging areas.
B. Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention
ponds, etc.).
C. Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
D. Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction
entrance for mud and debris control.
E. A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through
regrading, topsoil placement, reseeding, and other stabilization
techniques, as required.
§ 26-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-401
1:451
§ 26-402. Total maximum daily load (TMDL) requirements. [Ord.
No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
5. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following:
A. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
B. Infiltration BMPs shall be protected from receiving sediment-laden
runoff.
C. The source of protection for infiltration BMPs shall be identified
(i.e., orange construction fence surrounding the perimeter of the
BMP).
6. Maintenance during development of a project shall be the responsibility
of the developer and/or landowner and shall include, but not be limited
to:
A. Removal of silt and debris from basins, traps, inlet protection, silt
fencing, or other structures or measures when capacity of those
structures is reached.
B. Periodic maintenance of temporary control facilities, such as
replacement of straw bale dikes, straw filters or similar measures.
C. Establishment or reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and
mulching or sodding of scoured areas or areas where vegetation
has not successfully been established.
D. Installation of necessary controls to correct unforeseen problems
caused by storm events within design frequencies.
E. The contractor or developer shall be responsible for removal of all
temporary measures and installation of permanent measures upon
completion of the project.
1. Agricultural activities contributory to a watershed within South
Hanover Township containing an established non-point-source
(agricultural) TMDL shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 102
(Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control); Chapter 91, § 91.36 (General
Provisions Related to Manure Management); and Act 38 (Nutrient
Management).
2. This section shall apply to agricultural activities conducted in
watersheds where TMDLs are established in the future.
§ 26-401 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-402
1:452
ARTICLE V
Design Criteria
§ 26-501. Design criteria for stormwater management and drainage
facilities. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. General design guidelines.
A. Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless:
(1) The watersheds are subwatersheds of a common watershed
which join together within the perimeter of the property;
(2) The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate discharge
onto adjacent lands; or
(3) Easements from the affected landowner(s) are provided.
B. Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
predevelopment flow type condition.
C. Stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are encouraged (e.g.,
rooftop storage, drywells, cisterns, recreation area ponding,
diversion structures, porous pavements, holding tanks, infiltration
systems, stream channel storage, in-line storage in storm sewers,
and grading patterns). They shall be located, designed, and
constructed in accordance with the latest technical guidance
published by PADEP, provided they are accompanied by detailed
engineering plans and performance capabilities and supporting
site-specific soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and infiltration
rate data to verify proposed designs. Additional guidance from
other sources may be accepted at the discretion of the Township
Engineer (a preapplication meeting is suggested).
D. All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
E. No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a Township or state roadway.
F. The invert of all stormwater management facilities and
underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table or
other soil limiting zone. The invert of stormwater facilities may be
lowered if adequate subsurface drainage, which does not alter the
existing water table level, is provided.
§ 26-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-501
1:453
G. Any stormwater management facility may be required to be fenced
with a minimum four-foot-high fence of material acceptable to
South Hanover Township. Gates with a minimum opening of 10 feet
shall be provided for access. Ponds having slopes steeper than 3:1
side slopes shall be enclosed by a minimum six-foot-high chain-link
fence.
H. Stormwater management facilities excavated to carbonate rock
must either be fitted with an impervious clay liner, geosynthetic
clay liner (GGL), an HDPE liner or similar liner material as may be
approved by the Township Engineer, or overexcavated four feet and
refilled with a suitable material mix. Suitable backfill material is
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer. The developer
must provide supporting engineering calculations for the proposed
lining system.
I. The type, location, and number of landscaping and planting
specification shall be provided for all stormwater management
facilities and be specific for each type of facility.
2. Stormwater management facilities (with a depth of water equal to or
greater than three feet measured from the lowest point inside a facility
to the crest of the emergency spillway).
A. Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff and
requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be designed to
provide an emergency spillway to handle a peak rate of stormwater
runoff up to and including the 100-year post-development flow, with
a blocked primary outlet structure. The height of embankment
must be set as to provide a minimum one foot of freeboard through
the spillway, above the maximum water surface elevation,
computed when the spillway functions for the 100-year postdevelopment
inflow, with a blocked outlet structure. The primary
outflow structure must be designed to pass all design storms (up to
and including the 100-year event) without discharging through the
emergency spillway. The maximum water depth within any
stormwater management facility shall be no greater than eight feet
when functioning through the primary outlet structure.
B. Emergency spillways shall be armored to prevent erosion during
the 100-year post-development flow, with blocked primary outlet
structure. Synthetic liners or rip-rap may be used, and calculations
sufficient to support proposed armor must be provided. An earthen
plug must be used to accurately control the spillway invert if riprap
is the proposed armoring material. Emergency spillway armor must
extend up the sides of the spillway and continue at full width to a
minimum of 10 feet past the toe of slope.
C. Stormwater management facility berm cross sections must be at
least five feet wide at the top and eight feet wide through the
emergency spillway. For fill embankments, the side slopes shall be
§ 26-501 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-501
1:454
no steeper than 3:1 on the inside of the facility and 2:1 on the
outside of the facility. For cut slopes, the side slopes shall be no
steeper than 2:1.
D. A cutoff and key trench of impervious material shall be provided
under all embankments four feet or greater in height.
E. Soils used for the construction of stormwater management
facilities shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors) (refer to
E&S Manual) and be identified on the SWM site plan.
F. Trash racks must be provided to prevent clogging of primary
outflow structure stages for all orifices equivalent to 12 inches or
smaller in diameter.
G. Sewage control measures such as filter blankets or filter collars
must be provided on all outflow culverts in accordance with the
methodology contained in the latest edition of the E&S Manual.
H. Conventional, non-BMP stormwater management facilities must
empty over a period of time not less than 24 hours and not more
than 72 hours from the end of the facility's inflow hydrograph.
Infiltration tests performed at the facility locations and proposed
basin bottom depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual, must
support time-to-empty calculations if infiltration is a factor in the
sizing of the stormwater management facility.
I. Impervious low-flow channels are not permitted within stormwater
management facilities to promote water quality and groundwater
recharge for frequent storm events. Facilities designed as water
quality/infiltration BMPs may have a bottom slope of zero. Minimalmaintenance,
saturation-tolerant vegetation must be provided in
basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs. Conventional,
non-BMP stormwater management facilities must have a minimum
slope of 1% extending radially out from the primary outlet
structure. Water storage below the lowest outlet structure stage
(i.e., dead storage) is permitted in stormwater management
facilities designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs.
J. Stormwater management facilities' bottom elevations must be
greater than adjacent floodplain elevations (FEMA or HEC-RAS
analysis). If no floodplain is defined, bottom elevations must be
higher than existing ground elevations 50 feet from top of stream
bank in the facilities' vicinity.
K. Basin outflow culverts discharging into floodplains must account
for tailwater. Tailwater corresponding to the 100-year floodplain
elevation may be used for all design storms, or the applicant may
elect to determine flood elevations of the adjacent watercourse for
each design storm. The floodplain is assumed to be 50 feet from top
of stream bank in areas where a floodplain is not designated, or
where no other evidence is provided.
§ 26-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-501
1:455
L. Exceptions to these requirements may be made at the discretion of
South Hanover Township for BMPs that retain or detain water but
are of a much smaller scale than traditional stormwater
management facilities.
3. Storm sewer facilities:
A. Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff from
a ten-year design storm without surcharging inlets where
appropriate. When connecting to an existing storm sewer system,
the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed system will not
exacerbate any existing stormwater problems and that adequate
downstream capacity exists.
B. A minimum pipe size of 15 inches in diameter shall be used in all
roadway systems (public or private) proposed for construction.
Pipes shall be designed to provide a minimum velocity of 2 1/2 feet
per second when flowing full, but in all cases the slope shall be no
less than 0.5%. Arch pipe of equivalent cross-sectional area may be
substituted in lieu of circular pipe where cover or utility conflict
conditions exist.
C. In proposed curbed roadway sections, the maximum encroachment
of water on the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a
through travel lane or one inch less than the depth of curb during
the ten-year design storm of five-minute duration. Gutter depth
shall be verified by inlet capture/capacity calculations that account
for road slope and opening area. The maximum distance between
inlets in curbed roadway sections shall be no more than 600 feet;
however, access to underground pipes shall be provided every 300
feet.
D. Standard Type "C" inlets with eight-inch hoods shall be used along
vertical concrete curb roadway networks. Type "C" inlets with teninch
hoods that provide a two-inch sump condition may be used
with approval of the Township Engineer when roadway longitudinal
slopes are 1.0% or less.
E. For inlets containing a change in pipe size, the elevation for the
crown of the pipes shall be the same or the smaller pipe's crown
shall be at a higher elevation.
F. All inlets shall provide a minimum two-inch drop between the
lowest inlet pipe invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert
elevation.
G. On curbed sections, a double inlet shall be placed at the low point
of sag vertical curves, or an inlet shall be placed at the low point
and on each side of the low point at a distance not to exceed 100
feet, or at an elevation not to exceed 0.2 foot above the low point.
§ 26-501 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-501
1:456
H. At all roadway low points, swales and easements shall be provided
behind the curb or swale and through adjacent properties to
channelize and direct any overflow of stormwater runoff away from
dwellings and structures.
I. Inlets shall be placed so drainage cannot cross intersections or
street center lines.
J. All inlets in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicycle-safe grating
consistent with PennDOT Publication 72M. A note to this effect
shall be added to the SWM site plan or inlet details therein.
K. Inlets must be sized to accept the specified pipe sizes without
knocking out any of the inlet corners. All pipes entering or exiting
inlets shall be cut flush with the inlet wall. A note to this effect shall
be added to the SWM site plan or inlet details therein.
L. Inlets shall have weep holes covered with geotextile fabric placed
at appropriate elevations to completely drain the subgrade prior to
placing the base and surface course on roadways.
M. Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater than five feet in depth
shall be equipped with ladder rungs and shall be detailed on the
SWM site plan.
N. Inlets shall not have a sump condition in the bottom (unless
designed as a water quality BMP). Pipes shall be flush with the
bottom of the box, or concrete channels shall be poured.
O. Inlets, manholes, pipes, and culverts shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications set forth in PennDOT's
Publication 408, latest edition, and as detailed in PennDOT's
Publication 72M, Standards for Roadway Construction (RC), latest
edition, or as approved by the Township Engineer. All material and
construction details (inlets, manholes, pipe trenches, etc.), must be
shown on the SWM site plan, and a note added that all construction
must be in accordance with PennDOT's Publication 408 and
PennDOT's Publication 72M, latest edition. A note shall be added to
the plan stating that all frames, concrete top units, and grade
adjustment rings shall be set in a bed of full mortar according to
Publication 408.
P. Accessible drainage structures shall be located on continuous
storm sewer systems at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5°, and at all points
of convergence of two or more storm sewer pipes.
Q. All storm drainage piping (equal to or greater than 12 inches)
discharging to the ground surface shall be provided with either
reinforced concrete headwalls or plastic and metal pipe end
§ 26-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-501
1:457
§ 26-502. Calculation methodology. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
sections compatible with the pipe size involved in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408 and Publication 72M.
R. Outlet protection shall be provided at all surface discharge points
with storm drainage piping in order to minimize erosion consistent
with the E&S Manual. If outlet protection is not proposed, the
developer must provide supporting engineering calculations to
show that the design flow will leave the pipe at nonerosive
velocities.
S. Pavement base drain shall be provided at all low points in cut areas,
toe of slope areas, and other areas as dictated by proven
engineering principles and design judgment. All base drain shall be
in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408.
4. Swale conveyance facilities.
A. Swales must be able to convey post-development runoff from a tenyear
design storm with six inches of freeboard to top of the swale.
B. Swales shall have side slopes no steeper than 3:1.
C. All swales shall be designed, labeled on the SWM site plan, and
details provided to adequately construct and maintain the design
dimension of the swales.
D. Swales shall be designed for stability using velocity or shear
criteria. Velocity criteria may be used for channels with less than
10% slope. Shear criteria may be used for all swales.
Documentation must be provided to support velocity and/or shear
limitations used in calculations.
E. Where swale bends occur, the computed velocities or shear
stresses shall be multiplied by the following factor for the purpose
of designing swale erosion protection:
(1) 1.75: when swale bend is 30° to 60°.
(2) 2.00: when swale bend is 60° to 90°.
(3) 2.50: when swale bend is 90° or greater.
F. Swales must be designed for both temporary and permanent
conditions in accordance with the latest E&S Manual.
1. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual.
2. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
the Soil Cover Complex (SCS) Method for designing and analyzing
stormwater management facilities which involve hydrograph routing
(i.e., stormwater detention facilities).
§ 26-501 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-502
1:458
3. Rainfall values:
A. Rational Method. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves,
Publication 584, Chapter 7A, latest edition, shall be used in
conjunction with the appropriate time of concentration and return
period.
B. Soil Cover Complex Method. The Soil Conservation Service Type II,
twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in conjunction
with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14 or consistent with the
following table:
Return Interval
(year)
24-hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
1 2.40
2 2.90
10 4.36
25 5.43
50 6.38
100 7.48
4. Peak flow rates:
A. Rational Method: may be used for drainage areas up to 20 acres.
Extreme caution should be used by the qualified professional if the
watershed has more than one main drainage channel, if the
watershed is divided so that hydrologic properties are significantly
different in one verses the other, if the time of concentration
exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff volume is an important
factor. The combination of Rational Method hydrographs based on
timing shall be prohibited.
(1) The use of the Modified Rational Method to design stormwater
management facilities must be approved by the Township
Engineer.
(2) If the Rational Method is used, the ascending leg of the
hydrograph shall have a time of three times the time of
concentration (3 Tc) and the descending leg of the hydrograph
shall have a time of seven times the time of concentration (7
Tc).
B. Soil Cover Complex Method: may be used for drainage areas
greater than 20 acres. This method is recommended for design of
stormwater management facilities and where stormwater runoff
volume must be taken into consideration.
§ 26-502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-502
1:459
C. For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth
of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
5. Runoff coefficients:
A. Rational Method: Use Table C-1 (Appendix C).14
B. Soil Cover Complex Method: Use Table C-2 (Appendix C).15
C. For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious area conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition).
D. For the purposes of predevelopment volume determination, 20% of
existing impervious area, when present on the project site, and
contained within the new proposed limit of disturbance, shall be
considered meadow (good condition) for predevelopment
hydrologic calculations for redevelopment.
6. Design storm:
A. All drainage facilities (inlets, pipes, and swales) shall be designed
to safely convey the ten-year storm.
B. All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-, two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year
hydrographs through the facility using the Storage Indication
(Modified Puls) Method. The design storm hydrograph shall be
computed using a calculation method that produces a full
hydrograph.
C. The stormwater management and drainage system shall be
designed to safely convey the post-development100-year storm
event to stormwater detention facilities, for the purpose of meeting
peak rate control.
D. All structures (culverts or bridges) proposed to convey runoff under
a Township road shall be designed to pass the fifty-year design
storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the
lowest point along the top of the roadway.
E. All design within state or federal rights-of-way or that falls under
the design criteria of any higher authority must meet the
requirements of that agency in addition to meeting the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
7. Time of concentration:
A. Time of concentration shall be computed using the NRCS
Segmental Method as described in TR-55 (SCS 1986, or most-
14.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
15.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-502
1:460
current update). The length of sheet flow shall be limited to 100
feet. Manning's "n" Roughness Coefficient for TR-55 sheet flow
can be found in Table C-4 (Appendix C).16 Time of concentration
for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's
Equation.
B. For sites with insignificant channelized flow and less than 20%
imperviousness coverage, the time of concentration may be
computed using the NRCS equation for lag time:
Time of Concentration = Tc = [(Tlag/.6)* 60] (minutes)
Where:
Tlag = Lag time (hours).
L = Hydraulic length of watershed (feet).
Y = Average overland slope of watershed (percent).
S = Maximum retention in watershed as defined by: S =
[(1,000/CN) - 10].
CN = NRCS Curve Number for watershed as defined by the
NRCS Loss Method.
C. Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
(1) The post-development time of concentration shall never be
greater than the predevelopment time of concentration for any
watershed or subwatershed.
(2) The minimum time of concentration for any watershed shall be
five minutes.
(3) The designer must provide computations for all
predevelopment time-of-concentration paths. A five-minute
time of concentration cannot be assumed for predevelopment.
(4) Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been
made to convey runoff from all new impervious coverage to
best management practices) may be assumed to represent the
predevelopment conditions for purpose of time-ofconcentration
calculations.
8. Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed depressions in areas
underlain by limestone or carbonate geologic features shall be excluded
from the modeled point of analysis defining predevelopment flows. If
16.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-502
1:461
left undisturbed during construction activities, areas draining to closed
depressions may also be removed from peak runoff rates in the postdevelopment
analysis. New, additional contributing runoff shall not be
directed to existing sinkholes or closed depressions.
9. Where uniform flow is anticipated, Manning's Equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Manning's Equation should not be
used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Manning's "n" values shall be obtained from Table C-3
(Appendix C).17 Inlet control shall be checked at all inlet boxes to
ensure the headwater depth during the ten-year design event is
contained below the top of grate for each inlet box.
10. South Hanover Township may approve the use of any generally
accepted full hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total
runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that
produces a full hydrograph.
11. South Hanover Township has the authority to require that computed
existing runoff rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions
and site history. If the designer can substantiate, through actual
physical calibration, that more-appropriate runoff and time-ofconcentration
values should be utilized at a particular site, then
appropriate variations may be made upon review and approval of South
Hanover Township.
17.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-502
1:462
ARTICLE VI
SWM Site Plan and Report Requirements
§ 26-601. General requirements. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for the
exemptions provided in § 26-302, the final approval of subdivision and/or
land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit,
or the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed
until the applicant has received written approval of an SWM site plan from
South Hanover Township.
§ 26-602. SWM site plan and report contents. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/
23/2018]
1. The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to South Hanover Township in a format that is clear, concise,
legible, neat and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be
rejected.
2. Appropriate sections from the South Hanover Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance,18 and other applicable local
ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plan.
A. The SWM site plan shall include (but not be limited to):
(1) Plans no larger than twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets
and in a form that meets the requirements for recording in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County.
(2) The name of the development; name and location address of
the property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site plan.
(3) A sheet index map for those projects which require more than
one sheet to cover the entire site.
(4) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(5) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(6) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
(7) A location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000
feet.
(8) Metes-and-bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 26-601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-602
1:463
(9) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet.
(10) Existing water bodies within the project area, including
streams, lakes, ponds, field-delineated wetlands or other
bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard boundaries (FEMAdelineated
floodplains and floodways), areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved, the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site, and overland drainage paths.
(11) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
water lines on and within 50 feet of property lines.
(12) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(13) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the hydraulic
soil group classification.
(14) The proposed limit-of-disturbance line and associated
proposed disturbed acres.
(15) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings,
including plans and profiles of roads and paved areas and floor
elevations of buildings.
(16) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs.
(17) The location and clear identification of the nature of
permanent stormwater BMPs.
(18) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
(19) A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress
to and egress from a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an
easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the
plan granting South Hanover Township or its designees access
to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way.
(20) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
(21) Construction details of any improvements made to sinkholes.
(22) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership,
operations, and maintenance responsibilities.
(23) A detailed schedule of observations during and following
construction which is tailored for the site under consideration.
(24) Notes and statements:
§ 26-602 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-602
1:464
(a) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that
the stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered
or removed without prior approval by South Hanover
Township.
(b) A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is
part of the SWM site plan.
(c) A note indicating that record drawings will be provided for
all stormwater management facilities prior to occupancy,
or the release of financial security.
(d) The following signature block for the qualified professional
preparing the SWM site plan:
"I,__________, hereby certify that the stormwater
management site plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the South Hanover Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
(e) The following signature block for the qualified professional
preparing the SWM site plan, as applicable:
"I,__________, hereby certify that there (are/are not)
wetlands on the subject property, the proposed project
(will/will not) impact off-site wetlands, and permits (are/
are not) required from the state or federal government."
B. The SWM site report shall include (but not be limited to):
(1) The name of the development; name and location address of
the property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site report.
(2) Project description narrative, including expected project time
schedule.
(3) Location map showing the project site.
(4) Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting the
time-of-concentration paths.
(5) A detailed description of the existing site conditions. A detailed
site evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in
areas of carbonate geology or karst topography, and other
environmentally sensitive areas such as brownfields.
(6) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations,
calculations, assumptions, and criteria for the design of all
stormwater BMPs.
§ 26-602 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-602
1:465
§ 26-603. SWM site plan and report submission. [Ord. No. 6-2018,
10/23/2018]
(7) Description of, justification, and actual field results for
infiltration testing with respect to the type of test and test
location for the design of infiltration BMPs.
(8) Calculations showing the total drainage area and impervious
area loading rates to each BMP.
(9) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
features and on any existing Township stormwater collection
system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(10) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious
area to be added.
(11) All applicable worksheets from Chapter 8 of the BMP Manual
when establishing volume controls.
(12) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership,
operation, and maintenance responsibilities as well as
schedules and costs for inspection and maintenance activities
for each permanent stormwater or drainage BMP, including
provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements.
C. Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the
SWM site plan, as applicable:
(1) Signed and executed operations and maintenance agreement
(as adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors).
(2) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and
off-site work.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and approval letter
from the Dauphin County Conservation District.
(4) An NPDES permit.
(5) Permits from PADEP and ACOE.
(6) A geologic assessment.
(7) A wetland delineation report.
(8) A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT when utilization of
a PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when
proposed facilities would encroach onto a PennDOT right-ofway.
§ 26-602 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-603
1:466
§ 26-604. SWM site plan and report review. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/
2018]
1. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and the report for the
regulated activity.
2. Three copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted to
South Hanover Township and may be distributed as follows:
A. Two copies for South Hanover Township accompanied by the
requisite municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
B. One copy for the Township Engineer.
3. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by South Hanover
Township, the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission, the Dauphin
County Conservation District or PADEP.
1. South Hanover Township shall require receipt of a complete SWM site
plan and report as specified in this chapter. South Hanover Township
shall review the SWM site plan and report for consistency with the
purposes, requirements, and intent of this chapter.
2. South Hanover Township shall not approve any SWM site plan and
report that is deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At
its sole discretion and in accordance with this article, when an SWM
site plan and report is found to be deficient, South Hanover Township
may disapprove the submission and require a resubmission; or in the
case of minor deficiencies, South Hanover Township may accept
submission of modifications. All revised SWM site plans and reports
must be accompanied by a comment response letter, indicating how
each of the Township's comments was addressed.
3. South Hanover Township shall notify the applicant in writing within 45
calendar days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or
disapproved if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision
or land development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a
subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall following the
subdivision and land development process according to the
Municipalities Planning Code.19
4. South Hanover Township shall not issue a building permit for any
regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been found to be
inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by South Hanover
Township. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 26-603 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-605
1:467
§ 26-605. Modification of plans. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by South Hanover
Township, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 26-606. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plan and report.
[Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
A disapproved SWM site plan and report may be resubmitted, with the
revisions addressing South Hanover Township's concerns documented in
writing, to South Hanover Township in accordance with this chapter. The
applicable municipal review fee must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved SWM site plan and report.
§ 26-607. Authorization to construct; term of validity. [Ord. No.
6-2018, 10/23/2018]
South Hanover Township's approval of an SWM site plan and report
authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a
maximum term of validity of five years following the date of approval.
South Hanover Township may specify a term of validity shorter than five
years in the approval for any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity
shall commence on the date South Hanover Township signs the approval
for an SWM site plan. If stormwater management facilities included in
the approved SWM site plan have not been constructed, or if a record
drawing of these facilities has not been approved within this time, then
South Hanover Township may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and
may revoke any and all permits or approvals.
§ 26-608. Record drawings, completion certificate and final
inspection. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved
SWM site plan shall be submitted to South Hanover Township.
2. The record drawings shall include a certification of completion signed
by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan
and report.
3. The record drawings shall include an as-built survey, unless waived by
the Township Engineer, to verify elements crucial to the functioning the
BMPs. The elements may include, but are not limited to: volumes,
§ 26-605 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-608
1:468
elevations, and inverts. The as-built survey shall include the actual
location, dimensions, and/or elevations of the completed improvements.
4. After receipt of the record drawings and certification of completion,
South Hanover Township may conduct a final inspection.
§ 26-608 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-608
1:469

ARTICLE VII
Easements
§ 26-701. Easements. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. Easements shall be established to accommodate the existence of
drainageways.
2. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management
or drainage facilities, including, but not limited to: detention facilitates
(above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs,
drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
3. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
4. All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide.
5. Easements shall provide ingress to and egress from a public right-ofway.
In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note
may be added to the plan granting South Hanover Township or its
designee access to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way.
6. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
7. The following note shall be placed on the recorded plan, "Nothing shall
be planted or placed within the easement which would adversely affect
the function of the easement or conflict with any conditions associated
with such easement."
8. A note shall be placed on the SWM site plan identifying the party
responsible for assuring the continued functionality and required
maintenance of any easement.
§ 26-701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-701
1:471

ARTICLE VIII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 26-801. Financial guarantee. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
§ 26-802. Maintenance responsibilities. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/
2018]
1. The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to South Hanover
Township for the timely installation and proper construction of all
stormwater management controls as required by the approved SWM
site plan and this chapter, equal to 110% of the full construction cost of
the required controls in accordance with the Municipalities Planning
Code.
2. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:
A. Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified professional, verifying that all
permanent facilities have been constructed according to the SWM
site plan and report and approved revisions thereto.
B. Provide a set of record drawings.
C. Request a final inspection from South Hanover Township to certify
compliance with this chapter, after receipt of the certification of
completion and record drawings by South Hanover Township.
1. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The operation and
maintenance description shall outline required routine maintenance
actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the
stormwater control facilities.
2. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principles:
A. If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to South Hanover Township,
stormwater control facilities/BMPs may also be dedicated to and
maintained by South Hanover Township.
B. If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
streets, sewers, and other public improvements are to be privately
owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
§ 26-801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-802
1:473
§ 26-803. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
C. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded
as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.
D. The SWM site plan and operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
E. South Hanover Township may take enforcement actions against an
applicant for failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
3. South Hanover Township, upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer, shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan and report. South Hanover Township may require a dedication of
such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site
plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that South Hanover
Township will accept the facilities. South Hanover Township reserves
the right to accept or reject the ownership and operating responsibility
for any portion of the stormwater management controls.
4. If South Hanover Township accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs,
South Hanover Township may, at its discretion, require a fee from the
applicant to South Hanover Township to offset the future cost of
inspections, operations, and maintenance.
5. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM site plan, or to allow the property to
remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved SWM site
plan, unless South Hanover Township grants an exception in writing.
1. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant
shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (as
adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors) covering all
stormwater control facilities that are to be privately owned. The
operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be recorded with
the SWM site plan and made a part thereof.
2. Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of South Hanover Township and the Township Solicitor.
3. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement, South Hanover Township may perform
the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
§ 26-802 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-803
1:474
ARTICLE IX
Inspections
§ 26-901. Schedule of inspections. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
§ 26-902. Right of entry. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. PADEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any permits
issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to
PADEP compliance programs, South Hanover Township or its municipal
assignee may inspect all phases of the installation of temporary or
permanent stormwater management facilities.
2. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if South Hanover
Township determines that the temporary or permanent stormwater
management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the
approved SWM site plan, South Hanover Township shall revoke any
existing permits or approvals until a revised SWM site plan is submitted
and approved as specified in this chapter.
3. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the
landowner's designee, according to the inspection schedule described
on the SWM site plan for each BMP.
A. South Hanover Township may require copies of the inspection
reports, in a form as stipulated by South Hanover Township.
B. If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, South Hanover Township, or its designee,
may conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate
fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
(1) Prior to conducting such inspections, South Hanover Township
shall inform the owner of its intent to conduct such
inspections. The owner shall be given 30 days to conduct
required inspections and submit the required inspection
reports to South Hanover Township.
1. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of South Hanover Township may enter at reasonable
times, upon any property within the Township of South Hanover
Township, to inspect the implementation, condition, or operations and
maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in regard to any aspect governed
by this chapter.
2. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of South Hanover Township ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
3. Persons working on behalf of South Hanover Township shall have the
right to temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the Township of
§ 26-901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-902
1:475
South Hanover such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater BMP.
4. Unreasonable delay in allowing South Hanover Township access to a
stormwater BMP is a violation of this chapter.
§ 26-902 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-902
1:476
ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 26-1001. Notification. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
§ 26-1002. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
§ 26-1003. Public nuisance. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
§ 26-1004. Suspension and revocation. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/
2018]
1. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, South
Hanover Township shall provide written notification, via certified mail,
of the violation to the landowner indicated on the O&M agreement.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s).
2. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent South Hanover Township
from pursuing any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is
proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with the
terms and conditions of this chapter.
1. South Hanover Township is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. The approved SWM site plan shall
be on file at the project site throughout the duration of the construction
activity. South Hanover Township or its designee may make periodic
inspections during construction.
2. Adherence to approved SWM site plan:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as
provided for by an approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
1. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
2. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 26-1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1004
1:477
§ 26-1005. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
§ 26-1006. Appeals. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. Any approval or permit issued by South Hanover Township may be
suspended or revoked for:
A. Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement.
B. A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
C. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, or pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
2. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by South Hanover
Township when:
A. South Hanover Township or its designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the violation(s) that caused the
suspension.
B. South Hanover Township is satisfied that the violation(s) has/have
been corrected.
3. An approval that has been revoked by South Hanover Township cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
1. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties
shall be cumulative.
2. In addition, South Hanover Township, through its Solicitor, may
institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any
court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining
orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
1. Any person aggrieved by any action of South Hanover Township or its
designee, relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to South
Hanover Township within 30 days of that action.
2. Any person aggrieved by any decision of South Hanover Township,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Dauphin
§ 26-1004 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-1006
1:478
County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of South Hanover
Township's decision.
§ 26-1006 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1006
1:479

ARTICLE XI
Prohibitions
§ 26-1101. Prohibited discharges and connections. [Ord. No.
6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. Any drain (including indoor drains and sinks) or conveyance, whether
on the surface or underground, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter South Hanover Township's separate storm sewer system or
waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.
2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to South Hanover Township's separate storm sewer system,
which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records
and approved by South Hanover Township, is prohibited.
3. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into South Hanover
Township's separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of the
commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
A. As provided in Subsection 4 of this section below; and
B. Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
4. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
A. Discharges from firefighting activities.
B. Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
C. Irrigation drainage.
D. Air-conditioning condensate.
E. Springs.
F. Water from crawl space pumps.
G. Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
H. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
I. Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
J. Lawn watering.
K. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
L. Uncontaminated groundwater.
§ 26-1101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1101
1:481
§ 26-1102. Roof drains and sump pumps. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/
2018]
§ 26-1103. Alteration of BMPs. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
M. Water from individual residential car washing.
N. Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
5. In the event that South Hanover Township or PADEP determines that
any of the discharges identified in Subsection 4 of this section
significantly contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth, or
is so notified by PADEP, South Hanover Township will notify the
responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
6. Upon notice provided by South Hanover Township or PADEP under
Subsection 5 of this section, the discharger will have a reasonable time,
as determined by South Hanover Township or PADEP, to cease the
discharge, consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the
discharge.
7. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
commonwealth law.
1. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas,
vegetative BMPs, or pervious areas to the maximum extent practicable.
1. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or structures, unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of South
Hanover Township.
2. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures, or within a drainage
easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of South Hanover Township.
§ 26-1101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-1103
1:482
ARTICLE XII
Fees and Expenses
§ 26-1201. Municipal review fee. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by South Hanover Township to defray review
costs incurred by South Hanover Township and the Township Engineer. The
applicant shall pay all fees.
§ 26-1202. Expenses covered by fees. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
§ 26-1203. Recording of approved SWM site plan and related
agreements. [Ord. No. 6-2018, 10/23/2018]
1. The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan and report by South Hanover
Township.
C. Preconstruction meetings.
D. Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and
drainage improvements during construction.
E. Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM
site plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
1. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall
record the following documents in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Dauphin County, within 30 days of approval of the SWM site plan by
South Hanover Township:
A. The SWM site plan.
B. The operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement (as adopted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors).
C. Easements under § 26-701.
2. South Hanover Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted
for the project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply
with this section.
§ 26-1201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1203
1:483
Chapter 27
ZONING
§ 26-1203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 26-1203
1:484
ARTICLE I
Title, Authority, Purpose, Community Development Objectives
§ 27-101. Short title. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 101, 4/11/1995]
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Township of South
Hanover Zoning Ordinance."
§ 27-102. Authority. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 102, 4/11/1995]
This article is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, July 31, 1968, as reenacted and
amended by Act 170, December 21, 1988.
§ 27-103. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 103, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-104. Community development objectives. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 104, 4/11/1995]
To promote and foster the community development goals and objectives
as contained in the South Hanover Township Comprehensive Plan, as
amended.
§ 27-105. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 105, 4/11/1995]
In interpreting and applying this chapter its provisions shall be held to be
minimum requirements for promotion of health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the Township. Any use permitted subject to the regulations
prescribed by the provisions of this chapter shall conform with all
regulations and is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, annul,
supersede or cancel any reservations contained in deeds or other
agreements but that if this chapter imposes more stringent restrictions
1. This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: The
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and
practical community development, proper density of population,
emergency preparedness, disaster evacuation, the provision of
adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and
loading space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, public
grounds and other public requirements; as well as,
B. To prevent one or more of the following: Overcrowding of land,
blight, danger and congestion in gravel and transportation, loss of
health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers. This
chapter is made in accordance with an overall program and with
consideration for the character of the Township, its various parts
and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and
structures.
§ 27-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-105
1:485
upon the use of buildings and land than are contained in the deeds or
agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 27-106. Application. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 106, 4/11/1995]
The provisions, regulations, limitations and restrictions of this article shall
apply to all structures, buildings, uses, signs and land and their accessory
structures, buildings, uses and signs.
§ 27-105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-106
1:486
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 27-201. Definition of terms. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 201, 4/11/1995]
The following words are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation of
this chapter for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties by
appropriate officers and by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 27-202. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 202, 4/11/1995]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated. Words used
in the present tense include the future tense. The singular includes the
plural. The word "person" includes any individual or group of individuals, a
corporation, partnership or any other similar entity. The word "lot" includes
the words "plot" or "parcel." The term "shall" is always mandatory. The
word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be
construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used
or occupied."
§ 27-203. List of definitions. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 203, 4/11/1995;
Ord. No. 2-1998, § 1, 4/28/1998; Ord. No. 3-1998, §§ 1, 2, 10/27/
1998; Ord. No. 3-2005, § 10, 8/16/2005; Ord. No. 2-2007, §§ 1, 2, 5/
22/2007; Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the
use of the property by the owner with the intention neither of transferring
rights to the property to another owner nor of resuming the use of the
property.
ACCESS DRIVE — A paved surface, other than a street, which provides
vehicular access from a street or private road to a lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and detached from the
main building on the same lot and use for purposes customarily incidental
to the main building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure detached from but
located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is
incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use incidental to, and on the same lot as, a principal
use. A structure or use that:
Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a
principal building or use;
1.
2. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use;
Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or
principal use served;
3.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:487
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas," (as defined below) or an establishment within
a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT CABARET — A club, restaurant, bar, tavern, theater, hall or similar
establishment which features male and/or female entertainers whose
performance includes "specified sexual activities" (as defined below) and/or
reveals or displays "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below).
ADULT DRIVE-IN PICTURE THEATER — An area open to the air and not
enclosed within any building used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or related
to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined
below) for observation by patrons therein, which patrons observe such
material from a location within automobiles or other motor vehicles, seated
in autos or on outdoor seats.
ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity for less than 50 persons used at any time for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" (as defined below) for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity for greater than 50 persons used at any time for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" (as defined below) for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT WALK-IN PICTURE THEATER — An area neither enclosed nor open
to the sky (e.g., a pavilion, tent, etc.) where material presented is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" (as defined below) for observation by patrons therein.
AGRICULTURAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
supplying soil preparation services, crop services, landscaping,
horticultural services, veterinary and other animal services and farm labor
and management services.
AGRICULTURE — The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and
gardening.
AIR RIGHTS — The right to use space above ground level.
Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants,
business or industry in the principal building or principal use served;
and
4.
5. Is located on the same lot as the principal building or use served.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:488
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare other than a minor street which affords
only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for
general traffic circulation.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, any change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height or
the moving from one location or position to another.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of
a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
AMENDMENT — A change in use in any district which includes revision to
the zoning text and/or the Official Zoning Map; and the authority for any
amendment lies solely with the Board of Supervisors.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used for the treatment, housing or
boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and birds or
fowl by a veterinarian.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves
which is external to or attached to the exterior of any building.
ANTENNA, SATELLITE DISH — A device incorporating a reflective surface
that is solid, open mesh or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow
dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/
or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or
orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited
to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs and
satellite microwave antennas.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit within a multifamily dwelling. This
classification includes apartments in apartment houses, bachelor
apartments, studio apartments and kitchenette apartments. Conversion
apartments are not included in this classification.
APARTMENT, ACCESSORY — An independent dwelling unit, incorporated
within an existing single-family detached dwelling without any substantial
external modification, established for the purpose of providing an
independent living unit for a person or persons related by marriage or blood
relative.
APARTMENT, GARDEN — A two story multifamily dwelling containing one
story dwelling units.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
development including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development including, but not limited to, an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:489
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
AREA, LOT — The area contained within the property lines of a lot or as
shown on a subdivision plan excluding space within any street but including
the area of any easement.
AUTO BODY SHOP — Any structure or any building or part thereof that is
used for the repair or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels, fenders, bumpers
and/or accessories of automobiles and other vehicles of conveyance.
AUTOMOBILE — A self-propelled, free-moving vehicle primarily for
conveyance on a street or roadway to include vans, passenger cars, station
wagons and pickup trucks but excluding tractor cabs, trailers, dump trucks
and excavating vehicles and equipment.
AUTOMOBILE GARAGE — A building on a lot designed and/or used
primarily for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, rental, servicing or
supplying of gasoline or oil to automobiles, trucks or similar motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including any
structures thereon, or any building or part thereof, that is used for the retail
sale of gasoline, oil, other fuel or accessories for motor vehicles and which
may include facilities used for polishing, greasing, washing, dry cleaning or
otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles. This classification does
not include storage of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE WASHING (CAR WASH) — A building on a lot designed and
used primarily for the washing and polishing of automobiles and which may
provide accessory services set forth herein for automobile service stations.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD (see also JUNKYARD) — The dismantling
or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers or the storage, sale or
dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts. The presence on
any lot or parcel of land of two or more motor vehicles which, for a period
exceeding 30 days, have not been capable of operating under their own
power and from which parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or
sale shall constitute prima facie evidence of an automobile wrecking yard.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BILLBOARD — An off-premise sign which directs attention to a product,
service, business, or cause.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:490
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance to
render final adjudications.
BOARDING HOUSE — Any dwelling in which more than three persons,
either individually or as families, are housed or lodged for compensation,
with or without meals.
BUFFER YARD (see also SCREENING) — A landscaped area intended to
separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or
properties from one another. A strip of land identified on a site plan or by a
zoning ordinance, established to protect one type of land use from another
land use that is incompatible. Normally, the area is landscaped and kept in
open space use.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure
of persons, animals or property including covered porches or bay windows
and chimneys. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be
used for human habitation.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line so as to
provide the required yards.
BUILDING PERMIT — Written permission by the proper Township official
for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance permitted between any structure and the
adjacent street right-of-way.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest
the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches
whether enclosed or unenclosed but does not include steps.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs
and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING — A building the size, dimensions or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
to a zoning ordinance but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign that is incorporated into an awning or canopy that
is attached to the building.
CARPORT — A covered space, open on at least three sides, for the storage
of one or more vehicles and accessory to a main or accessory building.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:491
CARTWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is improved, designed
or intended for vehicular use.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than one-half of its
clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall
not be considered in determining the maximum number of stories.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections. It is defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining
land to be used for recreation, common open space and preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas.
COMMERCIAL USE — An occupation, employment or enterprise that is
carried on for profit by the owner, lessee or licensee.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development not
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities. Common open space shall be substantially free of structures but
may contain such improvements as are in the development plan as finally
approved and as are appropriate for the recreation of residents.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water and water vapor.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — An official document adopted by the Board of
Supervisors setting forth its policies regarding the long-term development
of the Township; the preparation of which is based on careful studies of
existing conditions and prospect for future growth of the Township. The
plan shall include but need not be limited to plans for the use of land,
transportation of goods and people, community facilities and services and
a map and statement indicating the relationship of the Township and its
proposed development to adjacent municipalities.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that, owing to some special characteristics
attendant to its operation or installation (for example, potential danger,
smoke or noise), is permitted in a district subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors and subject to special requirements different from those usual
requirements for the district in which the conditional use may be located.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a
condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building structure
including the placement of manufactured/mobile homes.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:492
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance or immediate precursor
as defined in Schedules 1 through five of the Pennsylvania Controlled
Substance, Drug Device and Cosmetic Act, 35 P.S. § 780.104, or any
amendments thereto.
COUNTRY ESTATE — A conditional use provision for single-family detached
residential development having lots containing a minimum of five acres.
The purpose of this development option is to maintain the rural/agrarian
character of the Township by permitting low density single-family
development with reduced lot widths at the street right-of-way lines and
thereby reducing the amount of street construction normally associated
with standard residential development otherwise required by the district in
which located.
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such
building.
COURT, INNER — A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a
building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable and
that the court does not extend to a street, alley, yard or other outer court.
COURT, OUTER — A court enclosed on not more than three sides by exterior
walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable with one side or end open
to a street, driveway, alley or yard.
COVERAGE — That portion or percentage of the lot area covered by
building area and impervious material. For purposes of this chapter
"building coverage" and "impervious coverage" shall have the following
meanings:
CROSSWALKS — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended for
[to] furnish access for pedestrians.
CRT — Cathode ray tube.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end and
terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround.
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade of the top of the curb in
front of the midpoint of the lot.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That portion or percentage of the lot area
covered by all principal and accessory buildings.
1.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA, IMPERVIOUS
COVERAGE) — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the
ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but are not limited
to: roofs, additional indoor living spaces, garages, storage sheds and
similar structures, and any new streets and sidewalks. Decks, parking
area, and driveway areas are not counted as impervious areas if they do
not prevent infiltration. Any surface area proposed to initially be gravel
or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious, unless designed
as an infiltration best management practice (BMP). [Amended by Ord.
No. 1-2018, 2/27/2018]
2.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:493
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; also, the
material removed in excavation.
DAIRY — A commercial establishment for the manufacture or processing of
dairy products.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility in a nonresidential setting offering baby
sitting services and child care services being licensed and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Welfare.
DAY CARE HOME — A residence offering baby-sitting services and child
care services being licensed and approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Welfare.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common
pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the Township lies.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder
except the following:
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
1. The Board of Supervisors.
2. The Zoning Hearing Board.
The Planning Commission only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22]
or planned residential development ordinances. Determinations shall
be appealable only to the Boards designated as having jurisdiction for
such appeal.
3.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:494
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DISTRICT, ZONING — A district includes all buildings, lots and surface
areas within certain designated boundaries as indicated on the South
Hanover Township Zoning Map.
DOG KENNEL — A shelter for the breeding and/or boarding of four or more
dogs by a dog kennel owner.[Amended by Ord. No. 2-2018, 2/27/2018]
DOG KENNEL OWNER — A person, partnership, firm, company, or
corporation professionally engaged in the business of sheltering dogs for
the purpose of boarding, breeding, sale, training, hunting, companionship,
or other purposes.[Added by Ord. No. 2-2018, 2/27/2018]
DOMESTIC EMPLOYEES QUARTERS — A dwelling unit established as an
accessory use subordinate to the principal dwelling unit on the lot for the
purpose of providing living accommodations for domestic employees (e.g.,
maid, butler, cook, etc.) of the residing household. Such accommodations
may be attached or detached from the principal dwelling structure.
DRIVE-IN FACILITY — An establishment that, by design of physical facilities
or by service or packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers
to receive a service or obtain a product that may be used or consumed in
a motor vehicle on the premises or to be entertained while remaining in
an automobile. Any portion of a building or structure from which business
is transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with customers
located in a motor vehicle during such business transactions.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — Any objects, devises, instruments, apparatus or
contrivances whose primary and traditional use is involved with the illegal
use of any and all controlled substances under the laws of Pennsylvania.
Drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to:
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is
a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be
derived.
1.
Kit used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
2.
Isomerization devises used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
3.
Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
4.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:495
Scales and balances used, intended for use, designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
5.
Diluents and adulterants such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances.
6.
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana.
7.
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended
for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
8.
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for
use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
9.
Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in storing or concealing controlled substances.
10.
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use
or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body.
11.
Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling
or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into
the human body such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
A.
B. Water pipes.
C. Caburetion tubes and devices.
D. Smoking and carburetion masks.
Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to
be held in the hand.
E.
F. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
G. Chamber pipes.
H. Carburetor pipes.
I. Electric pipes.
J. Air-driven pipes.
K. Chillums.
12.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:496
DUMP — A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for disposal by
abandonment, dumping, burial or other means and for whatever purpose, of
garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts
thereof or waste material of any kind.
DWELLING — A building or structure designed for living quarters for one
or more families including mobile homes which are supported either by a
foundation or by blocks or jacks or are otherwise permanently attached to
the land but not including hotels, rooming houses or other accommodations
used for transient occupancy.
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more single-family, two-family or
multifamily dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes and having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities arranged for
occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING — Any structure designed
primarily for residential occupancy except a manufactured/mobile home
which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or
assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation on the building site in such a manner that all concealed parts
or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected at the site without
disassembly, damage or destruction.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME — A transportable, singlefamily
detached dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place
of assembly contained in one or in two units designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it
may be used without a permanent foundation. For floodplain management
purposes this definition includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles located on site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking, including
apartment houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED (ROW) — A dwelling used for one
family and having two party walls in common with other buildings (such as
row house or townhouse).
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED — A building used by one family
having only one dwelling unit and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, SEMI-DETACHED — A dwelling used by one
family, having one side yard, one party wall common with another building.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, DETACHED (DUPLEX) — A building used by two
families with one dwelling unit arranged over the other and having two side
yards.
L. Bongs.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:497
DYNAMIC MESSAGE DISPLAY — A sign incorporating LCD, LED, plasma,
CRT, pixelized lights, other video-like displays or other means of changing
messages.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner
to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
ELDERLY HOUSING — A multifamily development devoted entirely for the
provision of housing for senior citizens 55 years of age or older.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for purposes other
than generation or utilization through which electric energy in bulk is
passed for the purpose of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet
the needs of the general public.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES — Electric
public utility transmission and distribution facilities including substations.
ELEEMOSYNARY SCHOOL — Milton Hershey School and any other
Pennsylvania nonprofit corporation that:
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania duly appointed as the engineer for the
Township.
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering specifications of the
Township regulating the installation of any required improvement or for any
facility installed by any owner, subject to public use.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during flooding
except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the structure
is substantially impermeable.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
Is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code, as amended;
1.
Is an institution of purely public charity under the Pennsylvania
Institutions of Purely Public Charity Act, Act 55 of 1997 (P.L. 508), 10
P.S. § 375, as amended; and
2.
Operates a private, nonsectarian, residential prekindergarten through
12th grade school that provides free education, career training,
housing, clothing, meals, health care, and counseling to racially and
ethnically diverse boys and girls who are in financial and social need,
with a primary geographic preference for children from Dauphin,
Lancaster and Lebanon Counties, Pennsylvania, and a secondary
geographic preference for children from other counties in
Pennsylvania.
3.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:498
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FAMILY — A single individual doing his/her own cooking and living upon the
premises as a separate housekeeping unit or a collective body of persons
doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises as a
separate housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon birth,
legal marriage or other domestic bond. This definition does not include a
collective body of persons occupying a hotel, dormitory, lodge, boarding/
rooming house, commune or institution. Domestic servants employed on the
premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family.
FARM — Any parcel of land containing 10 or more acres which is used
for gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry and dairy
products. It includes necessary farm structures within the prescribed limits
and the storage of equipment used. It excludes the raising of fur-bearing
animals, riding academies, livery or boarding stables and dog kennels.
FENCE — Any freestanding and uninhabitable structure constructed of
wood, glass, metal, plastic materials, wire, wire mesh or masonry, singly
or in combination, erected for the purpose of screening or dividing one
property from another to assure privacy or to protect the property so
screened or divided or to define and mark the property line when such
structure is erected on or within two feet of any front, side or rear lot line;
for the purpose of this chapter a freestanding masonry wall when so located
is considered to be a fence; also, for the purpose of this chapter when the
term "lot line" is used in relation to fences it shall be synonymous with "rear
yard lot lines," "side yard lot lines," "front yard lot lines" and the area within
two feet of the same. Fences are not synonymous with "garden structures"
which are defined elsewhere herein.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, transported or moved to a new location above
the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface and
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. The difference in elevation
between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher
elevation on the final grade. The material used to make a fill.
FLAT ROOF SIGN — A sign that has its longest axis along the same
direction as the roof to which it is attached and does not project beyond the
outside edges of the roof line in any direction.
FLAT WALL SIGN — A sign that is attached to the wall of a building and
whose face runs parallel to the wall to which it is attached and does not
extend beyond the outside of the edges of the wall in any direction.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:499
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood
insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD, BASE (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD) — A flood that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e. that has a 1% chance
of occurring each year although the flood may occur in any year).
FLOODPLAIN —
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on official federal, state and local floodplain maps.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot excluding cellar
and basement floor areas not used as primary living and sleeping quarters
but including the area of roofed porches and roofed terraces. All dimensions
shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA RETAIL, NET — All that space relegated to use by the
customer and the retail employee to consummate retail sales and to include
display area used to indicate the variety of goods available for the customer
but not to include office space, storage space and other general
administrative areas.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The aggregate of the horizontal areas of
all rooms used for habitation such as living room, dining room, kitchen,
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation.
1.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any surface.
2.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:500
bedroom, but not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service
rooms or utility rooms, bathroom, closets nor unheated areas such as
enclosed porches nor rooms without at least one window or skylight
opening onto an outside yard or court. At least one-half of the floor area of
every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet
and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less
than five feet shall not be considered as part of the habitable floor area. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, shall be 10% of the
habitable floor area of such room.
FOOTCANDLE — A measure of intensity of light stated in lumens per square
foot.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign that has a separate support structure and
is not physically attached to a building.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed or covered space for the storage of
one or more vehicles or vessels; provided, that no business, occupation or
service is conducted for profit therein.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building designed and used for the storage of
automotive vehicles operated as a business enterprise with a service charge
or fee being paid to the owner or operator for the parking or storage of
privately owned vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR MEANS (see also SERVICE STATION) — A building
designed and used for the storage, care, repair or refinishing of motor
vehicles including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint
and body work. Any building, premises or land in which or upon which a
business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair or
painting of motor vehicles is conducted or rendered.
GARDEN APARTMENT — See "apartment garden."
GARDEN STRUCTURES — Any accessory structure which may be occupied
for other than sleeping or general housekeeping purposes or which serves
as a shelter primarily for human beings except a permitted garage, porch or
carport which is located in any side or rear yard not closer than three feet to
any side or rear lot line; included in this category of structures are arbors,
aviaries, pergolas, trellises, barbecue shelters and freestanding screens or
baffles and similar structures as however called. No such structure may
be located in any required front yard between the building setback line
and the street line. Such structures may be solidly roofed and walled or
open to the sky and on the sides but if solidly roofed or solidly walled on
more than two sides they must be located within the building line of the lot
and may not invade any required yard. Unscreened, unroofed, unwalled or
unfenced patios, birdbaths, ornamental pools and swimming pools are not
considered as garden structures. Permitted structures may be attached to
or be detached from a dwelling.
GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or vegetables
excluding the keeping of livestock.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:501
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of South Hanover
Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of the streets as
officially established by the municipal authorities.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grade as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
GREENHOUSE — A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass
or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature
and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-ofseason
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use including basements, mezzanines and upper
floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of
joint partitions and from outside wall faces.
GROUND FLOOR — The floor of a building nearest the mean grade of the
front of the building.
GROUP HOME — The use of any lawful dwelling unit which meets all the
following criteria:
GUESTHOUSE — A dwelling unit established as an accessory use,
subordinate to the principal dwelling unit on the lot for the purpose of
accommodating visitors. Such a unit may be attached or detached from the
principal dwelling structure.
HALF-WAY HOUSE/AFTER CARE FACILITY — A facility wherein food,
lodging and some supervision or custodial care is provided to one or more
persons who have recently been released or paroled from a county, state or
federal correction facility.
Involves the care of no more than the maximum number of persons
permitted consistent with the minimum area requirements of the BOCA
National Property Maintenance Code, 1996 Edition, § PM-405.0,
"Occupancy Limitations," as the same may be amended from time to
time, but, in no event, no more than six persons regardless of the size
and dimensions of the dwelling unit.
1.
2. Involves persons functioning as a common household.
Involves providing nonroutine support services and oversight to
persons who need such assistance to avoid being placed within an
institution, because of physical disability, old age, mental retardation or
other "handicap" as defined by applicable federal law.
3.
Does not meet the definition of "boarding house," "institutional care
facility" or "lodging house."
4.
Does not involve the housing or treatment of persons who could be
reasonably be considered a threat to the physical safety of others.
5.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:502
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or
other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment
plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded material including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from
municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or agricultural
operations and from community activities or any combination of these
factors which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical
or infectious characteristics may:
The term "hazardous waste" shall not include coal refuse as defined in
the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act (52 U.S.C. §§ 30.51 — 30.62). The
term "hazardous waste" shall not include treatment sludges from coal mine
drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant
to and in compliance with a valid permit issued under the Clean Streams
Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 through 691.1001). The term "hazardous waste"
shall not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage or solid
dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which
are point sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342) or source, special nuclear, or
by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C.
§§ 2011 — 2394).
HAZARDOUS WASTE CONSTITUENT — A chemical component of a waste
or chemical compound which qualifies a waste as hazardous under
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PADER) Hazardous
Waste Management Regulations (HWMR) 75.261 (relating to criteria,
identification and listing of hazardous waste) or which is listed as a
hazardous waste or hazardous compound in 75.261 (relating to criteria,
identification and listing of hazardous waste).
HAZARDOUS WASTE DISCHARGE — A discharge of hazardous waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER — The number assigned
by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the number provided to
the PADER by the EPA for assignment to each generator, transporter and
treatment, storage or disposal facility handling hazardous waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY — A facility where storage,
treatment or disposal of hazardous waste occurs.
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANIFEST SYSTEM — The manifest, instructions
supplied with the manifest and distribution system for copies of the
manifest which together identify the origin, routing, storage or disposal
under the following PADER HWMR Subsections: 75.262(e), 75.263(d),
75.264(j) and 75.265(j) (relating to generators of hazardous waste,
transporters of hazardous waste, new and existing hazardous waste
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or
morbidity in either an individual or the total population.
1.
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of
or otherwise managed.
2.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:503
management facilities applying for a permit and interim status standards
for hazardous waste management facilities and permit program for new and
existing hazardous waste management facilities).
HAZARDOUS WASTE NUMBER — The number assigned by the PADER to
each hazardous waste listed and to each hazardous waste characteristic
identified in HWMR 75.261 (relating to criteria, identification and listing of
hazardous waste).
HAZARDOUS WASTE PERMIT — A written document issued by the PADER
under the Act which authorizes the recipient to undertake the treatment,
storage or disposal of hazardous waste under the act. The term "permit"
does not include interim status or a permit which has not yet been the
subject of final PADER action such as a draft permit or a proposed permit.
HAZARDOUS WASTE/INCOMPATIBLE WASTE — A hazardous waste which
is unsuitable for:
HAZARDOUS WASTE/INDIVIDUAL GENERATION SITE — The contiguous
site at or on which one or more hazardous wastes are generated. An
individual generation site, such as a manufacturing plant, may have one or
more sources of hazardous waste but is considered a single or individual
generation site if the site or property is contiguous.
HEAD SHOP — Any business, the operation of which involves the sale,
lease, trade, gift or display for sale of any and all types of drug
paraphernalia.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Placement in a particular device or facility because it may cause
corrosion or decay of containment materials such as container inner
liners or tank walls.
1.
Commingling with another waste or material under uncontrolled
conditions because the commingling might produce heat or pressure,
fire or explosion, violent reaction, toxic dusts, mists, fumes or gases or
flammable fumes or gases.
2.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
1.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
2.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
3.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:504
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use which can be conducted entirely within a
dwelling or in a building accessory thereto and carried on by the inhabitants
residing therein and no more than one employee; providing, that the use
is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes, the exterior appearance of the structure or premises is
constructed and maintained as a residential dwelling and no goods are
publicly displayed on the premises other than signs as provided herein.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing primary health services and medical
or surgical care to persons, inpatients and outpatients suffering from
illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental
conditions including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities
such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
HOTEL — A building used as the more or less temporary abiding place of
16 or more individuals who are, for compensation, lodged, with or without
meals and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room
or suite. A hotel may include restaurants, newsstands and other accessory
services primarily for serving its occupants and only incidentally the public.
IMMEDIATE PRECURSOR — A substance which under the regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Health is a principal compound commonly
used or produced primarily for use and which is an immediate chemical
intermediary used or likely to be used in the manufacture of a controlled
substance.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any substance placed on a lot which covers
the surface in such fashion as to prevent natural absorption of surface
water by the earth so covered. The following items shall be deemed to
be impervious material: buildings, concrete sidewalks, paved driveways
and parking areas, swimming pools and other nonporous structures or
materials.
INCINERATOR — An approved device in which combustible material, other
than garbage, is burned to ashes.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A planned, coordinated development of a tract of
land with two or more separate industrial buildings. Such development
is planned, designed, constructed and managed on an integrated and
coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular
circulation, parking, utility needs, building design and orientation and open
space. An industrial park is designed as a coordinated environment for
a variety of industrial and related activities. The project is developed or
controlled by one proprietary interest. It has an enforceable master plan
and/or covenants, conditions and restrictions. The development may be on
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior or
A.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
B.
4.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:505
one parcel, may be subsidized, may have condominium ownerships or a
combination of these types.
INDUSTRY, HEAVY — A use engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or
raw materials or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes
using flammable or explosive materials or storage or manufacturing
processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized
offensive conditions.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT — A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales and distribution of such products but excluding basic industrial
processing.
INSTITUTIONAL CARE FACILITY —
JUNKYARD (see also AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD) — A parcel of land
on which waste material or inoperative vehicles and other machinery are
collected, stored, salvaged or sold. An open area where wastes or used or
secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, processed or
handled. Materials shall include, but are not limited to, scrap iron and other
metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. An automobile wrecking yard
is also considered a junkyard.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
A facility providing shelter, counseling and other rehabilitation services
for individuals plus such minimum supervisory personnel as may be
required to meet standards of the licensing agency. Residents under
such supervisory care include those who by reason of chemical or
alcohol dependency or family or school adjustment problems require a
minimal level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing care.
1.
Such a facility must be licensed and approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare or other state agency having jurisdiction
over such activities. Such facilities are not included within the
definition of schools as contained in this chapter.
2.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of and for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings
whether proposed initially or cumulatively or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure.
A.
The division or allocation of land or space whether initially or
cumulatively between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
B.
1.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:506
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder or an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other persons having a
proprietary interest in land.
LAUNDERETTE — A business premises equipped with individual clothes
washing and/or drying machines for the use of retail customers exclusive of
laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in an apartment house.
LCD — Liquid crystal display.
LED — Light emitting diode.
LIGHTING —
LOADING BERTH/SPACE — An off-street area on the same lot with a
building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOADING HOUSE — A building where, for compensation, rooms are
provided for at least three but no more than 15 persons and in which no
table board is furnished.
2. A subdivision of land.
Land development does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
A.
The addition of an accessory building including farm building on a
lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
B.
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection an amusement park is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
C.
3.
DIFFUSED — That form of lighting wherein the light passes from the
source through a translucent cover or shade.
1.
DIRECT or FLOOD — That form of lighting wherein the source is
visible and the light is distributed directly from it to the object to be
illuminated.
2.
INDIRECT — That form of lighting wherein the light source is entirely
hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector from which it is
reflected to the object to be illuminated.
3.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:507
LOT — Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings or by a dwelling groups and its accessory buildings together with
such open space as required under the provisions of this chapter having not
less than the minimum area and width required by this chapter for a lot in
the district in which such land is situated and having its principal frontage
on a street. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat,
deed or permitted by law to be used, developed or built upon.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot as shown
on a subdivision plan excluding space within any street but including the
area of any easement.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which has been properly recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets or at the point of abrupt change of a single street where
the interior angle is less than 135° and the radius of the street line is less
than 100 feet.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH — The minimum required lot width measured at
the building setback line. The width of lots abutting a cul-de-sac shall be
measured as the chord distance length at the building setback line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot of record, the area or dimension of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to this chapter but
which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform
to the current requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:508
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a
manufactured/mobile home park/community improved with the necessary
utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection
thereon of a single manufactured/mobile home.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK/COMMUNITY — A parcel or
contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that
it contains two or more manufactured/mobile home lots for the placement
thereon of manufactured/mobile homes for nontransient use.
MANUFACTURING — The processing and/or converting of raw unfinished
or finished materials or products or any or either of them into an article
or substance of a different character or for use for a different purpose;
industries furnishing labor in the case of manufacturing or the refinishing
of manufactured articles.
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the
external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils powder,
creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used
in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably
expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third
person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration
or any gratuity therefor.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any establishment having a source of income or
compensation derived from the practice of massage and which has a fixed
place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation
engages in or carries on the practice of massage.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL CLINICS — Establishments containing the offices
of one or more physicians, dentists, physical therapists, pharmacists,
optometrists and other health care professionals primarily engaged in
furnishing outpatient medical, surgical, rehabilitative or other services to
individuals.
MESSAGE DISPLAY CYCLE — That unit of time in which one complete
message is displayed upon a sign incorporating a dynamic message display.
MINERALS — Includes but is not limited to clay, dolomite, sand, gravel,
rock, stone, earth, ore and other minerals.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support or the removal
or change of any required means of egress or rearrangement or parts of
a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:509
include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building or land for more than one
type of use.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in
connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units with separate
entrances and designed for year-round occupancy primarily for transient
automobile travelers and providing for accessory off-street parking
facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as tourist courts,
tourist cabins, motor lodges and similar terms.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after May 2, 1977 and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
NIGHTCLUB — A bar or restaurant or combination thereof where a dance
floor or entertainment is provided and guests are served food or drink,
or are free to consume food or drink which they have brought onto the
premises.[Added by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
NURSERY, HORTICULTURE — A lot or parcel of land used to cultivate,
propagate and grow trees, shrubs, vines and other plants including the
buildings, structures and equipment customarily incidental and accessory
to the primary use.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A building with sleeping rooms
where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals, nursing care
for hire and which is approved for nonprofit/profit corporations licensed by
the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare for such use.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — Any literature, book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing, photograph,
figure, image, motion picture, sound recording, article, instrument or any
other written or printed matter which:
Depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual conduct,
sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse or (in the case of articles
or instruments) is designed for use in achieving artificial sexual
stimulation.
1.
2. Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:510
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into
any channel, watercourse of flood-prone area which may impede, retard or
change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water or is placed where the flow of the
water might carry the same down stream to the damage of life and property.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit issued by the proper Township official
allowing occupancy of a building after it has been determined that the
building meets all the requirements of applicable ordinances.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A temporary storage area for a motor
vehicle, trailer or vessel that is directly accessible to a driveway and which
is not located on a dedicated street.
OFFICE — A building or portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical
operations.
OFFICE PARK — A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and
operated as an integrated facility for a number of separate office buildings
and supporting ancillary uses with special attention given to circulation,
parking, utility needs, aesthetics and compatibility.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — A room or rooms used for the carrying on of
a profession including, but not limited to, physicians, physical therapists,
dentists, architects, engineers, accountants, attorneys, real estate brokers,
insurance agents entitled to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or similar type.
OPEN SPACE — An area that is intended to provide light and air and is
designed for either environmental, scenic or recreational purposes. Open
space may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative planting,
walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains,
swimming pools, wooded areas and watercourses. Land used for recreation,
resource protection, amenity and/or buffers. Open space shall not be
deemed to include driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or
intended for vehicular travel.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods,
material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.
PARKING LOT, PUBLIC — Any lot, municipally or privately owned for offstreet
parking facilities providing for the transient storage of automobiles
or motor-driven vehicles. Such parking services may be provided as a free
service or may be provided for a fee.
PARKING SPACE — An area on a lot and/or within a building intended
for the use of temporary parking of a personal vehicle. This term is used
interchangeably with parking stall. Each parking space must have a means
of access to a public street.
Taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
3.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:511
PARKING, SHARED — The development and use of parking areas on two or
more separate properties for joint use by the business on those properties.
PARTY WALL — A common shared wall between two separate structures,
buildings or dwelling walls.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
PERVIOUS SURFACE (PERVIOUS AREA, PERVIOUS COVERAGE) — A
surface that allows the infiltration of water into the ground. Pervious
surfaces (or areas) shall include, but are not limited to: soil, plant or
vegetative cover, and anything not considered an impervious surface.
Pervious areas also include patios, pervious bituminous paved areas and
pervious concrete areas, providing the area incorporates an infiltration
best management practice (BMP) to address and manage the two-year
storm volume increase pursuant to the provisions of the South Hanover
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,20 and provided further that
the materials do not prevent stormwater from absorbing into the
ground.[Added by Ord. No. 1-2018, 2/27/2018]
PLANNED CENTER SIGN — A freestanding sign that is associated with a
coordinated development of more than one land use all sharing common
vehicle access and off-street parking.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Land under unified control to be planned
and developed as a whole in a single development operation or a definitely
programmed series of development operations or phases. A planned
development includes principal and accessory structures and uses
substantially related to the character and purposes of the planned
development. A planned development is built according to general and
detailed plans that include not only streets, utilities, lots and building
located and the like but also site plans for all buildings as are intended
to be located, constructed, used and related to each other and plans for
other uses and improvements on the land as related to the buildings. A
planned development includes a program for the provisions, operations
and maintenance of such areas, facilities and improvements as will be for
common use by some or all of the occupants of the planned development
district but which will not be provided, operated or maintained at general
public expense.
PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247, as amended and reenacted by Act 170 of 1988.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The South Hanover Township Planning
Commission, appointed by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
PLASMA — A video display technology that relies upon the electric
excitation of phosphors to emit light.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 26, Stormwater Management.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:512
PORCH — A roofed structure projecting from the front, side or rear wall of
a building.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which the building is located. A structure or, where the context
so indicates, a group of structures in or on which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which such structure is located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main use of land or structures as distinguished from
a secondary or accessory use. The primary use and chief purpose of a lot or
structure.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PRIVATE ROAD — A right-of-way, other than a street, which provides
vehicular and/or pedestrian access to one or more lots.
PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — The practice of a profession by any
professional including, but not limited to, attorney, physician, surgeon,
osteopath, chiropractor, dentist, optician, optometrist, chiropodist,
engineer, surveyor, architect, landscape architect, planner or similar type,
entitled to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PROJECTING ROOF SIGN — A sign whose support structure is attached to
the roof of a building and whose face either runs generally perpendicular to
the roof line or its underlying wall, or extends beyond the outside edges of
the roof to which it is attached.
PROJECTING WALL SIGN — A sign whose support structure is attached to
the wall of a building and whose face either runs generally perpendicular
to the wall, or extends beyond the outside edges of the wall to which it is
attached.
PRURIENT INTEREST — Is to be judged with reference to average adults
unless it appears from the nature of the material or the circumstances of
its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for clearly
defined deviant sexual groups in which case the predominant appeal of the
matter shall be judged with reference to its intended recipient group.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (federal,
state or local, including a corporation and/or board created by law for the
performance of certain specialized governmental functions).
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Public grounds include the following:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body or planning agency intended to inform and obtain
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas.
1.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
2.
3. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:513
public comment prior to taking action in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Code, Act 247, as amended.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," as amended.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Public utility transmission and distribution
facilities including substations and the like.
RECREATION AREAS — A place designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational
activities. Public recreation areas are those owned and operated by a unit
of local government. Private recreation areas are those owned and operated
by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona fide members and their
guests. Commercial recreation areas are those operated as a business and
open to the public for a fee.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Any establishment which carries on
investigation in the natural, physical, technical or social sciences or
engineering and development as an extension of such investigation with the
objective of creating end products.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in which
are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products
except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
1. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
2.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck,
3.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
4.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:514
RESIDENTIAL BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — The provision
of overnight sleeping accommodations and next day breakfast/snacks for
transient persons when one or more bedrooms for such purposes are
provided in a single-family dwelling and compensation for services is
rendered.
RESTAURANT — An establishment that serves food and beverages
primarily to persons seated within the building. This includes cafes, tea
rooms and outdoor cafes. A business establishment whose principal
business is the selling of unpackaged food to the customer in a ready-toconsume
state in individual servings or in nondisposable containers and
where the customer consumes these foods while seated at tables or
counters located within the building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — A retail outlet where food or beverages are
sold to a substantial extent for consumption by customers in parked motor
vehicles. An establishment that delivers prepared food and/or beverages
to customers in motor vehicles regardless of whether or not it also serves
prepared food and/or beverages to customers who are not in motor vehicles
for consumption either on or off the premises.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment that offers quick food
service which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already
prepared and held for service or prepared, fried or griddled quickly or
heated in a device such as a microwave oven. Orders are not generally
taken at the customer's table and food is generally served in disposable
wrapping or containers. Any establishment whose principal business is the
sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages in ready-to-consume individual
servings for consumption either within the restaurant building for carry
out and where either: (1) foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually
served in paper, plastic or other disposable containers and where customers
are not served their food, frozen desserts or beverages by a restaurant
employee at the same table or counter where the items are consumed or
(2) the establishment includes a drive-up or drive-through service facility or
offers curb service.
RIDING ACADEMY — An establishment where horses are kept for riding or
driving or are stabled for compensation or incidental to the operation of any
club, association, ranch or similar establishment.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription of condemnation and intended to be occupied or
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil
or gas pipeline, waterline, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses;
generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public or private thoroughfare for vehicular
traffic and/or pedestrian traffic whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or however
designated.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume or the
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:515
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the
part of one so clothed.
SCHOOL — A nonprofit educational institution, either public or private,
where the course of instruction parallels the requirements of the
Department of Education of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for public
elementary and/or secondary schools and, in the case of a private school,
such institution shall have complied with the registration requirements of
the department of education and adhere to the attendance laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SCHOOL, COLLEGE — Same as elementary and secondary school except
general education is provided above the level of the secondary school and
may include junior college, college or university.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY — Any school having regular sessions with
employed instruction which teaches those subjects that are fundamental
and essential in general education for elementary grades.
SCHOOL, NURSERY — A facility, not in a private residence, enrolling
children no more than five years of age and where tuition, fees or other
forms of compensation for the instruction and care of the children is
charged. Such facility shall employ licensed personnel and shall be licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SCHOOL, SECONDARY — Same as elementary school except general
education is provided for secondary grades.
SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL — Same as elementary and secondary school
except that the primary activity is training in a trade or vocation.
SCREENING (see also BUFFER YARD) — The method by which a view
of one site from another is shielded, concealed or hidden. Screening
techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms or other features. A device
or materials used to conceal one element of a development from other
elements or from adjacent or contiguous development. Screening may
include one or a combination of the following materials of sufficient mass to
be opaque or that shall become opaque after 12 months and which shall be
maintained in an opaque condition: walls, berms or plantings.
SELF-SERVICE STATION — An establishment where liquids used as motor
fuels are stored and dispersed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by
persons other than the service station attendant and may include facilities
available for the sale of other retail products.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A building consisting of individual,
small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of
business and household goods or contractor's supplies. A building or group
of buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains
varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls
or lockers for the storage of customer's goods or wares.
SERVICE STATION (see also GARAGE, REPAIR) — Any premises where
gasoline and other petroleum products are sold and/or light maintenance
activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, minor repairs and carburetor
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:516
cleaning are conducted. Service stations shall not include premises where
heavy automobile maintenance activities such as engine overhauls,
automobile painting and body fender work are conducted. Buildings and
premises where the primary use is the supply and dispensing at retail of
motor fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires and motor vehicle accessories.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Actual or simulated acts of human masturbation,
sexual intercourse or any touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals,
pubic areas or buttocks of the human make or female or the breasts of the
female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex, or
between humans and animals.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitalia
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of stores planned and designed to function
as a unit for the lot on which it is located with off-street parking provided as
an integral part of the unit.
SIGN — A device for visual communication that is used to bring the subject
to the attention of the public.
This term includes, but is not limited to:
Lettering, logos, trademarks, and other symbols that are an
integral part of the architectural design of a building which are
applied to a building or which are located elsewhere on the
premises;
A.
Lettering, logos, trademarks, and other symbols that are affixed to
windows or glass doors or are otherwise internally mounted such
that they are obviously intended to be seen and understood by
vehicular or pedestrian traffic outside the building;
B.
Flags and insignia of civic, charitable, religious, fraternal, patriotic,
and similar organizations;
C.
D. Insignia of governments and government agencies;
Banners, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, tinsel, and
similar objects; and
E.
F. Inflatable objects.
1.
This term shall not include:
Architectural features that may be identified with a particular
business;
A.
B. Backlit awnings that include no lettering, logos, or other symbols;
Lettering, logos, trademarks, and other symbols within a building
that are obviously intended to be seen primarily from within the
building;
C.
2.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:517
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A scaled graphical depiction of the proposed
development of a lot, parcel or tract of land describing all covenants
assigned as well as accurately depicting the use, location and bulk of
all buildings and structures, intensity of use or density of development,
streets, driveways, rights-of-way, easements, parking facilities, open space,
public facilities and utilities, setbacks, eight of buildings, setbacks, height
of buildings and structures and other such data necessary for Township
officials to determine compliance with this chapter and appropriate
provisions of such ordinances as they may apply.
SOLAR ACCESS — A property owner's right to have the sunlight shine on
his land.
SOLAR SKYSPACE — The space between a solar energy collector and the
sun which must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an extent
which precludes its cost-effective operation.
Outdoor signs intended for use within a property, such as menu
signs for fast-food restaurant drive-through lanes;
D.
Lettering, logos, trademarks, and other symbols with regulations
within a park;
E.
Building number and/or identification devices within an
educational campus;
F.
G. Flags of governments or government agencies;
Decorative seasonal and holiday banners on residential properties;
and
H.
Display of merchandise either behind store windows or outdoors.
SIGN TYPES DIAGRAM
I.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:518
SOLAR SKYSPACE EASEMENT — A right expressed as an easement,
covenant, condition or other property interest in any deed or other
instrument executed by or on behalf of any landowner which protects the
solar skyspace of an actual, proposed or designated solar energy collector
at a described location by forbidding or limiting activities or land uses that
interfere with access to solar energy.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT, FOR THE PURPOSES OF ARTICLE XIV
OF THIS CHAPTER — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
STABLE, PRIVATE — An accessory building in which horses are kept for
private use and not for hire, remuneration, exhibition or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC — A building in which horses are kept for remuneration,
hire, exhibition or sale.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
A. Human genitals, pubic region.
B. Buttock.
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
C.
1.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
2.
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
3.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:519
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STORY — That portion of any building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gabled, hipped or gabled roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not over three
feet above the finished floor of such story.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way constructed to Township
standards which affords primary vehicular traffic or pedestrian access to
abutting properties which includes avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway and viaduct but shall not include an alley for the purpose
of this chapter.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of the other streets upon
which the lot abuts at the midpoint of the frontage at the lot thereon. If
there is no officially established grade the existing grade of the street at
such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot, also
known as the right-of-way line.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between street right-of-way lines measured
at right angles to the center line of the street.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A major street or highway which carries traffic
from minor streets to arterial streets including the principle entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such
a development.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end and
terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround.
STREET, MINOR — A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of
such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:520
or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A structure without any foundation or
footings and which is to be removed when the designated time period,
activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
STUDIO — A building or portion of a building used as a place of work by an
artist, photographer or artisan or used for radio or television broadcasting.
STUDIO, DANCING OR MUSIC — The use of a premises by a teacher of
music or dancing where students are taught these arts for a fee. This term
is synonymous with "dancing school" and "music school" and other similar
expressions.
SUBDIVISION (see LAND DEVELOPMENT) — The division or redivision of
a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court
for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development. Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any
new street or easement of access or residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage" or "repetitive loss" regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however include either:
SURFACE MINING — The extraction of minerals from the earth, from waste
or stock piles or from pits or banks as activities conducted upon the surface
of the land which require the removal of overburden, strata or material
overlying, above or between the minerals or by otherwise exposing and
retrieving the minerals from the surface. These activities include, but are
not limited to, strip, drift, auger and open pit mining, quarrying, leaching,
box cutting, activities related thereto. Mining activities carried out beneath
the surface by means of shafts, tunnels or other underground openings are
not included in this definition.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or;
1.
Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic
structure."
2.
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:521
SWIMMING POOL — A portable or permanent structure designed to hold
water for wading or swimming purposes beginning at a height of 12 inches
not to exceed a height or depth for safety, overall area in size to be governed
by its location and located above or recessed at ground level shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, be defined as a swimming pool.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
moving pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis.
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are
provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
TOWNHOUSE — One dwelling unit that is attached to two or more dwelling
units, and with each dwelling unit being completely separated from and
attached to another dwelling unit by unpierced vertical fire-resistant walls.
Each dwelling unit shall have its own outside access. The number of
attached dwelling units shall be limited to four.[Added by Ord. No.
3-2017, 8/22/2017]
TRUCK TERMINAL — Land and buildings used as a relay station for the
transfer of a load from one vehicle to another or one party to another. The
terminal cannot be used for permanent or long-term accessory storage for
principal land uses at other locations. The terminal facility may include
storage areas for trucks and buildings or areas for the repair of trucks
associated with the terminal. A building or area in which freight brought
by truck is assembled and/or stored for routing or reshipment or in which
semitrailers, including tractors and/or trailer units and other trucks are
parked or stored.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot which has not been graded or in any other
manner prepared for the construction of a building.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
UNIFORMITY RATIO — A measurement that compares the brightest single
location with the darkest single location, upon the face of a sign or some
other designated surface.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designated,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment or such ordinance or amendment or prior
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:522
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
USE, PERMITTED — Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
regulations applicable to that zoning district.
USE, TEMPORARY — A use established for a fixed period of time with the
intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
VARIANCE — Relief granted by the Zoning Hearing Board from technical
requirements of this chapter which, if strictly adhered to, would inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. Procedures and criteria for
granting such relief shall comply with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code,
Act 247, as amended.
VEGETATIVE COVER — Such cover shall consist of trees, shrubs, flowers,
grass or similar natural cover.
VIOLATION — For the purposes of Article XIV of this chapter, means the
failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations)
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the Pennsylvania
Floodplain Management Act is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
material.
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION — A use engaged in storage,
wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and
equipment but excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable
or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive
conditions.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — A device which converts
wind energy to mechanical or electrical energy.
WIND ROTOR — The blades, plus hub to which, the blades are attached,
that are used to capture wind for purpose of energy conversion. The wind
rotor is used generally on a pole or tower and along with other generating
and electrical storage equipment forms a wind energy conversion system.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is either located on the inside or outside
surface of a window but whose message faces outward.
YARD — An unoccupied space, outside the building setback lines, other than
a court, open to the sky, on the same lot with a building or structure.
YARD, BUFFER — A strip of required yard space adjacent to the boundary
of a property or district not less than the width designated in this chapter
and on which is placed (planted) year-round shrubbery, hedges, evergreens
or other suitable plantings of sufficient height and density to constitute an
effective screen and give maximum protection and immediate screening to
§ 27-203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-203
1:523
an abutting property or district and may include a wall as provided for in
this chapter.
YARD, EXTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between a building and the
property boundary or street line.
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and
the building line projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front
yard shall be measured between the front building line and the street line.
YARD, INTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between buildings of a
building group, all of which are located on the same lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard located between a primary or accessory building and
the rear lot line upon which the building is located as prescribed by the
provisions of this chapter.
YARD, SIDE — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
and situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending
from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front
line shall be deemed a side line.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The South Hanover Zoning Hearing Board
appointed by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
ZONING MAP — The map setting forth the boundaries of the zoning
districts of the Township which shall be part of this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The duly constituted Township official designated to
administer and enforce this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall administer
this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.
§ 27-203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-203
1:524
ARTICLE III
Designation of Districts
§ 27-301. Zoning districts. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 301, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 3-2005, § 7, 8/16/2005]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into districts
which shall be designated as follows:
R-A Residential Agriculture District
ESC Eleemosynary School Campus District
R-S Residential Suburban District
R-U Residential Urban District
R-M Residential Multifamily District
V Village District
R-MH Residential Mobile Home Park
R-C Residential Cluster District
IP Industrial Park District
OP Office Park District
CH Commercial Highway District
FP Floodplain District
§ 27-302. Zoning Map. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 302, 4/11/1995; Ord. No.
3-2005, § 8, 8/16/2005]
§ 27-303. Boundaries between the R-A, ESC, R-S, R-U, R-M, R-MH,
V, IP, OP, and CH Districts. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 303, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 3-2005, § 9, 8/16/2005]
1. The boundaries of the R-A, ESC, R-S, R-U, R-M, R-MH, V, IP, OP and CH
Districts shall be as shown upon the map attached to and made a part of
this chapter, which shall be designated "Zoning Map." The said map and
all the notations, references and other data shown thereon are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter as if all were fully described
herein.
2. The boundaries of the FP District shall be located as specifically
described in the flood data table and one-hundred-year flood
delineation in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared for the
Township by the Flood Insurance Administration (FIA). The said study
and accompanying maps and all notations, references and other data
shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter
as if all were fully described herein.
1. The boundaries between these districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center lines of streets, alleys, rights-of-way, lot lines or such
lines extended or lines parallel thereto.
§ 27-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-303
1:525
§ 27-304. Interpretation of boundaries. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 304, 4/
11/1995]
When a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter the regulations of either
abutting district may be construed by the owner to be applicable to the
portion of such lot in the other abutting district for a distance of not more
than 50 feet beyond the district boundary line.
2. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street, alley,
right-of-way or lot line and a district boundary line, they indicate that
the district boundary line runs parallel to that line at a distance
therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated.
3. Where district boundaries are not clearly fixed by the above methods
they shall be determined by the use of the scale of the Zoning Map.
§ 27-303 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-304
1:526
ARTICLE IV
Residential Agricultural District: R-A
§ 27-401. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 401, 4/11/1995]
Agricultural land is considered a special nonreplaceable resource within
the Township which, if lost, is not reclaimable once developed. Agricultural
activities have been an integral part of the culture and economy of South
Hanover Township and are therefore deserving of preservation. The RA
District is intended and designed to preserve and promote agricultural
activities as ongoing and viable component of the Township's economy and
lifestyle. It is further intended to prevent adverse effects resulting from
encroachment by guiding development types and intensities incompatible
with agricultural operations into more appropriate zoning districts.
Nonagricultural uses permitted to develop in this district must accept
nuisances which are a normal adjunct to farming and related operations.
§ 27-402. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 402, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 3-1998, § 3, 10/27/1998; Ord. No. 2-2007, § 3, 5/22/2007]
1. Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter a building may be erected
or used and a lot may be used or occupied for the following purposes:
A. Single-family detached dwelling units.
B. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, cemeteries
including associated social facilities.
C. Golf courses and country clubs.
D. Public and private recreation areas.
E. Municipal buildings and facilities.
F. Raising of crops, fruits and vegetables and tilling of the soil.
G. Storage and packing of fruits and vegetables raised on the
premises.
H. The hatching, raising, slaughtering, dressing and marketing on a
commercial scale of chickens, turkeys or other fowl or poultry,
rabbits, fish or frogs hatched or raised on the premises.
I. The raising and grazing of horses, cattle, sheep or goats including
the supplementary feeding of such animals provided that such
raising or grazing is not a part of, nor conducted in conjunction
with, a livestock slaughterhouse or animal by-product business.
J. The keeping and raising of hogs; provided, that there shall be no
feeding of any market or house refuse, garbage or offal other than
that produced on the premises.
K. Horticulture and forestry activities.
§ 27-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-402
1:527
§ 27-403. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 403, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-404. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 404, 4/11/1995]
The height of a principal building shall not exceed 35 feet. The height of an
accessory building shall not exceed 14 feet except that accessory buildings
devoted for farm use shall be exempt from height restrictions.
§ 27-405. Lot area regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 405, 4/11/1995]
The minimum lot size shall be one acre. Density of residential units shall be
not greater than one dwelling unit per acre.
§ 27-406. Lot width regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 406, 4/11/1995]
The minimum permitted lot width at the minimum building setback line
shall be not less than 150 feet.
L. Processing, storage and sale of milk and milk products produced on
the premises.
M. Nurseries, greenhouses, garden stores and florists.
N. Dog kennels, riding academies, public and private stables.
O. Veterinary services and animal hospitals.
P. Public utility services and facilities including substations, water
pumping stations and reservoirs.
Q. Grange halls and buildings for agricultural oriented groups.
R. Home occupations.
S. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any
permitted uses.
T. Airports, radio and television towers.
U. Group homes.
1. Country estates.
2. Wind energy conversion systems.
3. Accessory apartment.
4. Day care home.
5. Guesthouse.
6. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
7. Domestic employee's quarters.
§ 27-402 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-407
1:528
§ 27-407. Yard regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 407, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-408. Coverage regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 408, 4/11/1995]
Total coverage shall not exceed 20% of the lot area.
§ 27-409. Off-street parking regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 410, 4/
11/1995]
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 27-410. Sign regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 410, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 2-2007, § 4, 5/22/2007]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII of
this chapter.
§ 27-411. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 411, 4/11/1995]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of this
chapter.
1. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth
and width indicated below:
A. Front yard depth: 50 feet.
B. Side yard width: 25 feet each on an interior lot. On a corner lot the
side yard abutting the street shall be not less than 50 feet in width.
C. Rear yard depth: 50 feet.
§ 27-407 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-411
1:529

ARTICLE IVA
Eleemosynary School Campus District
§ 27-4A01. Purpose. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/16/2005]
Milton Hershey School, formerly known as "Hershey Industrial School,"
owns an historical structure known as "Senior Hall," located in Derry
Township near the eastern boundary of South Hanover Township. Milton
Hershey School is an integral part of the culture and economy of South
Hanover Township. Milton Hershey School draws heavily on residents and
businesses in South Hanover Township as employees, vendors and
contractors. Alumni of Milton Hershey School are productive residents of
South Hanover Township. Lands in South Hanover Township have, since the
days of Milton Hershey, been used for purposes incidental to the operations
of Milton Hershey School at Senior Hall and elsewhere in the vicinity. The
Eleemosynary School Campus District is intended and designed to allow the
natural expansion of the Milton Hershey School campus and allow for the
possibility of establishment of campuses of similar eleemosynary schools
on lands in South Hanover Township which have historically been used by
Milton Hershey School for such incidental purposes, so as to preserve and
promote the continuation and development of Milton Hershey School and
allow for the possibility of similar eleemosynary schools as an ongoing and
viable component of the Township's economy and lifestyle.
§ 27-4A02. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/16/2005; Ord.
No. 1-2015, § 2, 2/10/2015]
1. Private educational facilities operated by eleemosynary schools for
teaching a general education curriculum approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Education.
2. Dwellings and student homes for employees and students of
eleemosynary schools.
3. Day-care centers for children of the faculty and employees of
eleemosynary schools.
4. Administrative offices of eleemosynary schools.
5. Health care facilities for students and employees of eleemosynary
schools.
6. Maintenance facilities for properties of eleemosynary schools.
7. Incidental facilities owned and operated by eleemosynary schools and
open only to bona fide students and employees of eleemosynary schools
and their invitees, including, without limitation, (a) gymnasiums and
other private recreation areas (excluding stadiums), (b) places of
assembly or worship, (c) performing arts and other cultural facilities,
(d) laboratories, and (e) bookstores, clothing stores, barbershops and
similar non-educational school-related facilities.
§ 27-4A01 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-4A02
1:531
§ 27-4A03. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/16/2005]
8. Public or private utility service structures, not including personal
wireless facilities.
9. Public or nonprofit fire services and public or nonprofit emergency
services.
10. Public or nonprofit parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, camps and other
recreation areas.
11. Public or nonprofit conservation areas and uses for the conservation of
open space, water, soil and wildlife resources, including state and
county sponsored agricultural and/or conservation districts.
12. Communications antennae attached to buildings to the extent that the
antennae must be used to provide communications services to the
parcel of land on which it is located or to contiguous lands owned by the
same party as the land on which it is located.
13. Raising of crops, fruits and vegetables and tilling of the soil.
14. Storage and packing of fruits and vegetables raised on the premises.
15. Horticulture and forestry activities.
16. Public utility services and facilities including substations, water
pumping stations and reservoirs.
17. The following uses provided that they are accessory to and in
connection with an eleemosynary school program:
A. The hatching, raising, slaughtering, dressing and marketing on a
non-commercial scale of chickens, turkeys and other fowl or
poultry, rabbits, fish or frogs hatched or raised on the premises.
B. The non-commercial raising and grazing of horses, cattle, sheep or
goats including the supplementary feeding of such animals
provided that such raising or grazing is not a part of, nor conducted
in conjunction with, a livestock slaughterhouse or animal byproduct
business.
C. The non-commercial keeping and raising of hogs; provided, that
there shall be no feeding of and market of house refuse, garbage or
offal other than that produced on the premises.
D. The non-commercial processing and storage of milk and milk
products produced on the premises.
E. Non-commercial nurseries, greenhouses, flower gardens, riding
academies and private stables.
18. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any permitted
uses.
§ 27-4A02 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-4A03
1:532
§ 27-4A04. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/16/2005]
The height of principal buildings shall not exceed 40 feet. The height
of accessory buildings shall not exceed 14 feet, except that accessory
buildings and structures devoted to agricultural uses shall be exempt from
height regulations.
§ 27-4A05. Lot area regulations. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/16/2005;
Ord. No. 1-2015, § 3, 2/10/2015]
The minimum lot size shall be 50 acres.
§ 27-4A06. Lot width and depth regulations. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1,
8/16/2005]
The minimum permitted lot width at the minimum building setback line
shall be not less than 400 feet. The minimum permitted lot depth at the
minimum building setback line shall be not less than 200 feet.
§ 27-4A07. Yard regulations. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/16/2005]
§ 27-4A08. Coverage regulations. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/16/2005]
Total coverage shall not exceed 15% of the lot area.
§ 27-4A09. Off-street parking regulations. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/
16/2005]
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 27-4A10. Sign regulations. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/16/2005]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII of
this chapter.
1. Accessory apartment.
2. Guesthouse.
3. Domestic employee quarters.
1. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth
and width indicated below:
A. Front yard depth: 50 feet or 1/2 of the adjacent street right-of-way,
whichever is greater.
B. Rear yard depth: 50 feet.
C. Side yard depth: 50 feet.
§ 27-4A03 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-4A11
1:533
§ 27-4A11. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 3-2005, § 1, 8/16/2005]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this chapter.
§ 27-4A11 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-4A11
1:534
ARTICLE V
Residential Suburban District: R-S
§ 27-501. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 501, 4/11/1995]
The purpose of the Residential Suburban District is to provide the singlefamily
residential living opportunities of a suburban nature at low
development densities in a rural environment.
§ 27-502. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 502, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 3-1998, § 5, 10/27/1998; Ord. No. 2-2007, § 5, 5/22/2007]
§ 27-503. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 503, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-504. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 504, 4/11/1995]
The height of a principal building shall not exceed 35 feet. The height of an
accessory building shall not exceed 14 feet except that accessory buildings
devoted for farm use shall be exempt from height regulations.
1. Unless otherwise permitted by this article a building may be erected or
used and a lot may be used or occupied for the following purposes:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and
associated social facilities.
C. Public recreation areas.
D. The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, fruits and vegetables,
greenhouses and nurseries.
E. Municipal buildings and facilities.
F. Home occupations.
G. Public utility services and facilities including substations, water
pumping stations and reservoirs.
H. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any
permitted uses.
I. Group homes.
1. Accessory apartment.
2. Grazing animals.
3. Guesthouse.
4. Domestic employee quarters.
§ 27-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-505
1:535
§ 27-505. Lot area regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 505, 4/11/1995]
The minimum lot size shall be one acre. Density of residential units shall be
not greater than one dwelling unit per acre.
§ 27-506. Lot width regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 506, 4/11/1995]
The minimum permitted lot width at the minimum building setback line
shall be not less than 100 feet.
§ 27-507. Yard regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 507, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-508. Coverage regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 508, 4/11/1995]
Total coverage shall not exceed 30% of the lot area.
§ 27-509. Off-street parking regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 509, 4/
11/1995]
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 27-510. Sign regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 510, 4/11/1995]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII of
this chapter.
§ 27-511. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 511, 4/11/1995]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of this
chapter.
1. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth
and width indicated below:
A. Front yard depth: 35 feet.
B. Side yard width: 12 feet each on an interior lot. On a corner lot the
side yard abutting the street shall be not less than 35 feet in width.
C. Rear yard depth: 35 feet.
§ 27-505 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-511
1:536
ARTICLE VI
Residential Urban District: R-U
§ 27-601. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 601, 4/11/1995]
The purpose of the Residential Urban District is to provide for residential
living opportunities of a more urban nature at greater densities with a
limited diversification of residential unit designs being permitted where
appropriate.
§ 27-602. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 602, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 3-1998, § 6, 10/27/1998; Ord. No. 2-2007, § 6, 5/22/2007]
§ 27-603. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 603, 4/11/1995]
1. Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, a building may be erected
or used and a lot may be used or occupied for the following purposes:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
C. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and
associated social facilities.
D. Public recreation areas.
E. Municipal buildings and facilities.
F. Home occupations.
G. Public utility services and facilities including substations, water
pumping stations and reservoirs.
H. The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, fruits and vegetables,
greenhouses and nurseries.
I. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any
permitted uses.
J. Group homes.
1. Accessory apartment.
2. Grazing animals.
3. Guesthouse.
4. Domestic employee's quarters.
§ 27-601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-604
1:537
§ 27-604. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 604, 4/11/1995]
The height of a principal building shall not exceed 35 feet. The height of an
accessory building shall not exceed 14 feet except that accessory buildings
devoted for farm use shall be exempt from height regulations.
§ 27-605. Lot area, width and yard regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 605, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-606. Coverage regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 606, 4/11/1995]
Total coverage shall not exceed 30% of the lot area.
1. Residential units.
A. Single-family detached units.
(1) Lots having an on lot sewage disposal system and well, or an
on-lot sewage disposal system with public water service shall
have a minimum lot area of not less than one acre, and a
minimum lot width measured at the minimum building setback
line of 100 feet. The front yard setback shall be not less than 35
feet; the side yard setback shall be not less than 12 feet; and
the rear yard setback shall be not less than 35 feet.
(2) Lots provided with both public sewage and water services shall
have a minimum lot area of not less than 20,000 square feet
and a minimum lot width measured at the minimum building
setback line of 100 feet. The front yard setback shall be not
less than 35 feet; the side yard setback shall be not less than 12
feet; and the rear yard setback shall be not less than 35 feet.
B. Single-family semidetached units. Lots for such uses must be
provided with both public sewage and water services. The
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than 20,000
square feet, and a minimum lot width measured at the minimum
building setback line shall be not less than 80 feet. The front yard
setback shall be not less than 35 feet; the side yard setback shall be
not less than 12 feet; and the rear yard setback shall be not less
than 35 feet.
C. On all corner lots, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less
than 35 feet.
2. Nonresidential uses. The minimum lot area, lot width and yard
requirements for nonresidential uses shall be the same as those for
residential single-family detached units set forth in Subsections 1A(1)
and (2) and 1C above.
§ 27-604 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-607
1:538
§ 27-607. Off-street parking regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 607, 4/
11/1995]
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 27-608. Sign regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 608, 4/11/1995]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII of
this chapter.
§ 27-609. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 609, 4/11/1995]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of this
chapter.
§ 27-607 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-609
1:539

ARTICLE VII
Residential Multifamily District: R-M
§ 27-701. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 701, 4/11/1995]
The Residential Multifamily District is intended to provide for a variety of
residential living opportunities at greater densities and in areas conducive
to this type of development in terms of location, accessibility, availability
of public water and sewer facilities, existing development patterns and
anticipated growth trends.
§ 27-702. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 702, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 3-1998, § 7, 10/27/1998; Ord. No. 2-2007, § 7, 5/22/2007]
1. Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter a building may be erected
or used and a lot may be used or occupied for the following purposes:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
C. Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses).
D. Multifamily (apartments and garden apartments).
E. Two-family detached (duplex dwellings).
F. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and
associated social facilities.
G. Municipal buildings and facilities.
H. Boarding, lodging or tourist houses.
I. Public utility services and facilities including substations, pumping
stations and reservoirs.
J. Public recreation areas.
K. Home occupations.
L. Medical and dental clinics.
M. Hospitals.
N. Nursing and convalescent homes.
O. The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, fruits and vegetables,
greenhouses and nurseries.
P. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any
permitted uses.
Q. Group homes.
§ 27-701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-703
1:541
§ 27-703. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 703, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-704. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 704, 4/11/1995]
The height of a principal building shall not exceed 35 feet. The height of
an accessory building shall not exceed 14 feet. The height of multifamily
buildings may be increased one foot for each additional foot that the width
of each yard exceeds the minimum required but no approval shall be
granted for a building height in excess of 40 feet. Accessory buildings
devoted for farm use shall be exempt from height regulations.
§ 27-705. Lot area, width, coverage and yard regulations. [Ord. No.
2-1995, § 705, 4/11/1995]
1. Grazing animals.
2. Guesthouse.
3. Domestic employee quarters.
1. Residential units.
A. Single-family detached units.
(1) Lots having an on lot sewage disposal system and well or an on
lot sewage disposal system with public water service shall have
a minimum lot area of not less than one acre and a minimum lot
width measured at the minimum building setback line of 100
feet. The front yard setback shall be not less than 35 feet; the
side yard setback shall be not less than 12 feet and the rear
yard setback shall be not less than 35 feet.
(2) Lots provided with both public sewage and water services shall
have a minimum lot area of not less than 10,000 square feet
and a minimum lot width measured at the minimum building
setback line of 80 feet. The front yard setback shall be not less
than 25 feet; the side yard setback shall be not less than 10
feet and the rear yard setback shall be not less than 25 feet.
(3) Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.
B. Single-family semidetached units. Lots for such uses must be
provided with both public sewage and water services. The
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than 7,000
square feet and a minimum lot width measured at the minimum
building setback line shall be not less than 50 feet. The front yard
setback shall be not less than 10 feet and the rear yard setback
shall be not less than 25 feet. Maximum lot coverage shall not
exceed 30%.
C. Two-family detached units. Lots for such use must be provided with
both public sewage and water services. The minimum lot area per
dwelling unit shall be not less than 7,000 square feet and a
§ 27-703 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-705
1:542
§ 27-706. Off-street parking regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 706, 4/
11/1995]
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 27-707. Sign regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 707, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 2-2007, § 8, 5/22/2007]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII of
this chapter.
§ 27-708. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 708, 4/11/1995]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of this
chapter.
minimum lot width measured at the minimum building setback line
shall be not less than 80 feet. The front yard setback shall be
not less than 25 feet; the side yard setback shall be not less than
10 feet and the rear yard setback shall be not less than 25 feet.
Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.
D. Single-family attached units (townhouses). Lot for such uses must
be provided with both public sewage and water services. The
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than 6,000
square feet and a minimum lot width per dwelling unit measured at
the minimum building setback line shall be not less than 20 feet.
The front yard setback shall be not less than 25 feet; the side yard
setback shall be not less than 10 feet for end units and the rear
yard setback shall be not less than 25 feet. The maximum number
of dwelling units permitted per building or row shall not exceed
eight. Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 50%.
E. Multifamily. Lots for such uses must be provided with both public
sewage and water services. The minimum lot area shall be not less
than 8,000 square feet per dwelling unit and a minimum lot width
measured at the building setback line of each parcel developed
shall be not less than 200 feet. The minimum front, side and rear
yard setbacks shall be not less than 25 feet. No portion of an
apartment building shall be closer than 25 feet from any portion of
an adjacent apartment building. Maximum lot coverage shall not
exceed 50%.
2. Nonresidential uses. The minimum lot area, lot width and yard
requirements for nonresidential uses shall be the same as those for
residential single-family detached units set forth in Subsections 1A(1)
and (2) above. Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 50%.
3. On all corner lots the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than
25 feet.
§ 27-705 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-708
1:543

ARTICLE VIII
Residential Village District: V
§ 27-801. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 801, 4/11/1995]
The purpose of this district is to preserve and perpetuate the existing
residential and low intensity commercial use which characterize designated
settlement areas of the Township and exclude those uses that would disrupt
compatible living/working relationships.
§ 27-802. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 802, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 3-1998, § 8, 10/27/1998; Ord. No. 2-2007, § 9, 5/22/2007]
§ 27-803. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 803, 4/11/1995]
1. Unless otherwise permitted by this article a building may be erected or
used and a lot may be occupied for the following purposes:
A. Residential uses, single- and two-family, multifamily and
apartments and residential in combination with the following
permitted commercial uses.
B. Stores and shops for retail businesses such as restaurants, food,
drug, clothing, hardware, variety, antique, personal service (e.g.
barber, beauty, shoe and similar retail services); provided, such
activities are conducted entirely within a building and do not
provide drive-in or in-car service. When used in conjunction with a
residential use, total commercial use shall occupy a floor area not
greater than 4,000 square feet.
C. Public schools as a principle use.
D. Municipal buildings and facilities.
E. Churches or similar places of worship, parish house and associated
social facilities.
F. Public utility services and facilities including substations, water
pumping stations and reservoirs.
G. Business and professional offices.
H. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any
permitted uses.
I. Group homes.
1. Grazing animals.
2. Guesthouse.
3. Domestic employee quarters.
4. Bed-and-breakfast establishment.
§ 27-801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-804
1:545
§ 27-804. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 804, 4/11/1995]
The height of a principal building shall not exceed 35 feet. The height of
an accessory building shall not exceed 14 feet. The height of apartment
buildings shall be governed by § 27-704 of this chapter.
§ 27-805. Lot area, width, coverage and yard regulations. [Ord. No.
2-1995, § 805, 4/11/1995]
1. The lot area per dwelling unit/nonresidential occupancy and lot width at
the minimum building setback line shall be not less than and the
coverage shall be no greater than indicated below:
A. Residential uses where both public sewerage and water services
are provided:
Dwelling Type
Minimum Lot
Area per
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Width at
Front
Building Line
(feet) Coverage
Single-Family
Detached
7,200 50 30%
Single-Family
Semi-Detached
7,200 50 30%
Single-Family
Attached
(Townhouses)
4,500 24 50%
Two-Family
Detached
7,200 50 30%
Two-Family
Semi-Detached
4,500 60 30%
Garden
Apartments
4,500 100 30%
Apartments 4,500 100 50%
B. Nonresidential uses.
(1) For a nonresidential use, proposed as the only use on a lot, the
minimum lot standards shall be as follows:
(a) Lot area shall be based on providing for required minimum
building setbacks, required yards, coverage, parking and
loading/unloading facility areas.
(b) Maximum coverage shall not exceed 50%.
(c) Minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet.
§ 27-804 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-805
1:546
§ 27-806. Yard regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 806, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-807. Off-street parking regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 807, 4/
11/1995]
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 27-808. Sign regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 808, 4/11/1995]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII of
this chapter.
§ 27-809. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 809, 4/11/1995]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of this
chapter.
(2) For a nonresidential use, proposed in conjunction with a
residential use on the same lot, the minimum lot standards
shall be as follows:
(a) Lot area shall be based on providing for required minimum
building setbacks, yards, parking and loading/unloading
facility areas. The minimum lot width shall be not less
than, nor the maximum coverage be greater than the
standards set forth in Subsection 1A above, for the
associated dwelling type.
1. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth
and width indicated below:
A. Front yard depth: 20 feet for all uses except apartment buildings.
B. Side yard or yards width: five feet each for all uses except
apartment buildings or attached dwellings on interior lots. On a
corner lot the side yard abutting a street shall be not less than 20
feet in width.
C. Rear yard depth: 20 feet for all uses except apartment buildings.
D. For apartment buildings the minimum front, side and rear yard
setbacks shall be not less than 25 feet. No portion of an apartment
building shall be closer than 25 feet from any portion of an adjacent
apartment building.
§ 27-805 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-809
1:547

ARTICLE IX
Residential Mobile Home District: R-MH
§ 27-901. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 901, 4/11/1995]
The purpose of the R-MH Residential Mobile Home District is to provide
an area specifically for the location of manufactured/mobile home dwellings
within the Township, to provide reasonable standards to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of manufactured/mobile home dwellings
as single-family dwellings and manufactured/mobile home parks/
communities; to provide standards which will encourage the installation
of public facilities and preservation of public open space; to provide for
the public convenience and to otherwise create conditions conducive to
carrying out the purpose of this chapter.
§ 27-902. Use regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 902, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-903. Development standards. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 903, 4/11/
1995]
For the purpose of this article, the procedures and standards contained
in Sections 51 through 56, "Mobile home parks," of the South Hanover
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations shall apply, as may be
amended.21
§ 27-904. Sign regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2007, § 10, 5/22/2007]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII of
this chapter.
1. Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, a building may be erected
or used and a lot may be used or occupied for the following purposes:
A. Manufactured/mobile home dwellings when located in a
manufactured/mobile home park/community.
B. Home occupation.
C. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development, Art. VII.
§ 27-901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-904
1:549

ARTICLE X
Residential Cluster District: R-C
§ 27-1001. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1001, 4/11/1995]
The purpose of the Residential Cluster District is to provide for residential
living opportunities of a suburban nature at low or medium densities,
dependent upon the provision of public sewage and water services. As an
optional form of development, residential units may also be clustered on
lots smaller than those specified under the base regulations of this district;
provided, a conditional use application is approved by the Township Board
of Supervisors.
§ 27-1002. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1002, 4/11/1995;
Ord. No. 2-2007, § 11, 5/22/2007]
§ 27-1003. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1003, 4/11/1995]
1. Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter a building may be erected
or used for the following purposes:
A. Single-family detached dwelling. [Amended by Ord. No. 1-2019,
2/12/2019]
B. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and
associated social facilities.
C. Public recreation areas.
D. The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, fruits and vegetables,
greenhouses and nurseries.
E. Municipal buildings and facilities.
F. Home occupations.
G. Public utility services and facilities including substations, water
pumping stations and reservoirs.
H. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any
permitted uses.
1. Grazing animals.
2. Guesthouse.
3. Domestic employee quarters.
4. Accessory apartment when associated with a single-family detached
dwelling.
5. Cluster development as set forth in § 27-1010 below. [Added by Ord.
No. 1-2019, 2/12/2019]
§ 27-1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1004
1:551
§ 27-1004. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1004, 4/11/1995]
The height of a principal building shall not exceed 35 feet. The height of an
accessory building shall not exceed 14 feet, except that accessory buildings
devoted for farm use shall be exempt from height regulations.
§ 27-1005. Lot area, width and yard regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 1005, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-1006. Coverage regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1006, 4/11/
1995]
Total coverage shall not exceed 30% of the lot area.
§ 27-1007. Off-street parking regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1007,
4/11/1995]
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 27-1008. Sign regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1008, 4/11/1995]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII of
this chapter.
1. Residential uses.
A. Single-family detached units.
(1) Lots having an on-lot sewage disposal system and well or an
on-lot sewage disposal system with public water service shall
have a minimum lot area of not less than one acre and a
minimum lot width measured at the minimum building setback
line of 100 feet. The front yard setback shall be not less than 35
feet; the side yard setback shall be not less than 12 feet and the
rear yard setback shall be not less than 35 feet.
(2) Lots provided with both public sewage and water services shall
have a minimum lot area of not less than 20,000 square feet
and a minimum lot width measured at the minimum building
setback line of 100 feet. The front yard setback shall be not
less than 35 feet; the side yard setback shall be not less than 12
feet and the rear yard setback shall be not less than 35 feet.
2. Nonresidential units. The minimum lot area, lot width and yard
requirements for nonresidential uses shall be the same as those for
residential single-family detached unit set forth in Subsections 1A(1),
(2) and (3) of this section.
3. On all corner lots the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than
35 feet.
§ 27-1004 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1009
1:552
§ 27-1009. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1009, 4/11/
1995]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of this
chapter.
§ 27-1010. Residential cluster option. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1010, 4/
11/1995]
1. Residential lots may be designed as a cluster development when
approved by the Township Board of Supervisors as a conditional use
based on the following standards and criteria:
A. Permitted uses. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
occupied or used for any one of the following uses. Each dwelling
unit shall be located on its own individual lot. All units/lots shall be
for sale only.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family attached dwellings (townhouse units).
B. Tract size. The minimum developable tract size shall be 50
contiguous acres.
C. Public sewage and water services shall be provided to all units
within the development.
D. Density. The gross density of a clustered subdivision shall not
exceed 2.2 dwelling units/lots per acre. A determination of the
number of dwelling units/lots permitted to be created shall be that
number which could be established through a standard subdivision
plat arrangement of lots and streets applied to the parcel proposed
for development utilizing the standards contained in § 27-1005,
Subsection 1A(2), of this chapter and applicable provisions of the
South Hanover Township Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations [Chapter 22]. Such plat shall be prepared by a
registered land surveyor/engineer and accompany the preliminary
cluster subdivision plat submission and conditional use application.
Floodplains, streams and ponds, drainage basins, stormwater
basins, and slopes greater than 15% may be included in the
calculation for open space but shall not constitute more than 50%
of the total open space area. [Amended by Ord. No. 1-2019, 2/
12/2019]
E. Lot area. [Amended by Ord. No. 1-2019, 2/12/2019]
(1) The minimum lot are for single-family detached dwelling units
shall be not less than 10,000 square feet.
(2) The minimum lot area for single-family attached dwelling units
shall not be less than 6,000 square feet. The maximum number
§ 27-1009 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1010
1:553
of dwelling units permitted per single-family attached
structure shall not exceed four.
(3) The stormwater management plan shall provide 130% of the
designed impervious coverage stormwater mitigation/
retention per residential lot to allow for the future addition of
patios, sheds, or other impervious coverages.
F. Lot width.
(1) The minimum lot width for single-family detached dwelling
units, measured at the minimum building setback line, shall be
no less than 80 feet.
(2) The minimum lot width for single-family attached dwelling
units, measured at the minimum building setback line, shall be
not less than 20 feet.
G. Yard regulations.
(1) Each lot containing a single-family detached dwelling unit shall
have a front yard setback not less than 25 feet, side yard
setbacks not less than 10 feet each, and a rear yard setback not
less than 25 feet.
(2) Each lot containing a single-family attached dwelling unit shall
have a front yard setback not less than 25 feet, a side yard
setback not less than 10 feet for end units, and a rear yard
setback of not less than 25 feet.
H. Coverage regulations. The maximum permitted impervious
coverage, including buildings and streets, shall not exceed 30% of
the total tract area. The remainder shall be retained as open space.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1-2019, 2/12/2019]
I. Open space regulations. [Amended by Ord. No. 1-2019, 2/12/
2019]
(1) Open space areas shall be developed to complement and
enhance the man-made environment. In the selection of the
location of such areas, consideration shall be given to the
preservation of natural and man-made features such as natural
permanent vegetation, historical amenities, and other
community assets which will enhance the attractiveness and
value of the remainder of the property to be subdivided or
developed. Floodplains, streams and ponds, drainage basins,
stormwater basins, and slopes greater than 15% may be
included in the calculation for open space but shall not
constitute more than 50% of the total open space area.
(2) The open space area shall be so located and designed that it is
easily accessible to all people, including the handicapped. Safe
§ 27-1010 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1010
1:554
and easy access to common open space areas shall be provided
either by adjoining road frontage, easements or paths.
(3) Common open space areas shall be designed as a continuous
system of usable areas which are interspersed among
groupings of residential buildings; provided, however, in those
instances in which the total minimum open space is less than
two acres in size, such acres shall be located in one parcel and
shall only be broken up if the development site or its physical
constraints dictate otherwise, with the concurrence of the
Board of Supervisors.
(4) Such areas specifically designed for open space shall be fully
usable and suitable for that purpose and shall be set aside by
deed restriction.
(5) Accessways to the site shall be sufficiently wide so that
maintenance equipment shall have reasonably convenient
access to such areas. In all instances such open space areas
shall be maintained in a careful and prudent manner.
(6) Common open space may be dedicated partially or entirely to
public use. The Township Parks and Recreation Commission
may recommend and the Board of Supervisors may approve
the dedication of any common open space land for public use.
However, the Board of Supervisors shall also have the right to
not accept any dedication of open space if it finds that the size,
location, type of development or cost of development or
maintenance of such common open space or the availability of
other public open space nearby would make public use
undesirable or unnecessary. Any land to be used for recreation
areas instead of using the fee in lieu of land dedication
provision as set forth in § 22-901 shall not be a part of the
calculated open space required by this chapter or the land to
establish density set forth in § 27-1010, Subsection 1D, above.
(7) Private ownership. When common open space is not dedicated
and accepted to public use it shall be protected by legal
arrangements, satisfactory to the Township, sufficient to
assure its maintenance and preservation for whatever purpose
it is intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall:
(a) Obligate purchasers to participate in a homeowners'
association and to support maintenance of the open space
areas by paying to the association assessments sufficient
for such maintenance and subjecting their properties to a
lien for enforcement of payment of the respective
assessments.
(b) Obligate such an association to maintain the open areas
and private streets and utilities.
§ 27-1010 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1010
1:555
(c) Empower the Township, as well as other purchasers in the
development, to enforce the covenants in the event of
failure of compliance.
(d) Provide for agreement that, if the Township is required to
perform any maintenance work pursuant to the subsection
above, such purchasers would pay the cost thereof and
that the same shall be a lien upon their properties until
such cost has been paid; provided, that the developer shall
be responsible for the formation of the homeowners'
association of which the developer, or if the developer is
not the owner of the development, then such owner shall
be a member until all of the lots of record are sold. Other
equivalent provisions to assure adequate perpetual
maintenance may be permitted if approved by the Board of
Supervisors. Assurance that such covenants or equivalent
provisions will be evidenced by the recordation in the
office of Recorder of Deeds of a perpetual maintenance of
facilities as prescribed hereinabove and identifying the
tract and each lot therein. The declaration shall be
included in the deed or other instrument of conveyance of
each lot of record and shall be made binding on all
purchasers; provided, that such declaration may, as to
subsequent conveyance other than the initial conveyance
of each lot of record, be incorporated by reference in the
instrument of conveyance.
(e) Guarantee that any association formed to own and
maintain common open space will not be dissolved without
the consent of the Board of Supervisors.
Such covenants or equivalent legal arrangements shall be
submitted for preliminary review with the preliminary plan
and conditional use application and shall be reviewed and
approved by the Board of Supervisors prior to the granting
of a conditional use and final plan approval.
§ 27-1010 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1010
1:556
ARTICLE XI
Industrial Park District: IP
§ 27-1101. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1101, 4/11/1995]
The Industrial Park District is intended to maximize the light industrial
development potential of the Township by providing opportunities for the
planned development of a variety of such uses and support activities in an
aesthetic parklike environment. It is intended that development occurring
in this district be planned, designed, constructed and managed in an
integrated and coordinated manner based on an overall site development
master plan.
§ 27-1102. Principal uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1102, 4/11/1995]
1. Light industrial activates which engage in the manufacture,
predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products
or parts including business, administrative and corporate offices,
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, storage, sales
and distribution of such products but excluding basic industrial
processing activities defined as heavy industry.
2. Light industrial uses include, but are not limited to, manufacturing of
the following products:
A. Clocks or watches.
B. Toys or novelties.
C. Electrical appliances.
D. Electronic components.
E. Office equipment.
F. Sheet metal products.
G. Machine tools.
H. Food products.
I. Cosmetics.
J. Jewelry.
K. Hand tools.
L. Ceramics.
M. Furniture.
N. Textiles/apparel products.
O. Wood products.
§ 27-1101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1102
1:557
§ 27-1103. Accessory uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1103, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-1104. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1104, 4/11/1995;
Ord. No. 2-2007, § 12, 5/22/2007]
§ 27-1105. Development standards. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1105, 4/11/
1995]
P. Paper products.
3. Municipal facilities.
4. Public utility facilities including substations, water pumping stations
and reservoirs.
5. Farms and agricultural activities.
6. Research and development.
7. Academic clinical research centers, medical marijuana grower/
processors, medical marijuana transport vehicle offices, and medical
marijuana dispensaries, with consideration for the applicable
performance standards found in § 27-14A04. [Added by Ord. No.
2-2017, 8/22/2017]
1. When associated with a principal use the following uses shall be
permitted:
A. Day-care center to service employees.
B. Retail/wholesale activities.
C. Personal services to meet commercial convenience needs of
employees including exercise/fitness centers.
1. Heliports.
2. Wind energy conservation systems.
3. Outdoor storage of material or equipment.
4. Billboards as defined herein, subject to the requirement of § 27-1707 of
this article.
1. Site area requirements. A site area for purposes of this chapter shall be
the total land area to be developed as a unit prior to the creation of any
new lots within the property area. A site area may be:
A. A single tax parcel or two or more adjacent tax parcels under the
same ownership.
B. Two or more adjacent tax parcels under separate ownership
provided that all individual property owners are members of an
entity created for the purpose of developing the properties as a
§ 27-1102 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1105
1:558
single integrated planned development. Documents related to the
establishment of such entity shall be recorded in the Dauphin
County Courthouse as a prerequisite to subdivision or land
development plat application processing.
2. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
A. Enhance the appearance of the development from public streets
and adjacent properties.
B. Encourage the retention of large sites and their development in a
coordinated, aesthetic and efficient manner.
C. Ensure that the minimum functional requirements associated with
the development are provided on site.
D. Establish maximum limits of development intensity.
3. Site area standards. The following standards shall apply to any
development proposed in the Industrial Park District:
A. Minimum permitted site area shall be 15 acres.
B. Site area development or subdivision into individual lots shall be
processed as either a land development or subdivision plat
application.
4. Setback requirements.
A. Perimeter street setbacks. No structure shall be located closer than
75 feet to an existing public street right-of-way. No structure shall
be located closer than 50 feet from an internal access drive (public
or private street) serving the development site.
B. Side and rear yard property line setbacks.
(1) A minimum side and rear yard setback of 100 feet shall be
required from any such property line that is common with/
adjacent to a residential district.
(2) A minimum side and rear yard setback of 50 feet shall be
required from any such property line that is common with/
adjacent to a nonresidential district.
5. Minimum public street frontage. A site area shall have a minimum of
100 feet of continuous, uninterrupted frontage measured along a public
street right-of-way.
6. Internal building setbacks.
A. Within a development site area front to front and rear to rear facing
structures shall have a minimum of 80 feet between faces.
B. Within a development site area end wall faces of structures shall
have a minimum of 40 feet between end walls.
§ 27-1105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1105
1:559
C. Within a development site area the minimum separation distance
between end wall faces of structures and front or rear faces of
structures shall be 50 feet.
7. Maximum building height. The height of a building shall not exceed 40
feet.
8. Sight distance. No sight obscuring structures or plantings exceeding 30
inches in height shall be located within a twenty-foot radius of the lot
corner nearest the intersection involving a public street or private
access drive. Trees located within a twenty-foot radius of such an
intersection shall be maintained to allow 10 feet of visual clearance
below the lowest hanging branches.
9. Landscaping requirements. A minimum of 35% of the total site area
shall be landscaped open space in compliance with the following
standards: [Amended by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
A. A landscaped buffer shall be maintained adjacent to all perimeter
setbacks as follows:
(1) Perimeter street setbacks. Minimum landscaped buffer of 30
feet consisting of street trees and shrubbery approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
(2) Side and rear yard property setbacks. Where the site area
abuts a residential district or use a landscaped screen buffer of
30 feet shall be required having an opacity of 80% after the
first year and thereafter. Such screened buffer may consist of a
masonry wall, wood fence, trees, shrubs, berms or
combinations thereof.
(3) All parking, loading and refuse facility areas shall be screened
from the street grade of adjacent public streets and the
established grade of abutting residential district areas.
(4) In the event a masonry wall or wood fence is used for screening
purposes, vegetative landscaping shall be placed and
maintained between the wall or fence and the property line
adjacent to a residential district to form an ornamental screen.
B. Internal circulation drives shall be landscaped with street trees and
street side planters. A minimum of 10 feet width shall be
landscaped.
C. Existing significant trees, tree stands and natural vegetation shall
be integrated into the site area landscape plan to the maximum
extent possible.
D. Outdoor eating and recreation areas for employees may be
included in the required landscaped area but shall be screened, as
set forth above, from adjacent residential district areas.
§ 27-1105 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1105
1:560
§ 27-1106. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1106, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-1107. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1107, 4/11/
1995]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX,
"motor vehicle access," of this chapter.
§ 27-1108. Signs. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1108, 4/11/1995]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with Article XVII, "signs," of this
chapter.
E. Undeveloped portions of the site shall be seeded, mowed and well
maintained.
10. Access and site circulation. In addition to other provisions set forth in
this chapter the location, design and development of access and
circulation shall:
A. Provide continuous pedestrian access corridors along public
streets and private access drives to service the various activities
taking place within the site development area.
B. Provide on-site directions signing identifying the location of all uses
within the site area in compliance with Article XXI, "signs," of this
chapter.
C. Site areas shall not be developed so as to establish direct or
indirect access corridors passing through a residential
development.
11. Structural siting and design. In applying the provisions of this section
particular emphasis shall be given to the siting and design of all
structures, or portions thereof, on the periphery of a site area which
may be viewed from any public street.
A. All exterior building walls and structures shall be constructed with
attractive, durable materials such as textured concrete, masonry,
stone, brick, finished wood, metal, stucco and glass, preferably a
combination thereof. The facade facing a public street shall have at
least two-thirds of its surface area covered by two or more
materials named above other than metal.
B. The design and siting of buildings shall compliment the natural
terrain and vegetation of the site.
1. Parking, loading and unloading areas and facilities shall be provided in
accordance with Article XVIII, "off-street parking," of this chapter.
A. Parking shall be permitted within the front yard setback area;
however, shall not be permitted within the landscaped buffer areas.
§ 27-1105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1109
1:561
§ 27-1109. Lot coverage. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1109, 4/11/1995]
Total coverage shall not exceed 65% of the lot area.
§ 27-1109 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1109
1:562
ARTICLE XII
Office Park District: OP
§ 27-1201. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1201, 4/11/1995; as
amended by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
The Office Park District is intended to provide suitable development
opportunities to permit combined business and office activities to become
established in a compatible manner. A further objective is to allow limited
assembly, warehouse and distribution and light industrial activities which
are incidental to permitted principle uses. Such development is encouraged
to be planned, designed, constructed and managed in an integrated and
coordinated fashion based on an overall site development master plan.
§ 27-1202. Principal uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1202, 4/11/1995]
1. The following commercial and office uses may be established
individually on separate lots or cumulatively on one parcel:
A. Offices for professional services, businesses, finance, unions,
advertising, insurance and other similar activities.
B. Medical clinics.
C. Scientific research and development activities.
D. Studios for radio and television stations.
E. Banks, investment brokers and finance agencies.
F. Commercial photography and art studios.
G. Employment agencies.
H. Computer and data processing services.
I. Management and public relations.
J. Municipal facilities and services including substations, water
pumping stations and reservoirs.
K. Restaurants.
L. Security, commodity brokers and services.
M. Office supplies and equipment.
N. Health/fitness centers.
O. Day-care centers.
P. Public utility facilities including substations, water pumping
stations and reservoirs.
Q. Public and private schools.
§ 27-1201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1203
1:563
§ 27-1203. Accessory uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1203, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-1204. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1204, 4/11/1995]
The height of a building shall not exceed 40 feet.
§ 27-1205. Development standards. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1205, 4/11/
1995]
§ 27-1206. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1206, 4/11/1995]
1. Warehousing and distribution, assembly and light industrial activities
are permitted when said uses are incidental and accessory to any
principal permitted use subject to the following standards:
A. Unless permitted as a special exception, where a single building is
established on one lot a minimum of 60% of said building must be
devoted to a principal use with a maximum of 40% of the gross floor
area utilized for warehousing and distribution, assembly or light
manufacturing.
B. Where two or more buildings are established on one lot the
percentages prescribed above may be achieved by utilizing the
aggregate gross floor area of all buildings erected therein rather
than apply these limitations to each individual building.
C. Any use shall not involve the manufacture, processing, storage or
distribution of materials which are classified as highly flammable,
explosive or toxic.
D. All materials, products and processing activities shall be entirely
contained within a building.
2. When associated with a principal use the following uses shall also be
permitted:
A. Day-care center to service employees.
B. Personal services to meet commercial convenience needs of
employees including exercise/fitness centers.
C. Such uses are subject to the following standard: Day-care centers,
personal service uses and exercise/fitness centers shall not
consume more than 10% of the gross floor area of a single floor of
the building in which located.
1. The development standards set forth in Article XI, § 27-1105, shall
apply to all development permitted in this district.
2. No outdoor storage of equipment or materials shall be allowed.
1. Parking, loading and unloading areas and facilities shall be provided in
accordance with Article XVIII, "off-street parking," of this chapter.
§ 27-1203 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1206
1:564
§ 27-1207. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1207, 4/11/
1995]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX,
"motor vehicle access," of this chapter.
§ 27-1208. Signs. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1208, 4/11/1995]
Signs shall be provided in accordance with Article XVII, "signs," of this
chapter.
§ 27-1209. Lot coverage. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1209, 4/11/1995]
Total coverage shall not exceed 60% of the lot area.
2. Parking shall be permitted within the front yard setback area; however,
shall not be permitted within the landscaped buffer areas.
§ 27-1206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1209
1:565

ARTICLE XIII
Commercial Highway District: CH
§ 27-1301. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1301, 4/11/1995]
The Commercial Highway District is designed to accommodate the needs of
transient highway travelers as well as to serve as retail marketing centers
for the entire Township. This district is intended for a wide range of
shopping and service functions which can provide adequate comparison
shopping activities.
§ 27-1302. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1302, 4/11/1995;
Ord. No. 3-1998, § 3, 10/27/1998; Ord. No. 2-2007, § 13, 5/22/2007]
1. In the Commercial Highway District no building or land shall be used
and no building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used for other than the following uses. No processing or
storage activity shall be permitted outside of a building unless such
activity is effectively screened by a wall, partition or suitable
landscaping. Such uses, operations or products shall not be
objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or similar
causes.
A. Building materials and garden supplies.
B. General merchandise stores.
C. Food stores.
D. Automotive dealers and service stations.
E. Apparel and accessory stores.
F. Furniture and home furnishings stores.
G. Eating and drinking places.
H. Drugstores.
I. Liquor stores.
J. Used merchandise stores.
K. Miscellaneous shopping foods stores.
L. Retail stores.
M. Banking.
N. Credit agencies other than banks.
O. Security, commodity brokers and service.
P. Insurance carriers, agents, brokers and service.
§ 27-1301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1302
1:567
Q. Professional offices.
R. Real estate.
S. Nurseries and greenhouses.
T. Hotels, motels and other transient lodging places.
U. Personal services stores.
V. Business services stores.
W. Automotive rentals and storage facilities.
X. General automotive repair and body shops.
Y. Mechanical, plumbing, lumber, heating and electrical supply
stores.
Z. Watch, clock and jewelry repair.
AA. Membership sports and recreation clubs.
BB. (Reserved)22
CC. Health service clinics, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing and
convalescent homes.
DD. Veterinarians.
EE. Legal services.
FF. Mortuaries.
GG. Municipal uses.
HH. Bus passenger stations and other commuter support related
facilities and services (e.g. baggage check areas, ticket sales,
luggage reclamation, auto rentals and commuter parking areas).
II. Computer services and sales.
JJ. Shopping centers and department stores.
KK. Recreational vehicle parks.
LL. Public and private schools.
MM.Day-care centers.
NN. Public libraries and museums.
OO. Commercial recreation (e.g. miniature golf, ice skating, roller
skating, etc.).
22.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 1BB, Membership sports and recreation clubs, was
repealed 8/22/2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017.
§ 27-1302 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1302
1:568
§ 27-1303. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1303, 4/11/1995;
Ord. No. 2-2007, § 14, 5/22/2007]
§ 27-1304. Yard requirements. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1304, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-1305. Buffer yard requirements. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1305, 4/
11/1995]
Where required, buffer yards shall be provided in compliance with the
standards set forth in § 27-1508, Subsection 1F, of this chapter.
PP. Institutional care facilities.
QQ. Assembly and fabrication of products to be sold on the premises.
Assembly and fabrication activities are permitted; provided, the
area devoted to such activates do not exceed 2,000 square feet in
area.
RR. Public utility facilities including substations, water pumping
stations and reservoirs.
SS. Accessory uses customarily incident to permitted uses.
TT. Half-way house/after care facility.
UU. Academic clinical research centers, medical marijuana grower/
processors, medical marijuana transport vehicle offices, and
medical marijuana dispensaries, with consideration for the
applicable performance standards found in § 27-14A04. [Added by
Ord. No. 2-2017, 8/22/2017]
1. Billboards as defined herein, subject to the requirements of § 27-1707
of this article.
1. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth
or width indicated below:
A. Front yard depth, 60 feet from the street right-of-way.
B. Side yards, two; width 10 feet each side of a principal building;
provided, that when a written agreement is provided by adjoining
property owners no side yard shall be required where two or more
commercial uses abut side to side; however, in no case shall
common walls be permitted between properties of separate
ownership. In the case of a series of abutting structures adjacent to
and paralleling a public right-of-way and open and unobstructed
passage for vehicles and pedestrians of at least 20 feet in width
shall be provided at grade level at intervals of not more than 400
feet.
C. Rear yard depth, 30 feet.
§ 27-1302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1306
1:569
§ 27-1306. Building height. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1306, 4/11/1995]
The height of a building shall not exceed 35 feet.
§ 27-1307. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1307, 4/11/1995]
Parking shall be provided for in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter.
§ 27-1308. Signs. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1308, 4/11/1995]
Signs shall be in accordance with Article XVII of this chapter.
§ 27-1309. Lot coverage requirements. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1309, 4/
11/1995; as amended by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
Total coverage shall not exceed 40% of the lot area.
§ 27-1310. Motor vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1310, 4/11/
1995]
Motor vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of this
chapter.
§ 27-1306 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1310
1:570
ARTICLE XIV
Floodplain District: FP
§ 27-1401. Statutory authorization. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1401, 4/11/
1995; Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of South
Hanover Dauphin County, Pennsylvania does hereby amend Chapter 27,
Article XIV, of the Code of Ordinances of the Township in its entirety to
provide as follows.
§ 27-1402. General provisions.
§ 27-1402.1. Intent. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1402, 4/11/1995; Ord. No.
2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
§ 27-1403. Applicability.
§ 27-1403.1. Floodplain District. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
The Floodplain District shall include the areas identified as Zones AE and
A1-30 in the FIS which are subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event determined by detailed methods and have base flood elevations
(BFEs) shown.
§ 27-1403.2. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
1. The intent of this article is to:
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents, by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
1. The following uses are permitted in the Floodplain District:
§ 27-1401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1403.2
1:571
§ 27-1403.3. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
The height of a building shall be no greater than 35 feet.
§ 27-1403.4. Area regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
The lot area and the lot area dwelling unit shall be no less than one acre.
§ 27-1403.5. Width regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
The lot width at the required front building line shall be not less than 150
feet.
§ 27-1403.6. Yard regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticultural, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming and wild crop harvesting.
B. Residential dwelling uses which shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the requirements set forth in the South Hanover
Township Building Code [Chapter 5, Article II].
C. Other residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas and
parking areas.
D. Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks,
day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launchings,
swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries and hunting and
fishing areas.
E. Storage of materials and equipment provided that they are not
buoyant, flammable and explosive and are not subject to major
damage by flooding or provided that such equipment is firmly
anchored to prevent flotation or movement and/or can be readily
removed from the area within the time available after flood
warning.
F. Small structures or accessory buildings generally considered
necessary or incidental to above uses.
G. Electric and telephone utility, transmission and distribution of
facilities including substations, water or sewer pumping stations
and reservoirs which shall be floodproofed as set forth in the South
Hanover Township Building Code [Chapter 5, Article II].
1. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth
or width indicated below:
A. Front yard depth: 50 feet.
B. Side yards, two — Width, 30 feet each.
§ 27-1403.2 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1403.6
1:572
§ 27-1403.7. Coverage regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/
2012]
Total coverage shall not exceed 30% of the lot area. At least 50% of the lot
shall be covered with vegetative material.
§ 27-1403.8. Off-street parking. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVIII,
entitled "off-street parking."
§ 27-1403.9. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within the Township of South Hanover unless a permit has been
obtained from the floodplain administrator.
§ 27-1403.10. Minor repairs. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1403, 4/11/1995;
Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
§ 27-1404. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 1404, 4/11/1995; Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
This article supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this article, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 27-1405. Severability. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1405, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this article are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 27-1406. Warning and disclaimer of liability. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 1406, 4/11/1995; Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights
may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and
C. Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
§ 27-1403.6 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1406
1:573
bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas
outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This article shall not create liability on the part of the Township of South
Hanover or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 27-1407. Administration.
§ 27-1407.1. Designation of floodplain administrator. [Ord. No.
2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
The South Hanover Township Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce this article and is referred to herein as the
floodplain administrator.
§ 27-1407.2. Permit required. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
A permit shall be required before any construction or development,
including placement of manufactured homes, is undertaken within any area
of the Township of South Hanover.
§ 27-1407.3. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
[Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
1. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
2. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
3. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
4. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
§ 27-1406 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1407.3
1:574
§ 27-1407.4. Application procedures and requirements. [Ord. No.
2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
5. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this article.
6. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
7. The floodplain administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this article including, but not limited to, permitting,
inspection and enforcement.
8. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
1. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by the Township of South Hanover.
Such application shall contain the following:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
C. Name and address of contractor.
D. Site location including address.
E. Listing of other permits required.
F. Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
G. A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
2. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
§ 27-1407.3 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1407.4
1:575
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
B. All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
D. Structures, including manufactured homes, will be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement;
E. Building materials are flood-resistant;
F. Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
G. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
3. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
A. A completed permit application form.
B. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale, and date;
(2) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(3) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
C. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(2) The elevation of the base flood;
§ 27-1407.4 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1407.4
1:576
(3) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2006 IBC or the 2006 IRC.
D. The following data and documentation:
(1) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood elevation; and
(2) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(3) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an special floodplain area (see
§ 27-1408.2, Subsection 1B), when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
base flood elevation more than one foot at any point.
(4) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of flood proofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development.
(5) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 27-1409.3, Subsection 1F, Storage, and § 27-1409.4,
Development which may endanger human life, including:
(a) The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 27-1409.3, Subsection 1F, and
§ 27-1409.4, which are intended to be used, produced,
stored or otherwise maintained on site.
(b) A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 27-1409.4 during a base flood.
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
§ 27-1407.4 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1407.4
1:577
§ 27-1407.5. Review by county conservation district. [Ord. No.
2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the floodplain administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the floodplain administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 27-1407.6. Review of application by others. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2,
4/25/2012]
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals such as the Township Planning Commission and
Township Engineer for review and comment.
§ 27-1407.7. Changes. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant
to floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 27-1407.8. Placards. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit the date of its
issuance and be signed by the floodplain administrator.
§ 27-1407.9. Start of construction. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180
days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The
actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of poles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on
a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
E. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the Township based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
§ 27-1407.4 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1407.9
1:578
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request.
§ 27-1407.10. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
1. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
A. Be in writing;
B. Include the specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of the ordinance;
C. Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
D. Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
E. Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this article;
F. Include the name of the owner of record and any other person
against whom the Township intends to take action;
G. Include the location of the violation;
H. Include the date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed;
I. Include language advising the recipient of the notice that the
recipient has the right to appeal to the Township Zoning Hearing
Board within a prescribed period of time in accordance with the
§ 27-1407.9 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1407.10
1:579
§ 27-1407.11. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1407, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
§ 27-1408. Identification of floodplain areas.
procedures set forth in this article and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code;
J. Include notice that failure to comply with the notice within the time
specified, unless extended by appeal to the Township Zoning
Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with sanctions clearly
described.
2. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the Township shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. In addition to the above penalties all other
actions at law or in equity are hereby reserved including an action in
equity for the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a
fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this article
shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue
and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with
this article may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be a public
nuisance and abatable as such.
1. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
article, may appeal to the Township Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal
must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the floodplain administrator.
2. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a time
and place within 60 days from the date of receipt of the notice of
appeal, for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time
and place at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all
parties.
3. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief there from by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
commonwealth including the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management
Act.
§ 27-1407.10 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1408.1
1:580
§ 27-1408.1. Identification. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
The identified floodplain area shall be all areas of South Hanover Township
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the flood insurance
study (FIS) and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated
August 2, 2012 and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the flood insurance study.
The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments are hereby adopted by South Hanover Township and declared
to be a part of this article.
§ 27-1408.2. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
1. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
A. Floodway area.
(1) Description. The area identified as floodway in the FIS which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation by more than one foot at any point.
This term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special floodplain areas where no floodway has been
identified in the FIS.
(2) Special requirements:
(a) Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed,
unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. Special floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the
FIS which are subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event determined by detailed methods and have base
flood elevations (BFEs) shown.
(2) Special requirements:
(a) No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse.
§ 27-1408.1 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1408.2
1:581
(b) In special floodplain areas without a designated floodway,
no new development shall be permitted unless it can be
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and
projected development will not increase the BFE by more
than one foot.
C. Approximate floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS which
are subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood event
determined using approximate methodologies. Because
detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs
or flood depths are shown.
(2) Special requirements:
(a) No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse.
(b) When available, information from other federal, state, and
other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the
BFE, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the BFE shall be determined by
using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site in question.
In lieu of the above, the Township may require the
applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods
used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Township of South Hanover.
D. Shallow flooding area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AO and AH in the
FIS. These areas are subject to inundation by 1% annual
chance shallow flooding where average depths are between
one and three feet.
(2) Special requirements. Establish drainage paths to guide
floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
§ 27-1408.2 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1408.3
1:582
§ 27-1408.3. Changes in identification of area. [Ord. No. 2-2012,
§ 2, 4/25/2012]
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from the FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify the FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 27-1408.4. Boundary disputes. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1408, 4/11/
1995; Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the South Hanover Township
Floodplain Administrator and any party aggrieved by this decision or
determination may appeal to the Township Zoning Hearing Board. The
burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 27-1409. Technical provisions.
§ 27-1409.1. General. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
1. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
A. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
B. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
C. In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development, shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
2. The floodplain administrator shall submit technical or scientific data to
FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six months of the
completion of any new construction, development, or other activity
resulting in changes in the BFE.
3. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this article and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 27-1408.3 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1409.2
1:583
§ 27-1409.2. Elevation and floodproofing requirements. [Ord. No.
2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
1. Residential structures.
A. In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
B. In A Zones, where there [are] no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation in accordance with § 27-1408.2,
Subsection 1C(2)(b), of this article.
C. In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
D. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2006 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2006 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 —
405 as amended) shall be utilized.
2. Nonresidential structures.
A. In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(1) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and,
(2) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
B. In A Zones, where there [are] no base flood elevations are specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation in accordance with § 27-1408.2, Subsection 1C(2)(b), of
this article.
C. In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
§ 27-1409.2 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1409.2
1:584
D. Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
E. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2006 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2006 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 —
405 as amended) shall be utilized.
3. Space below the lowest floor.
A. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
B. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
4. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
A. The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
B. Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
§ 27-1409.2 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1409.2
1:585
§ 27-1409.3. Design and construction standards. [Ord. No. 2-2012,
§ 2, 4/25/2012]
C. The structure will have a low damage potential.
D. The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
E. Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
F. Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, and similar fixtures and
appliances are prohibited.
G. Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
H. The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
1. The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only — Sanitary Landfills
shall not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, feet unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by the floodplain administrator; and
§ 27-1409.2 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1409.3
1:586
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with
all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such
system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages and
the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life,
and not listed in § 27-1409.4, Development which may endanger
human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures, including manufactured homes,
shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted
§ 27-1409.3 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1409.3
1:587
engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are "waterresistant"
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
"water-resistant" material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a "marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other
finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units,
and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
§ 27-1409.3 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1409.3
1:588
§ 27-1409.4. Development which may endanger human life. [Ord.
No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 — 405), as
amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to
the above and other sections and subsections of this article, to the
extent that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the
requirements of this article.
International Building Code (IBC) 2006 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2006 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
1. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the department of community and economic
development as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved
structure which: will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any
activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons,
or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
• Acetone
• Ammonia
• Benzene
• Calcium carbide
• Carbon disulfide
• Celluloid
• Chlorine
• Hydrochloric acid
§ 27-1409.3 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1409.4
1:589
§ 27-1409.5. Special requirements for subdivisions. [Ord. No.
2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
• Hydrocyanic acid
• Magnesium
• Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
• Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
• Phosphorus
• Potassium
• Sodium
• Sulphur and sulphur products
• Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
• Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated.
2. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection 1 above shall be prohibited.
3. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection 1 above shall
be:
A. Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation,
B. Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood elevation.
C. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
4. Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection 1 above shall be prohibited within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
§ 27-1409.4 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1409.5
1:590
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 27-1409.6. Special requirements for manufactured homes. [Ord.
No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
§ 27-1409.7. Special requirements for recreational vehicles. [Ord.
No. 2-1995, § 1409, 4/11/1995; Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
§ 27-1410. Activities requiring special permits.
1. Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
2. Within approximate floodplain or special floodplain area, manufactured
homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward
from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
3. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
A. Placed on a permanent foundation.
B. Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
C. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
4. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2006 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto shall apply and
34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 — 405.
5. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2006 IBC, and the 2006 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the unit's(s') proposed installation.
1. Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either:
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 27-1409.6.
§ 27-1409.5 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1410.1
1:591
§ 27-1410.1. General. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
§ 27-1410.2. Application requirements for special exception
permits. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
1. In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement
the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, the following activities
shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special
exception permit has been issued by the Township Zoning Hearing
Board.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
1. Applicants for special exception permits shall provide five copies of the
following items:
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways,
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction, and elevations;
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
§ 27-1410.1 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1410.2
1:592
and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed
activity or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the base flood elevation elevations,
and information concerning the flow of water including
direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and
any other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which South Hanover Township
considers necessary for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing
the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building
elevations, as appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any
other floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the base flood elevation;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he
represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect that the proposed
§ 27-1410.2 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1410.2
1:593
§ 27-1410.3. Application review procedures. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2,
4/25/2012]
construction has been adequately designed to protect against
damage from the base flood elevation;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a base flood elevation,
including a statement concerning the effects such pollution
may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on base flood elevation elevations and
flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the base flood elevation and the
effects such materials and debris may have on base flood
elevation elevations and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development;"
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a
permit for any activity regulated by the Department of
Environmental Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;
and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of
a base flood.
1. Upon receipt of an application for a special exception permit by the
Township, the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of
§ 27-1407:
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying
§ 27-1410.2 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1410.3
1:594
§ 27-1410.4. Special technical requirements. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 1410, 4/11/1995; Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
documentation shall be forwarded to the county Planning
Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and
recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the South Hanover Township Planning Commission
and South Hanover Township Engineer for review and comment.
B. The procedures set forth in Chapter 27, Article XXI, of the Code of
Ordinances of South Hanover Township and the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, Article IX, 53 P.S. §§ 10901
through 10917 shall apply to special exception permit requests.
1. In addition to the requirements of § 27-1409 of this article, the
following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between
any of the following requirements and those in § 27-1409 of this article
or in any other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
2. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
A. Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(1) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood elevation without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or
contents below the BFE.
(2) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood elevation.
B. Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
3. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by South Hanover Township and the Department of Community
and Economic Development.
§ 27-1410.3 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1411
1:595
§ 27-1411. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
§ 27-1411.1. Existing structures. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
The provisions of this article do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 27-1411.2 shall apply.
§ 27-1411.2. Improvements. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1411, 4/11/1995;
Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
§ 27-1412. Variances.
§ 27-1412.1. General. [Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
If compliance with any of the requirements of this article would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 27-1412.2. Variance procedures and conditions. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 1412, 4/11/1995; Ord. No. 2-2012, § 2, 4/25/2012]
1. The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is
made to an existing structure located within any identified floodplain
area.
2. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation
of the base flood elevation.
3. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one
foot at any point.
4. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this article.
5. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC.
6. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
7. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 27-1411 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1412.2
1:596
1. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 27,
Article XXI, § 27-2111, Subsection 2, of the Code of Ordinances of South
Hanover Township and the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Code, Article IX, 53 P.S. §§ 10901 through 10917, and the
following.
2. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the
BFE.
3. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any special floodplain area that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE than one
foot at any point.
4. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
special exception permit § 27-1410 or to development which may
endanger human life § 27-1409.4.
5. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
6. In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it considers necessary in order
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this article.
7. Whenever a variance is granted, the Township shall notify the applicant
in writing that:
A. The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
B. Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
8. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
A. That there is good and sufficient cause.
B. That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
C. That the granting of the variance will:
(1) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense.
§ 27-1412.2 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1412.2
1:597
(2) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances
and regulations.
9. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to FEMA.
10. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting a 1%
annual chance flood.
§ 27-1412.2 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1412.2
1:598
ARTICLE XIVA
Wireless Communications Facilities
§ 27-14A01. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, 4/11/1995; as amended by
Ord. No. 1-1999, 1/26/1999; by Ord. No. 1-2000, 9/12/2000; by Ord.
No. 3-2005, 8/16/2005; and by Ord. No. 1-2016, 7/12/2016]
1. The purpose of this article is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
communications facilities in South Hanover Township (referred to
herein as the "Township"). While the Township recognizes the
importance of wireless communications facilities in providing highquality
communications service to its residents and businesses, the
Township also recognizes that it has an obligation to protect public
safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects of such facilities
through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
2. By enacting these provisions, the Township intends to:
A. Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities
while regulating their location and number so as to ensure the
provision of necessary services;
B. Provide for the managed development of wireless communications
facilities in a manner that enhances the benefits of wireless
communication and accommodates the needs of both Township
residents and wireless carriers in accordance with federal and
state laws and regulations;
C. Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
non-tower-based wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside the public
rights-of-way;
D. Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited to,
distributed antenna systems, data collection units, and other
wireless communications facilities;
E. Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such
facilities through proper design, siting, screening, material, color
and finish, and by requiring that competing providers of wireless
communications services co-locate their non-tower WCFs and
related facilities on existing towers;
F. Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Township's residents.
§ 27-14A01 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A02
1:599
§ 27-14A02. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2-1995, 4/11/1995; as amended
by Ord. No. 1-1999, 1/26/1999; by Ord. No. 1-2000, 9/12/2000; by
Ord. No. 3-2005, 8/16/2005; and by Ord. No. 1-2016, 7/12/2016]
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section, unless the content clearly indicates
otherwise:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, tall
steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas on towers.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities as defined below.
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base of the
antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure. If
the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the
highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF, or on any structure that already supports
at least one non-tower WCF.
COMMERCIAL MOBILE SERVICE — Any mobile service (as defined in
Section 153 of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended) that
is provided for profit and makes interconnected service available: (1) to the
public, or (2) to such classes of eligible users as to be effectively available
to a substantial portio of the public. It includes, but is not limited to,
personal communications services (PCS), cellular radio/telephone service
and paging.
COMMON CARRIER — Any person engaged as a common carrier for hire,
in interstate or foreign communications by wire or radio, or in interstate
or foreign radio transmission of energy, but a person engaged in radio
broadcasting shall not, insofar as such person is so engaged, be deemed a
common carrier.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
1.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
2.
§ 27-14A02 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A02
1:600
EXCHANGE ACCESS — The offering of access to telephone exchange
services or facilities for the purpose of the originator or terminator of
telephone toll services.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a
tower-based WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities, including, but
not limited to, antennas and related equipment. Non-tower WCFs shall not
include support structures for antennas or any related equipment that is
mounted to the ground or at ground level.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES — Facilities for the provision
of personal wireless services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Includes commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access
services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES SITE — A tract or parcel of land that
contains a personal wireless service antenna as the principal use, its
support structure, accessory building(s), parking and may include other
uses and equipment associated with the ancillary to telecommunication
signal transmission or processing.
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to,
or necessary for the operation of a tower-based WCF or non-tower WCF.
By way of illustration, not limitation, related equipment includes generators
and base stations.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — State-of-the-art design techniques used to
blend objects into the surrounding environment and to minimize the visual
impact as much as possible. These design techniques are applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which blend the
proposed WCF into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a
manner as to render it less visible to the casual observer. Such methods
include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted
antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing
structure, and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, light poles,
utility poles or flagpoles.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A modification
to an existing wireless communications facility substantially changes the
physical dimensions of a tower or base station if it meets any of the
following criteria:
§ 27-14A02 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A02
1:601
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.
UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunication
services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual
licenses, but does not mean the provision of direct exchange satellite
services.
WBCA — The Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line-of-sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communication facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
(ROW) or other Township-owned land or property.
For communications towers outside the public rights-of-way, it
increases the height of the facility by more than 10%, or by the height of
one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing
antenna, not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for
communications towers in the rights-of-way, it increases the height of
the facility by more than 10% or 10 feet, whichever is greater;
1.
For communications towers outside the public rights-of-way, it
protrudes from the edge of the WCF by more than 20 feet, or more
than the width of the tower structures at the level of the appurtenance,
whichever is greater; for those communications towers in the public
rights-of-way, it protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than
six feet;
2.
It involves installation of more than the standard number of new
equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four
cabinets;
3.
It entails any excavation of deployment outside the current site of the
communications tower; or
4.
It does not comply with conditions associated with prior approval of
construction or modification of the communications tower, unless the
noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, or
addition of cabinets.
5.
§ 27-14A02 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A02
1:602
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility, or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Township.
§ 27-14A03. Requirements for non-tower wireless communications
facilities. [Ord. No. 2-1995, 4/11/1995; as amended by Ord. No.
1-1999, 1/26/1999; by Ord. No. 1-2000, 9/12/2000; by Ord. No.
3-2005, 8/16/2005; and by Ord. No. 1-2016, 7/12/2016]
1. The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs:
A. Non-tower WCFs shall be located on municipally owned poles and
traffic lights. If such placement is not possible, non-tower WCFs are
permitted by conditional use in all zones subject to the restrictions
and conditions prescribed below and subject to applicable
permitting by the Township.
B. The following sites shall be considered by applicants as the
preferred order of location of proposed non-tower WCFs, including
antennas and assorted equipment. As determined to be feasible,
and in order of preference, the sites are:
(1) Existing WCF, smokestack, water tower or any other tall
structure.
(2) IP Industrial Park District.
(3) Publicly owned structures.
(4) CH Commercial Highway District and OP Office Park District.
(5) Residential zones which are R-A Residential Agriculture
District, R-S Residential Suburban District, R-U Residential
Urban District, R-M Residential Multifamily District and V
Residential Village District, and the ESC Eleemosynary School
Campus District, as a conditional use.
C. Nonconforming wireless support structures. Non-tower WCFs shall
be permitted to co-locate upon nonconforming tower-based WCFs
and other nonconforming structures. Co-location of WCFs upon
existing tower-based WCFs is encouraged even if the tower-based
WCF is nonconforming as to use within a zoning district.
D. Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most-recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Standard, National Electrical Safety Code, and National
Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained
in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
§ 27-14A02 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A03
1:603
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Township.
E. Wind. All non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to withstand
the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to
the standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association and Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended) and ASCE-7 latest edition.
F. Aviation safety. Non-tower WCFs shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
G. Public safety communications. Non-tower WCFs shall not interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
H. Radio frequency emissions. A non-tower WCF shall not, by itself or
in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC,
including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
I. Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is discontinued,
the owner shall provide written notice to the Township of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed
as follows:
(1) All abandoned or unused non-tower WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within two months of the cessation
of operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by
the Township.
(2) If the non-tower WCF or accessory facility is not removed
within two months of the cessation of operations at a site, or
within any longer period approved by the Township, the nontower
WCF and/or associated facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the non-tower WCF.
J. Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower WCF
shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the nontower
WCF.
§ 27-14A03 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A03
1:604
K. Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or
contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the non-tower
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower WCF shall
defend any actions or proceedings against the Township in which it
is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property
damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a non-tower WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court
costs and all other costs of indemnification.
L. Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
(1) The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents.
(3) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
2. The following regulations shall apply to all co-located non-tower WCFs
that do not substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless
support structure to which they are attached, or otherwise fall under
the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
A. Permit required. WCF applicants proposing the modification of an
existing tower-based WCF shall obtain a building permit from the
Township. In order to be considered for such permit, the WCF
applicant must submit a permit application to the Township in
accordance with applicable permit policies and procedures.
B. Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA.
Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a nontower
WCF is filed with the Township, the Township shall notify the
WCF applicant in writing of any information that may be required
to complete such application. Within 60 calendar days of receipt of
a complete application, the Township shall make its final decision
on whether to approve the application and shall advise the WCF
§ 27-14A03 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A03
1:605
applicant in writing of such decision. The Township shall notify the
WCF applicant as to completeness of the WCF application within
30 days of receipt. The timing requirements in this section shall
only apply to proposed facilities that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act.
C. Related equipment. Ground-mounted related equipment greater
than three cubic feet shall not be located within 50 feet of a lot in
residential use or zoned residential.
D. Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a nontower
WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
3. The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs that do
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they are
attached, or that otherwise do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act:
A. Prohibited on certain structures. No non-tower WCF shall be
located on single-family detached residences, single-family
attached residences, or any residential accessory structure.
B. Conditional use required. Any WCF applicant proposing the
construction of a new non-tower WCF, or the modification of an
existing non-tower WCF, shall first obtain a conditional use from
the Township. New constructions, modifications, and replacements
that fall under the WBCA shall not be subject to the conditional use
process. The conditional use application shall demonstrate that the
proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions in the
South Hanover Township Zoning Ordinance.
C. Historic buildings. No non-tower WCF may be located upon any
property, or on a building or structure, that is listed on either the
National or Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places, or is listed on
the official historic structures and/or historic districts list
maintained by the Township, or has been designated by the
Township to be of historical significance.
D. Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of these WCF provisions. The WCF
applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Township
for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in providing expert
evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
E. Permit fees. The Township may, from time to time, establish, by
resolution, appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly related
to the Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing the
§ 27-14A03 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A03
1:606
application for approval of a non-tower WCF, as well as related
inspection, monitoring and related costs.
F. Development regulations. Non-tower WCFs shall be co-located on
existing wireless support structures, such as existing buildings or
tower-based WCFs, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The total height of any wireless support structure and mounted
WCF shall not exceed 20 feet above the maximum height
permitted in the underlying zoning district, unless the WCF
applicant applies for, and subsequently obtains, a variance.
(2) In accordance with industry standards, all non-tower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Township
justifying the total height of the non-tower WCF. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such
justification on an individual basis.
(3) If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the related equipment
in a separate building, the building shall comply with the
minimum requirements for the applicable zoning district, and
landscaping shall be required to screen as much of the
equipment building as possible. An evergreen screen shall
surround the site. The evergreen screen shall be a minimum
height of six feet at planting and shall grow to a minimum of 15
feet at maturity.
G. A security fence with a minimum height of six feet and a maximum
height of eight feet, with openings no greater than nine inches,
shall surround any separate communications equipment building.
Vehicular access to the communications equipment building shall
not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site
for the principal use.
H. Noncommercial usage exemption. Township residents utilizing
satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining
television, phone, and/or Internet connections at their respective
residences shall be exempt from the regulations enumerated in this
section of the Zoning Ordinance.
I. Design regulations.
(1) Non-tower WCFs shall employ stealth technology and be
treated to match the wireless support structure in order to
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Township.
(2) Omnidirectional or whip communications antennas shall not
exceed 20 feet in height or seven inches in diameter.
§ 27-14A03 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A03
1:607
(3) Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed
eight feet in height or three feet in width.
(4) Cylinder-type antennas shall not exceed 10 feet in length and
not exceed 12 inches in diameter and shall be of a color that is
identical or similar to the color of the supporting structure to
make the antenna and any related accessory equipment
visually unobtrusive.
(5) Satellite and microwave dishes shall not exceed 10 feet in
diameter. Dish antennas greater than three feet in diameter
shall be screened with an appropriate architectural treatment
that is compatible with or integral to the architecture or
building to which they are attached. This screening
requirement shall not apply to dishes located upon towers.
J. Removal, replacement and modification.
(1) The removal and replacement of non-tower WCFs and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing
the WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does
not substantially change the overall size of the WCF or the
number of antennas.
(2) Any material modification to a WCF shall require notice to be
provided to the Township, and possible supplemental permit
approval to the original permit or authorization.
K. Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any WCF to
ensure compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and
any other provisions found within the Township Code or state or
federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall have the authority
to enter the property upon which a WCF is located at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
4. Regulations applicable to all non-tower WCFs located in the public
rights-of-way. In addition to the non-tower WCF provisions listed in
§ 27-14A03, Subsections 1 through 3, the following regulations shall
apply to non-tower WCFs located in the public rights-of-way:
A. Co-location. Non-tower WCFs in the ROW shall be co-located on
existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles. If colocation
is not technologically feasible, the WCF applicant shall
locate its non-tower WCF on existing poles or freestanding
structures that do not already act as wireless support structures
with the Township's approval.
B. Design requirements:
(1) WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public
ROW, including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and
joint utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that
§ 27-14A03 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A03
1:608
are no more than six feet in height and that are compatible
in scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly
intrusive equipment feasible.
(2) Antennas and related equipment shall be treated to match the
supporting structure and may be required to be painted, or
otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support
structure upon which they are mounted.
C. Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all non-tower WCFs in the ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
D. Equipment location. Non-tower WCFs and related equipment shall
be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists, or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the
Township. In addition:
(1) In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb
or within an easement extending onto a privately owned lot.
(2) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the Township.
(3) Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(4) Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any related
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(5) Any proposed underground vault related to non-tower WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
E. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within two months following
written notice from the Township, or such longer period as the
Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF when the
Township, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public
Utility Commission regulations, shall have determined that such
§ 27-14A03 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A03
1:609
§ 27-14A04. Requirements for tower-based wireless
communications facilities. [Ord. No. 2-1995, 4/11/1995; as amended
by Ord. No. 1-1999, 1/26/1999; by Ord. No. 1-2000, 9/12/2000; by
Ord. No. 3-2005, 8/16/2005; and by Ord. No. 1-2016, 7/12/2016]
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary
under the following circumstances:
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(2) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(4) An emergency as determined by the Township.
1. The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities, excluding any tower-based WCF that is less
than 70 feet in height and owned and operated by a federally licensed
amateur radio status operator:
A. Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most-recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Standard, National Electrical Safety Code, National
Electrical Code, ASCE-7, latest edition, as well as the accepted and
responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at all
times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair
by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the
same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in
the Township.
B. Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based WCF
and the scheduling of the public hearing upon the application, the
WCF applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every property
within 1,500 feet of the proposed facility. The WCF applicant shall
provide proof of the notification to the Township.
C. In certain zoning districts conditional use authorization required.
Tower-based WCFs are permitted in the R-A Residential
Agriculture District, R-M Residential Multifamily District, R-U
Residential Urban District, V Residential Village District, and ESC
Eleemosynary School Campus District, by conditional use and at a
height necessary to satisfy their function in the WCF applicant's
wireless communications system. No WCF applicant shall have the
right under these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum
§ 27-14A03 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A04
1:610
height specified in this section unless it proves the necessity for
such height. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that the
antenna/tower/pole for the tower-based WCF is the minimum
height necessary for the service area.
(1) Prior to the Board's approval of a conditional use authorizing
the construction and installation of tower-based WCF, it shall
be incumbent upon the WCF applicant for such conditional use
approval to prove to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that the WCF applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its
communications system by the use of equipment such as
redoes, repeaters, antenna(s) and other similar equipment
installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or their
appurtenances and other available tall structures. The WCF
applicant shall further demonstrate that the proposed towerbased
WCF must be located where it is proposed in order to
serve the WCF applicant's service area and that no other viable
alternative location exists.
(2) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed tower
or other communication facilities and equipment, a description
of the type and manufacturer of the proposed transmission/
radio equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band)
assigned to the WCF applicant, the power in watts at which the
WCF applicant transmits, and any relevant related tests
conducted by the WCF applicant in determining the need for
the proposed site and installation.
(3) The conditional use application shall also be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
(4) Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation to the Board of Supervisors that the owner of
the property has granted an easement for the proposed WCF
and that vehicular access will be provided to the facility.
(5) The conditional use application shall also be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all applicable provisions in this section.
D. Engineer inspection. Prior to the Township's issuance of a permit
authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based WCF, a
structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall issue to the
Township a written certification of the proposed WCF's ability to
meet the structural standards offered by either the Electronic
Industries Association or the Telecommunication Industry
Association and certify the proper construction of the foundation
§ 27-14A04 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A04
1:611
and the erection of the structure. This certification shall be
provided during the conditional hearings or, at a minimum, be
made as a condition attached to any approval given such that the
certification shall be provided prior to issuance of any building
permits.
E. Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based WCFs
shall employ stealth technology which may include the tower
portion to be painted silver or another color approved by the Board
of Supervisors, or shall have a galvanized finish. All tower-based
WCFs and related equipment shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and
shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing
surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent
possible. The Board of Supervisors shall consider whether its
decision upon the subject application will promote the harmonious
and orderly development of the zoning district involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development existing
in the area; benefit neighboring properties by preventing a
negative impact on the aesthetic character of the community;
preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to the greatest
possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and land
development design and construction principles, practices and
techniques.
F. Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based WCF
shall demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building, or
sited on land owned and maintained by South Hanover Township.
The Board of Supervisors may deny an application to construct a
new tower-based WCF if the WCF applicant has not made a goodfaith
effort to mount the commercial communications antenna(s) on
an existing structure. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that it
contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers
within a one-half-mile radius of the site proposed, sought
permission to install an antenna on those structures, buildings, and
towers and was denied for one of the following reasons:
(1) The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or
tower, and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate
§ 27-14A04 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A04
1:612
the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
(4) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
G. Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under
applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF, which increases the
overall height of such WCF, shall first obtain a building permit from
the Township. Nonroutine modifications shall be prohibited without
such permit.
H. Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity
exists in the applicable area and that the type of WCF being
proposed is the least-intrusive means by which to fill that gap in
wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in
wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Township's decision on an
application for approval of tower-based WCFs.
I. Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antennas on tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower-based WCF shall not
install any additional antennas without obtaining the prior written
approval of the Township.
J. Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in
addition to the standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of
the Electronics Industry Association and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222), as amended, and
ASCE-7, latest edition.
K. Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the minimum
functional height. In all zoning districts, the maximum height of any
new tower-based WCF shall be 200 feet. An existing tower may be
modified or extended to a height not to exceed a total height of 215
feet, to accommodate the co-location of additional communications
antennas.
L. Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 500 square feet
in area or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not
exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving and
transmitting equipment may be located on the site for each
unrelated company sharing commercial communications
antenna(s) space on the tower-based wireless communications
facility.
§ 27-14A04 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A04
1:613
M. Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
N. Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(1) Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the WCF in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents, and utilize the best available technology
for preventing failures and accidents.
O. Radio frequency emissions. A tower-based WCF shall not, by itself
or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC,
including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
P. Historic buildings or districts. A tower-based WCF shall not be
located upon a property, and/or on a building or structure, that is
listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Register of Historic
Places, or eligible to be so listed, or is included in the official
historic structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the
Township.
Q. Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily visible
location identifying the name and phone number of a party to
contact in the event of an emergency. The only other signage
permitted on the WCF shall be that required by the FCC or any
other federal or state agency.
R. Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted, except
as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF applicant shall
provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as
unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state
and federal regulations. The WCF applicant shall promptly report
any outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the
appropriate governmental authorities and to the Township
Secretary.
S. Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as
not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under
state law and the Township Code, except in emergency situations
requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise
standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
§ 27-14A04 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A04
1:614
T. Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
U. Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant and/or
expert necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the tower-based WCF
and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these provisions. The WCF
applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Township
for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in providing expert
evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
V. Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application. All
applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150
days of the receipt of a fully completed application for the approval
of such tower-based WCF, and the Township shall advise the WCF
applicant in writing of its decision. If additional information was
requested by the Township to complete an application, the time
required by the WCF applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the 150-day review period.
W. Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCFs which are
hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be
repaired and restored at their former location but must otherwise
comply with the terms and conditions of this section.
X. Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is planned to
be discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of
WCFs shall be removed as follows:
(1) All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by
the Township.
(2) If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within six
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and
accessory facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner
of the WCF.
(3) Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including antennas,
shall be removed within six months of the time of cessation of
operations. The Township must approve all replacements of
portions of a tower-based WCF previously removed.
§ 27-14A04 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A04
1:615
Y. Permit fees. The Township may, from time to time, by resolution,
establish appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly related to
the Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing the
application for approval of a tower-based WCF, as well as related
inspection, monitoring, and related costs.
Z. FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC
license, including the name, address, and emergency telephone
number for the operator of the facility.
AA. Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Township with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence covering the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns
or operates a tower-based WCF 40 feet or less in height shall
provide the Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each tower-based
WCF.
BB. Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or
contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the tower-based
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF shall
defend any actions or proceedings against the Township in which it
is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property
damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of tower-based WCFs. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court
costs and all other costs of indemnification.
CC. Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based WCF
shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural
engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DD. Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the Township financial security sufficient
to guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF. Said financial
§ 27-14A04 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A04
1:616
security shall remain in place until the tower-based WCF is
removed.
2. The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located outside the public rights-of-way:
A. Development regulations.
(1) Tower-based WCFs shall not be located in, or within 75 feet of
an area in which utilities are primarily located underground.
(2) Tower-based WCFs are permitted outside the public rights-ofway
in the following zoning districts, subject to the above
prohibition:
(a) IP Industrial Park District.
(b) OP Office Park District.
(c) CH Commercial Highway District.
(3) Tower-based WCFs are permitted by conditional use, outside
the public rights-of-way, subject to the prohibition in
§ 27-14A03, Subsection 2A(1), as well as in § 27-14A03,
Subsection 1C, in the following zoning districts:
(a) R-A Residential Agriculture District.
(b) R-U Residential Urban District.
(c) R-M Residential Multifamily District.
(d) V Residential Village District.
(e) ESC Eleemosynary School Campus District.
(4) Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as a
sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets the
minimum size specifications set forth in the Township Zoning
Code.
(5) Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another use, except residential,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) The existing use on the property may be any permitted use
in the applicable district and need not be affiliated with the
WCF.
(b) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable district and shall be the
area needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF and
guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and
§ 27-14A04 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A04
1:617
buffer planting if the proposed WCF is greater than 40 feet
in height.
(c) Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the
base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property line
or street right-of-way line shall be equal to 100% of the
height of the tower-based WCF or the minimum front yard
setback of the underlying zoning district, whichever is
greatest. Where the site on which a tower-based WCF is
proposed to be located is contiguous to an educational use,
child day-care facility, or agriculture or residential use, the
minimum distance between the base of a tower-based
WCF and any such adjoining uses shall equal 250 feet,
regardless of the height of the tower-based WCF, unless it
is demonstrated to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that, in the event of failure, the WCF is designed to
collapse upon itself within a setback area less than the
required minimum setback without endangering such
adjoining uses and their occupants.
B. Design regulations.
(1) The WCF shall employ the most-current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
Application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
(2) To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to an
existing tower-based WCF shall require prior approval of the
Township.
(3) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future
users.
(4) Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be equipped
with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the manufacturer.
C. Surrounding environs.
(1) The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF structure
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(2) The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township
complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as amended, to document and
verify the design specifications of the foundation of the towerbased
WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
§ 27-14A04 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A04
1:618
D. Fence/screen.
(1) A security fence with a minimum height of six feet and a
maximum height of eight feet, with openings no greater than
nine inches, shall completely surround any tower-based WCF
greater than 40 feet in height, as well as guy wires, or any
building housing WCF equipment.
(2) Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a newly
constructed tower-based WCF as possible. The Board of
Supervisors may permit any combination of existing
vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other
features instead of landscaping, if, in the discretion of the
Board, they achieve the same degree of screening. Existing
vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(a) An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the
site. The evergreen screen shall be a minimum height of
six feet at planting and shall grow to a minimum of 15 feet
at maturity.
E. Accessory equipment.
(1) Ground-mounted related equipment associated to, or
connected with, a tower-based WCF shall be placed
underground or screened from public view using stealth
technologies, as described above.
(2) All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into the
environment in which they are situated and shall meet the
minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
F. Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to
tower-based WCFs. The access road shall be a dust-free, allweather
surface for its entire length. Maximum use of existing
roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent
practicable. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to
assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion.
Where applicable, the WCF owner shall present documentation to
the Township that the property owner has granted an easement for
the proposed facility.
G. Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height,
there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
H. Inspection.
(1) Beginning in December of 2015 and by December of each oddnumbered
year thereafter, the antenna support structure shall
§ 27-14A04 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A04
1:619
be inspected by an expert who is regularly involved in the
maintenance, inspection and/or erection of antenna support
structures. At a minimum, this inspection shall be conducted in
accordance with the tower inspection class checklist provided
in the Electronics Industries Association (EIA) Standard 222,
"Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna
Support Structures." A copy of said inspection report shall be
provided to the Township. At the time said report is provided
to the Township, the applicant shall pay a fee in the amount
of $25 or such other amount as the Board of Supervisors shall
from time to time set forth by resolution with respect to this
section.
(2) The Township reserves the right to inspect any tower-based
WCF to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and any
other provisions found within the Township Code or state or
federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall have the
authority to enter the property upon which a WCF is located at
any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure
such compliance.
3. The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the public rights-of-way:
A. Location and development standards.
(1) Tower-based WCFs in the ROW shall not exceed 40 feet in
height.
(2) Tower-based WCFs are prohibited in areas in which utilities
are located underground and shall not be located in the front
facade area of any structure.
(3) Tower-based WCFs shall be permitted along certain collector
roads and arterial roads throughout the Township, regardless
of the underlying zoning district, provided that they are not
situated within 50 feet of an area in which utilities are
underground. A map of such permitted roads is kept on file at
the Township Zoning Office.
B. Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on public
safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
C. Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and related equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists, or to
§ 27-14A04 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A04
1:620
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by
the Township. In addition:
(1) In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
(2) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the Township.
(3) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(4) Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(5) Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township.
D. Design regulations.
(1) The WCF shall employ the most-current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
(2) Tower-based WCFs in the public ROW shall not exceed 40 feet
in height.
(3) To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall require
prior approval of the Township, and shall not increase the
overall height of the tower-based WCF to more than 40 feet.
(4) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future
users.
E. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based WCFs in the ROW
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF when the
Township, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public
Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
§ 27-14A04 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14A04
1:621
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(2) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(4) An emergency as determined by the Township.
F. Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every tower-based WCF in the ROW is
subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable
fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual ROW management costs, including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all
reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Township. The owner of each towerbased
WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate
the Township for the Township's costs incurred in connection with
the activities described above.
§ 27-14A04 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14A04
1:622
ARTICLE XIVB
Medical Marijuana Facilities
§ 27-14B01. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-2017, 8/22/2017]
The purpose of this article is to establish a process and standards for the
establishment, construction, and operations of medical marijuana facilities,
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Medical Marijuana Act (PA Act 16, 2016),23
to allow for the integration of an allowed industry while providing for the
protection of the public's health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
§ 27-14B02. District regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2017, 8/22/2017]
§ 27-14B03. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2-2017, 8/22/2017]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER — An accredited medical
school within this commonwealth that operates or partners with an acute
care hospital licensed within this commonwealth.
CAREGIVER — The individual designated by a patient to deliver medical
marijuana.
CERTIFIED MEDICAL USE — The acquisition, possession, use or
transportation of medical marijuana by a patient, or the acquisition,
possession, delivery, transportation or administration of medical marijuana
by a caregiver, for use as part of the treatment of the patient's serious
medical condition, as authorized by certification by the commonwealth.
CLINICAL REGISTRANT — An entity that:
1. Academic clinical research centers are permitted in the Commercial
Highway (CH) and Industrial Park (IP) Districts with consideration for
the applicable performance standards found in § 27-14A04, Subsection
1, of this article.
2. Medical marijuana grower/processors are permitted in the Commercial
Highway (CH) and Industrial Park (IP) Districts with consideration for
the applicable performance standards found in § 27-14A04, Subsection
2, of this article.
3. Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices are permitted in either a
Commercial Highway (CH) or Industrial Park (IP) District, with
consideration for the applicable performance standards found in
§ 27-14A04, Subsection 3, of this article.
4. Medical marijuana dispensaries are permitted in either a Commercial
Highway (CH) or Industrial Park (IP) District, with consideration for the
applicable performance standards found in § 27-14A04, Subsection 4, of
this article.
23.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 27-14B01 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14B03
1:623
DISPENSER — A person, including a natural person, corporation,
partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any combination thereof,
which holds a permit issued by the Department of Health (DOH) of the
commonwealth to dispense medical marijuana.
FORM OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The characteristics of the medical
marijuana recommended or limited to a particular patient, including the
method of consumption of any particular dosage, strain, variety and
quantity or percentage of medical marijuana or particular active ingredient.
GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
combination thereof, which holds a permit from the DOH to grow and
process medical marijuana.
IDENTIFICATION CARD — A document issued by the DOH that permits
access to medical marijuana.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as legally
permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DELIVERY VEHICLE OFFICE — Any facility used to
house delivery vehicles for supplying marijuana plants or seeds to one or
more marijuana grower/processors and/or dispensaries.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION OR FACILITY — A dispensary or a
grower/processor of marijuana for medical purposes.
REGISTRY — The registry established by the DOH for all medical marijuana
organizations and practitioners.
§ 27-14B04. Use regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2017, 8/22/2017]
1. Holds a permit both as a grower/processor and a dispensary; and
Has a contractual relationship with an academic clinical research
center under which the academic clinical research center or its affiliate
provides advice to the entity regarding, among other areas, patient
health and safety, medical applications and dispensing and
management of controlled substances.
2.
1. Academic clinical research centers.
A. Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article XVIII, § 27-1802, Subsection 15, Off-Street Parking
Regulations, as listed for industrial uses, in the South Hanover
Township Zoning Ordinance.
B. An academic clinical research center may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance and
other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor facility
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular
unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
§ 27-14B03 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14B04
1:624
C. All external lighting serving an academic clinical research center
must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted
skyward or onto adjoining properties.
D. A buffer planting is required as found in Article XV, § 27-1508,
Subsection 1F, in the South Hanover Township Zoning Ordinance,
where an academic clinical research center adjoins a residential
use or district.
2. Medical marijuana grower/processor.
A. A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance and
other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor facility
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo containers, mobile or
modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor
vehicle.
B. The floor area of a medical marijuana grower/processor shall
include sufficient space for production, secure storage of marijuana
seed, related finished product cultivation, and marijuana-related
materials and equipment used in production and cultivation or for
required laboratory testing.
C. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste
into the environment from any facility where medical marijuana is
growing or processing or testing occurs.
D. Marijuana remnants and by-products shall be secured and properly
disposed of in accordance with the DOH policy and shall not be
placed within any unsecured exterior refuse containers.
E. The grower/processor shall provide only wholesale products to
other medical marijuana facilities. Retail sales and dispensing of
medical marijuana and related products is prohibited at medical
marijuana grower/processor facilities.
F. All external lighting serving a medical marijuana grower/processor
must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted
skyward or onto adjoining properties.
G. Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article XVIII, § 27-1802, Subsection 15, Off-Street Parking
Regulations, as listed for industrial uses, in the South Hanover
Township Zoning Ordinance.
H. A buffer planting is required as found in Article XV, § 27-1508,
Subsection 1F, in the South Hanover Township Zoning Ordinance,
where a medical marijuana grower/processor adjoins a residential
use or district.
§ 27-14B04 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14B04
1:625
I. Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana grower/processor
must be designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to
serve the facility.
(1) All accesses must secure the appropriate highway occupancy
permit (state or Township, as applicable).
(2) The clear sight triangle found in Article XV, § 27-1508,
Subsection 1B, of the South Hanover Township Zoning
Ordinance must be considered and maintained.
(3) The driveway must be designed and improved to the standards
expressly described in Article IV, § 22-401, of the South
Hanover Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
J. Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If
an external loading dock is designed, it should be from within a
secure environment.
3. Medical marijuana transport vehicle service.
A. A traffic impact study is required where the office is operated.
B. Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article XVIII, § 27-1802, Subsection 15, Off-Street Parking
Regulations, as listed for industrial uses, in the South Hanover
Township Zoning Ordinance.
C. All external lighting serving a medical marijuana transport vehicle
service must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be
emitted skyward onto adjoining properties.
D. A buffer planting is required as found in Article XV, § 27-1508,
Subsection 1F, in the South Hanover Township Zoning Ordinance,
where a medical marijuana transport vehicle service adjoins a
residential use or district.
E. Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana transport vehicle
service must be designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles
used to enter and exit the premises.
(1) All accesses must secure the appropriate highway occupancy
permit (state or Township, as applicable).
(2) The clear sight triangle found in Article XV, § 27-1508,
Subsection 1B, of the South Hanover Township Zoning
Ordinance must be considered and maintained.
(3) The driveway must be designed and improved to the standards
expressly described in Article IV, § 22-401, of the South
Hanover Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
§ 27-14B04 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14B04
1:626
F. If for some reason a medical marijuana product is to be temporarily
stored at a medical marijuana transport vehicle service facility, the
facility must be secured to the same level as a medical marijuana
grower/producer and dispensary.
G. Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If
an external loading dock is designed, it should be from within a
secure environment.
4. Medical marijuana dispensary.
A. A medical marijuana dispensary must be legally registered in the
commonwealth and possess a current, valid medical marijuana
permit from the DOH.
B. A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, permanent, and secure building
and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or
modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor
vehicle.
C. A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site
as a facility used for growing and processing medical marijuana.
D. Medical marijuana dispensaries shall have a single secure public
entrance and shall implement appropriate security measures to
deter and prevent the theft of marijuana and unauthorized
entrance into areas containing medical marijuana.
E. Permitted hours of operation of the dispensary shall be 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. of the same calendar day.
F. A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
(1) Not have a drive-through service;
(2) Not have outdoor seating areas;
(3) Not have outdoor vending machines;
(4) Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of, medical
marijuana on the premises; and
(5) Not offer direct or home delivery service.
G. A medical marijuana dispensary may dispense only medical
marijuana to certified patients and caregivers and shall comply
with all lawful, applicable health regulations.
H. All external lighting serving a medical marijuana dispensary must
be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted
skyward or onto adjoining properties.
§ 27-14B04 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14B04
1:627
§ 27-14B05. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. No. 2-2017, 8/
22/2017]
I. Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article XVIII, § 27-1802, Subsection 15, Off-Street Parking
Regulations, as listed for industrial uses, in the South Hanover
Township Zoning Ordinance.
J. A buffer planting is required as found in Article XV, § 27-1508,
Subsection 1F, in the South Hanover Township Zoning Ordinance,
where a medical marijuana dispensary adjoins a residential use or
district.
K. Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana dispensary must
be designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to enter
and exit the premises.
(1) All accesses must secure the appropriate highway occupancy
permit (state or Township, as applicable).
(2) The clear sight triangle found in Article XV, § 27-1508,
Subsection 1B, of the South Hanover Township Zoning
Ordinance must be considered and maintained.
(3) The driveway must be designed and improved to the standards
expressly described in Article IV, § 22-401, of the South
Hanover Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(4) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are
preferred. If an external loading dock arrangement is
designed, it should be from within a secure environment.
1. Building and zoning permits/approvals.
A. A zoning permit shall be required prior to obtaining a building
permit for the construction or erection of a building, the alteration
of a building or portion thereof, the use or change in use of a
building or land, or any adjustments to a nonconforming use.
B. The Township zoning permit application must be completed and
submitted.
C. Permit fees shall be as stipulated in the fee schedule adopted by
resolution of South Hanover Township in effect at the time of
application.
D. Permits may be denied if the applicant, in the reasonable opinion of
South Hanover Township, is failing to comply with any state or local
law or regulation.
§ 27-14B04 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14B05
1:628
§ 27-14B06. Severability. [Ord. No. 2-2017, 8/22/2017]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion thereof.
§ 27-14B07. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2-2017, 8/22/2017]
Any owner, operator, or other person who violates or permits a violation of
this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, pay to South Hanover
Township a fine of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including,
but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by South Hanover
Township on account of such violation. No penalty or cost shall be imposed
until the date the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District
Judge becomes final. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, South Hanover Township may enforce the judgment as provided
by law. Each day a violation exists after the final judgment shall constitute a
separate offense. The amount of the fine imposed shall be multiplied by the
number of such days and may be charged and collected by South Hanover
Township without further judicial proceedings. Further, the appropriate
officers or agents of South Hanover Township are hereby authorized to
issue a cease-and-desist notice and/or to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith. No bond will be required if
injunctive relief is sought by South Hanover Township. A person who
violates this article shall also be responsible for South Hanover Township's
attorneys' fees, engineering fees, expert fees and court costs reasonably
incurred by South Hanover Township on account of such violation.
§ 27-14B08. When effective. [Ord. No. 2-2017, 8/22/2017]
This article shall take effect five days after enactment.
E. In the case of new construction, meeting the PA MPC definition of
land development, an application is required to be submitted and
an approval secured prior to establishment of the use.
F. If the application is to change the use of a building, or needs to
demonstrate allocation of space within a structure, the applicant
shall provide architectural drawings prepared by an architect
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
G. A medical marijuana grower/processor must be legally registered
in the commonwealth and possess a current, valid medical
marijuana permit from the DOH.
§ 27-14B05 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14B08
1:629

ARTICLE XIVC
Short-Term Rentals
§ 27-14C01. Preamble. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
The preamble of this ordinance is incorporated herein by reference and
approved as part hereof.24
§ 27-14C02. Short title. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
This article shall be known as the "Short-Term Rental Ordinance of South
Hanover Township."
§ 27-14C03. Intent and scope. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
This article shall be construed to secure its expressed purpose of promoting
the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of South
Hanover Township. This article shall apply to all existing and future
properties that are used as short-term rentals (STR) in South Hanover
Township which are located in the Residential/Agricultural and Village
Zoning Districts as set forth and established by the South Hanover
Township Zoning Ordinance and shall constitute the minimum requirements
and standards for the operation of any STR. STRs may be operated only in
the Residential/Agricultural and Village Zoning Districts.
§ 27-14C04. Definitions. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
1. For the purpose of this article, certain terms, phrases and words are
defined as follows:
A. Tense, gender, and number. Words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the masculine gender include the
feminine and the neuter; the singular number includes the plural
and the plural singular.
B. General terms. The words "shall," "will" or "must" are always
mandatory; the words "should" or "may" are permissive. The words
"used for" include "designed for," "arranged for," "intended for,"
"maintained for" or "occupied for." The word "building" includes
24.Editor's Note: Said preamble read as follows: WHEREAS, short-term rentals (STRs) of
dwellings have become a significant segment of the local tourism economy; and
WHEREAS, short-term rentals of dwellings provide a community benefit by expanding the
number and type of lodging facilities available and assist owners of single-family homes
by providing revenue which may be used for maintenance, upgrades and deferred costs;
and WHEREAS, while the majority of these short-term rentals operate without a problem,
there have been complaints to the Township regarding excessive noise, parking, litter, and
concerns regarding security, public safety, and trespass; and WHEREAS, the transitory
nature of occupants of short-term rentals makes enforcement against the occupants
difficult; and WHEREAS, the provisions of this ordinance are necessary to prevent the
continued burden on Township and community services and impact on residential
neighborhoods posed by short-term rentals; and WHEREAS, the provisions of this
ordinance are necessary to provide for a system of inspections and for issuance and
renewal of licenses and to establish penalties for violations. NOW THEREFORE, BE IT
ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Hanover Township,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ordained and enacted as follows.
§ 27-14C01 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14C04
1:631
"structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase
"or part thereof." The word "person" includes "individual," "profit
or nonprofit organization," "partnership," "company," "LLC,"
"incorporated association" or other similar entities.
C. Terms, phrases, and words not defined. When terms, phrases or
words are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted
meaning or such as the context may imply.
D. Specific terms. Terms or words used herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated, shall have the following meanings:
BEDROOM — Any room or space designed to be used or intended
to be used for sleeping purposes. Space used for eating, cooking,
bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility rooms and
similar uses are not considered bedrooms.
CODE OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this article, or any duly
authorized representative.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building or portion
thereof is utilized or occupied.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having
a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the
official records of the commonwealth, county or Township as
holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the
property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person,
and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, LLC, or any
other group acting as a unit.
PERSON IN CHARGE — A person or agent with actual authority
to represent the owner for purposes of contact and communication
regarding the owner's STRs.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL (STR) — Any dwelling unit owned or
managed by a person which is rented or leased for a period of
30 consecutive calendar days or less. STRs may be, but are not
required to be, owner-occupied.
STR ANNUAL TERM — January 1 to December 31 of the year.
STR LICENSE — The written grant of the right to operate an STR
pursuant to the specific terms of the license granted to a specific
owner.
TENANT — Shall refer to the primary individual who has entered
into an agreement with the owner or owner's agent for the
§ 27-14C04 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14C04
1:632
§ 27-14C05. Code officials; administration. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/
2018]
The Township Board of Supervisors will appoint one or more code officials,
who may be the Township Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer,
a South Hanover Township employee or a contracted individual, firm or
agency, to conduct inspections, make reports, administer this article and
enforce this article. The code official shall inspect any STR property at
the time an initial application has been submitted for the purpose of
determining its qualification for license, may inspect any STR property
at the time application has been submitted for license renewal, and may
inspect any STR property if a complaint is received and the substance of the
complaint requires further inspection.
§ 27-14C06. Licensing. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
temporary use of an STR for 30 consecutive calendar days or less.
Such individual must be at least 21 years of age.
1. Effective upon enactment of this article, all owners must obtain a
license for all dwelling units intended for use as short-term rentals
(STRs) prior to renting out a dwelling unit as an STR. Operating an STR
without a license is a violation of this article and is subject to the
criminal prosecution and the penalties set forth below, owners or their
agents must complete the STR license application and submit it to the
Township Zoning Officer for processing. No property may be used as an
STR until a license has been granted by the Zoning Officer.
2. The Township will prescribe the forms and procedures for processing of
license applications under this article. The owners must provide all
requested information concerning the dwelling unit and must agree, in
writing, to comply with all the requirements of this article.
3. Licenses are nontransferable. If ownership of an STR changes, the new
owner(s) must complete a new license application form before renting
out any part of the dwelling unit for a short-term rental and must pay
the annual fee.
4. Upon the submission of a complete application to operate an STR, the
Township will have 15 business days to inspect the property and either
grant or deny the request for a license. If, after 15 business days, the
Township has not acted on the application, the application shall be
deemed denied. If the application is denied due to the lack of
information, the applicant will be given the opportunity to provide the
requisite information and resubmit the application.
A. License requirements:
(1) The STR license shall only be issued in the name of the owner
of the STR property.
(2) A separate license is required for each STR property.
§ 27-14C04 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14C06
1:633
(3) Each owner shall maintain at least $500,000 in liability
insurance on the STR for the full duration of the license term
and provide proof of the same to the Township.
(4) A copy of the current Dauphin County hotel room excise tax
certificate and current Pennsylvania sales tax license.
(5) A copy of their STR form agreement which states that the
Tenant(s) acknowledge that violation of the STR agreement or
this article may result in termination of the owner's(s') STR
license.
(6) All STRs must be either owner-occupied or, if not owneroccupied,
must designate a local person in charge. A person in
charge, who may or may not be an/the owner, must reside in or
have an office within 15 miles of the STR property and be able
to act as the legal agent for the owner(s). The Township must
be notified, in writing, within 14 days of the change if there is a
change of ownership or in the identity of the person in charge.
(7) The owner or person in charge shall respond to the code
official within one hour after being notified by the code official
of the existence of a violation of this article or any disturbance
requiring immediate remedy or abatement. If the person in
charge is not the owner, they shall immediately advise the
owner of any notification of a violation. Owners and persons in
charge must maintain all STR dwelling units under their
ownership and/or control in compliance with all applicable
Township ordinances and regulations as established by the
Township. Owners, persons in charge, and tenants shall be
liable for violations of laws and/or ordinances, including, but
not limited to, occupancy violations, at STR dwelling units
under their ownership, control, or occupancy.
(8) The condition of any STR must fully comply with the
International Residential Code currently in use as adopted by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and other relevant laws
and codes.
(9) The owner shall limit overnight occupancy of the STR to the
specific number of tenants designated in their STR license.
(10) Overnight occupancy of an STR dwelling unit shall be limited
to no more than two persons per bedroom plus four additional
persons per dwelling unit. The maximum number of day guests
allowed at any one time, in addition to the overnight
occupants, shall not exceed 75% of the maximum overnight
occupancy of the STR.
(11) Density and proximity limitation.
§ 27-14C06 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14C06
1:634
§ 27-14C07. Term of license; fees; initial compliance. [Ord. No.
7-2018, 12/11/2018]
§ 27-14C08. License renewal. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
Each STR license shall be renewed annually. Failure to pay the renewal
license fee will immediately terminate the STR license. Annual STR license
renewal will not be approved unless all required licensing conditions are
(a) The Township reserves the right to limit the number of
licensed properties in the Residential/Agriculture (R-A)
Zone to not more than 8 STR dwelling units per square
mile.
(b) The Township reserves the right to deny a license for an
STR dwelling unit that is within 1,000 feet of a lot on which
another STR dwelling unit is located.
(12)No on-street or yard parking, or parking on unpaved areas of
the property, will be permitted at any time. No tents are
permitted. No recreational vehicles, campers, buses or other
large vehicles may be parked on the STR property by tenants
at any time. Outdoor overnight sleeping of tenants or guests is
prohibited. Outdoor fires are prohibited.
(13) The owner is responsible for any trash or noise disturbance
that is created or caused by any tenant. Failure to have
adequate trash storage and weekly collection service or to stop
a noise disturbance caused by a tenant will result in a notice of
violation.
B. License posting requirement. Each STR license granted will
include a public notice placard. It is the owner's responsibility to
post the notice on the inside of the front door of the dwelling unit.
This notice shall remain on the front door at all times, and it is the
owner's responsibility to ensure that it remains legible.
1. The license term for all STRs runs from January 1 to December 31. The
initial licenses granted hereunder shall run until December 31 of 2019,
regardless of when they were actually issued.
2. The annual STR license fee is per dwelling regardless of the point in a
calendar year that a license is obtained. Fee(s) are established by
resolution and are set forth in the Township Fee Schedule, which may
change from time to time. Fee(s) must be paid at the time the
application is submitted for approval. If an application is denied, your
fee(s) shall be refunded, minus the inspection fee. Otherwise, no license
fee(s) are to be prorated or refunded.
3. Short-term rentals existing on date of adoption of this article shall have
30 days after adoption of application to make application for short-term
license.
§ 27-14C06 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14C08
1:635
met as set forth in § 27-14C06 above. In addition, verification that all owed
hotel and sales taxes have been paid shall be provided. License renewal
applications must be filed on or before November 15 of the prior year.
§ 27-14C09. Inspections. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
§ 27-14C10. Marketing. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
The marketing of an STR in which the advertised occupancy exceeds the
maximum occupancy requirements permitted by the owner's STR license, or
which promotes any other activity which is prohibited by this article, shall
be a violation of this article.
§ 27-14C11. Notice of violation. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
If it appears to a code official that a violation of this article or an issued
STR license exists or has occurred, the code official shall provide a written
notice of violation to the owner, delivered personally, or by both United
States first-class and certified mail. The enforcement notice shall identify
the premises which is the subject of the violation, enumerate the conditions
which constitute the violation, cite the specific sections of this article or
regulations which are violated, indicate the action required to correct the
violation, and provide a time frame (established by the code official based
upon the nature of the violation) to correct the violation. The time frame
may be immediate; however, in no event shall the time within which to
correct the violation exceed seven days.
1. All STRs shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Officer and the
code official to verify application information and compliance with all
license, license renewal and/or operating requirements.
2. The issuance of an STR license or inspection is not a warranty that the
premises is lawful, safe, habitable, or in compliance with this article or
any other applicable ordinances. Rather, the license indicates that the
premises is either set to be inspected on a routine basis or, if inspected,
the premises met this article or other applicable ordinance
requirements on the day and at the time of the inspection.
3. If there is reasonable cause to believe that any provision of this article
is being violated, the Board of Supervisors may enter or may cause,
through an authorized representative of the Township, entry onto the
STR for the purpose of inspection of any and all STRs, properties,
buildings and/or structures located within the Township for
ascertaining the existence of violations. In those matters where the
nature of an alleged violation is such that an inspection of the interior of
a building or structure is necessitated, prior arrangements must be
made with the owner or the person in charge to secure access thereof.
Upon such request, the owner or person in charge shall provide access.
§ 27-14C08 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14C12
1:636
§ 27-14C12. Violation declared a nuisance. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/
2018]
In the interest of promoting the public health, safety and welfare, and
minimizing the burden on Township and community services and impacts
on residential neighborhoods posed by STRs, a violation of any of the
provisions of this article is declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 27-14C13. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
§ 27-14C14. Owners severally responsible. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/
2018]
If the premises are owned by more than one owner, each owner shall jointly
and severally be subject to prosecution for a violation of this article.
§ 27-14C15. Appeals. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
1. Any violation of this article shall be enforced in accordance with
§ 27-2111, Violations, of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of
South Hanover.
2. In addition to, but not in limitation of, the provisions of this section, the
Zoning Officer or code official may either revoke, or deny an application
to renew, an STR license for failure to comply with the STR license or
the provisions of this article or to provide accurate information on the
STR license application. The STR license shall be revoked for a period
of one year after the owner has been convicted of their second violation.
A revoked STR license may not be renewed for a period of one year. The
Zoning Officer or code official shall issue, in writing, a notice of
revocation to the owner.
1. Appeals of a determination of the Zoning Officer or code official under
this article to deny any application for, or renewal of, an STR license, or
to revoke an STR license, shall be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board
of the Township of South Hanover at the Township's business office
within 30 days of the date of the determination appealed from. Appeals
shall be processed as follows:
A. All appeals shall be in writing and signed by the appellant on forms
prescribed by the Township and shall be accompanied by a fee, the
amount of which shall be established by the Township Supervisors,
which may include notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead costs in relation to the hearing.
B. Each appeal shall fully set forth the determination appealed from, a
detailed reason or basis for the appeal, and the relief sought. Every
appeal shall refer to the specific provision or circumstances of the
case.
2. The Zoning Hearing Board of the Township of South Hanover shall
conduct hearings and make decisions pursuant to the requirements of
§ 27-14C12 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-14C15
1:637
§ 27-14C16. Severability. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
If any section, provision or portion of this article shall be held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of this article,
so long as it remains legally enforceable minus the invalid portion. The
Township reserves the right to amend this article or any portion thereof
from time to time as it shall deem advisable in the best interest of the
promotion of the purposes and intent of this article and the effective
administration thereof.
§ 27-14C17. Repealer. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 27-14C18. When effective. [Ord. No. 7-2018, 12/11/2018]
This article shall become effective five days after enactment.
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as
amended and supplemented, and § 27-2112 of the Code of Ordinances
of the Township of South Hanover.
§ 27-14C15 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-14C18
1:638
ARTICLE XV
General Regulations
§ 27-1501. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1501, 4/11/1995]
The following general regulations shall supplement the regulations set forth
herein for each district and shall apply throughout the Township unless
otherwise specified in other sections of this chapter.
§ 27-1502. Use regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1502, 4/11/1995;
Ord. No. 1-2002, § 1, 1/22/2002]
1. Agriculture, farms and gardening. The tilling of the soil, raising of
crops, horticulture and gardening shall be permitted in any district.
2. Animals and horticulture. In districts where permitted, operations
involving the use of buildings and land for farming, nurseries and
green-houses, riding academies, livery or boarding stables, dog
kennels, animal hospitals, stock raising, dairying and poultry shall be
subject to the following safeguards and regulations:
A. Buildings in which animals or poultry are kept shall not hereafter
be erected within 50 feet of any lot line.
B. The stockpiling or storage of manure or odor- or dust-producing
substances shall not be permitted within 50 feet from any lot line.
C. (Reserved)25
D. Commercial greenhouse heating plant, coal, natural gas or fuel oil
fire shall not be operated within 100 feet of any residential district
boundary.
E. Buildings used for animal hospitals, including exercise yards, shall
not hereafter be erected within 100 feet of any lot line. [Amended
by Ord. No. 2-2018, 2/27/2018]
F. A minimum of five acres is required for a dog kennel use to be
located in the Residential Agriculture (R-A) Zoning District.
[Added by Ord. No. 2-2018, 2/27/2018]
G. Buildings used for dog kennels, including exercise yards and runs,
shall not be erected closer than 100 feet to any lot line. [Added by
Ord. No. 2-2018, 2/27/2018]
H. For dog kennel uses, unless the provisions of Chapter 27,
§ 27-1508, Subsection Buffer yards and screen plantings, provide
higher standards, a twenty-foot vegetative buffer is required along
all adjoining property lines. The vegetative buffer shall, in all other
respects, meet the standards for buffer yards and screen plantings
25.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 2C, regarding horses, was repealed 8/22/2017 by Ord.
No. 3-2017.
§ 27-1501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:639
set forth in Chapter 27, § 27-1508, Subsection 1F. [Added by Ord.
No. 2-2018, 2/27/2018]
I. Manure storage must be at least 200 feet from any adjacent
residence and 100 feet from any lot line. Evidence of an effective
means of disposal must be provided to the Township. [Added by
Ord. No. 2-2018, 2/27/2018]
J. The zoning permit application for a permit authorizing the
operation of a dog kennel must be accompanied by proof that the
applicant has been issued a valid license permitting the operation
of a dog kennel by Dauphin County and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. [Added by Ord. No. 2-2018, 2/27/2018]
3. Accessory uses. An accessory use shall be permitted only when
customarily incidental and accessory to a lawfully permitted use of a lot
and/or building.
4. Day care home. Where permitted as a conditional use, day care homes
may be established in a single-family detached dwelling subject to the
following conditions:
A. A minimum of 100 square feet of usable outdoor play space and 40
square feet of usable indoor space must be provided for each child
present at the facility including resident children.
B. Outside play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.
C. A buffer yard/screen planting of no less than 10 feet in depth shall
be established along rear and side lot lines in accordance with this
article.
D. Operators must comply with all Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare licensing/registration requirements and any other local,
state or federal regulations.
E. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article
XVIII, "Off-Street Parking."
5. Hazardous substances. The temporary or permanent storage and
transportation of hazardous wastes, as defined in Article II, herein,
shall comply with the following conditions:
A. All activities that generate, store, use, transport and dispose of
materials and substances regulated by this section shall possess all
applicable permits required by the Township, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, United States
Environmental Protection. Agency and any other agency having
jurisdiction over such use.
B. All activities and operations must be in compliance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, as
§ 27-1502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1502
1:640
amended. Further, such activities shall be in compliance with the
following Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
(DER) Rules and Regulations, as amended:
Title 25 Environmental Resources
Part I Department of Environmental Resources
Subpart C Protection of Natural Resources
Article I Land Resources
Chapter 75 Solid Waste Management
Subchapter D Hazardous Waste
Subchapter F Criteria for Siting Hazardous Waste Facilities
C. As required by the above referenced regulations administered by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, a copy
of the preparedness, prevention and contingency plan shall be
maintained at the site and submitted to the local police
department, fire departments, hospitals and emergency response
teams that may be called upon to provide emergency services. A
copy shall concurrently be filed with the Township Zoning Officer to
verify compliance with this section of the chapter. The plan and
copies furnished shall be maintained in current condition as a
responsibility of the facility owner.
D. Unless greater restrictions apply through the agencies identified in
Subsection 5A above, no use regulated by this section shall be
established:
(1) Within 200 yards of any dwelling, church, school or any other
building or buildings which, from time to time, are utilized for
human occupancy.
(2) Within 200 yards of:
(a) Any body of water.
(b) Any well.
(c) Any water intake for a water supply system.
(3) In addition to any and all setbacks required by this chapter, any
use regulated by this section shall also be subject to the
following:
(a) A chain link fence, a minimum of eight feet in height with
at least a one foot, three stranded course of outward
slanting barbed wire extension, shall completely encircle
the premises, with any gates locked during nonbusiness
hours.
(b) A buffer yard of 75 feet shall be maintained along all
adjoining property lines. No structures, other than an
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:641
approved fence or an earth retaining mound shall be
permitted within the buffer yard.
6. Home occupation. Where permitted, only one home occupation may be
established per premises subject to the following conditions:
A. The home occupation shall be carried on completely within the
dwelling unit or accessory building. Home occupations shall not be
permitted in multifamily apartments or garden apartments.
B. Not more than one person other than the occupants of the dwelling
unit shall be employed.
C. Not more than 50% of the floor area of a main building shall be
devoted to a home occupation.
D. Articles sold or offered for sale shall be limited to those produced
on the premises or to articles which are clearly incidental to the
home occupation and directly related thereto such as hair care
products by a barber or beautician. If the gross sales of articles not
produced on the premises exceed 25% of the gross receipts from
the home occupation and sales of articles produced on the
premises, such sales shall not be deemed to be incidental to the
home occupation and shall not be permitted. It shall be the home
occupation operator's responsibility to file an accurate and attested
to annual report of gross business receipts with the Township
Zoning Officer to serve as proof of compliance with this provision.
E. There shall be no exterior display or sign (except as permitted in
the regulation of sign in this chapter), no exterior storage of
materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation
or variation of the residential character of the main building.
F. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke or other particulate matter,
heat, humidity, glare or other objectionable effects shall be
produced.
G. A home occupation may include craft shops; art studios;
dressmaking or millinery; barbershop; beauty parlor; teaching,
music or dance instruction limited to a single pupil at a time; real
estate or insurance office; the professional office of a dentist,
physician, lawyer, engineer, planner, accountant, architect; home
telephone sales or any other activities of a similar nature.
H. A home occupation shall, under no circumstances, be interpreted to
include a commercial stable or a dog kennel, automobile sales,
small engine repair shop, donut shop or any occupation where the
principal activity involves sales offered across the counter.
I. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVIII, "off-street parking." In addition to
private employee vehicles only one business related vehicle may be
§ 27-1502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1502
1:642
parked on the premises. Such business related vehicle may only be
a passenger car, station wagon, van or pickup truck not exceeding
three-fourths ton capacity. Business identification is permitted to
appear on the business vehicle.
7. Recreational vehicle parks. Where permitted, Recreational Vehicle
Parks shall be subject to the following:
A. The driveways, exists, entrances and walks shall be lighted and
paved in accordance with Township standards. One-way traffic
cartways shall be not less than 12 feet wide and two-way traffic
cartways shall be not less than 22 feet wide.
B. Access to vehicle spaces shall not be permitted from any public
road. All such access will be provided by an internal access road.
C. An area of not less than 1,500 square feet shall be provided for
each vehicle.
D. The minimum width of each vehicle space shall be 25 feet.
E. The minimum depth of each vehicle space shall be not less than 60
feet or 30% longer than the length of the vehicle, whichever
requirement is greater.
F. Each vehicle shall be located not less than 25 feet from any
building and not less than 30 feet from lines bounding adjacent
property.
G. Separate provision shall be made for the parking of tow equipment
on or adjacent to the vehicle space or at a location removed from
the vehicle space. There shall be one such off-street parking space
not less than 10 feet wide and 20 feet long for each vehicle space in
the park.
H. In addition to the off-street parking as required in Subsection 7G
above, there shall be additional off-street parking space required
equal to 1/2 of the number of vehicle spaces provided in the park.
I. Recreation vehicle parks shall be provided with screening such as
fences or natural growth along the property boundary line
separating the parking and adjacent uses. If the buffer yards are
already wooded this plant life shall be maintained as screening.
J. A land development plan of any proposed recreation vehicle park
development shall be presented to the Planning Commission and
Board of Supervisors for approval before any construction and any
vehicle shall be permitted on the site.
K. Sewers.
(1) Each vehicle park shall be provided with sewage disposal
facilities. The proposed provisions for sewage shall be
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:643
presented to the Planning Commission and the Township
Engineer for approval before any vehicle shall be permitted
on the site. Approval shall be required from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
(2) A recreation vehicle park may be approved without individual
sewerage connection; provided, the park is serviced by
approved central toilet facilities and central shower facilities.
Approvals shall be required from the Township Supervisors
and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
8. Motels and hotels. In districts where permitted, motels and hotels shall
be subject to the following safeguards and regulations. [Amended by
Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
A. Where proposed as a land development, a plat shall be prepared
and submitted to the Township in accordance with the South
Hanover Township Subdivision/Land Development Ordinance
[Chapter 22].
B. No motel or hotel shall have a lot area of less than one acre.
C. Front, side and rear yards of the motel or hotel shall be
permanently landscaped and maintained in good condition.
D. Off-street parking and loading spaces for other facilities developed
as part of the motel or hotel premises shall be provided as required
by Article XVIII, Off-Street Parking.
E. Every unit shall be provided with running hot and cold water and
separate toilet facilities and shall be connected to a public sanitary
sewage system.
F. Motel and hotel buildings or parts thereof shall be placed no closer
than 30 feet to any lot line.
G. The space between motel or hotel buildings shall be not less than
20 feet, and the space between the rears of units shall be not less
than the dimensions required for courtyards where such are
formed by the arrangement of units.
9. Outdoor recreation areas, private or semiprivate. Unless otherwise
controlled by district regulations, private or semiprivate recreation
areas may be permitted; provided, that:
A. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVIII.
B. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations shall be permitted only
when conducted as nonprofit enterprise, dining facilities for benefit
of club members only, no sign advertising food or beverage is
displayed and buffer yards will be provided as required by this
chapter.
§ 27-1502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1502
1:644
C. Site development shall include protective measures to adjoining
properties in regard to dust, noise and glare as deemed necessary
by the Board to protect public safety and welfare.
D. All lighting shall be so arranged and shielded so that no
unreasonable glare or illumination is cast upon adjoining
residential uses in any district.
10. Private yard and garage sales. Such activities may be permitted based
on the following conditions:
A. Such sales are limited to two per year per dwelling unit.
B. All activities are conducted in such a manner that no hazards,
nuisances or traffic safety problems are created.
C. The duration of such a sale shall not exceed two consecutive days
and shall not commence prior to 9:00 a.m. nor continue after
sunset.
D. Authorization to conduct such activities shall require a zoning
permit. The zoning fee shall be waived for such permit. [Amended
by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
11. Public utility service and distribution facilities. Public utility buildings
shall be permitted in any district without regard to the use and area
regulations; provided, however, that buildings erected for these utilities
shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations of the district in which the building is located.
B. Height of building shall conform to the district regulations.
C. Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed with a chain link fence six
feet in height topped with barbed wire. Selected planting shall be
used to minimize adverse visual affects.
D. Housed equipment. When the equipment is totally enclosed within
a building no fence or screen planting shall be required and the
yard shall be maintained in conformity with the district in which
the facility is located. [Amended by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/
2017]
E. Screen planting. The required fence for unhoused equipment shall
be surrounded by an evergreen planting properly maintained for
visual appearance.
F. The external design of the building shall be in conformity with the
buildings in the district.
G. Access for unhoused equipment. Where vehicular access is across
the front yard the gate shall be constructed of solid materials
having not less than 50% solid in ratio to open space.
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:645
H. Public utility transmission and distribution facilities shall be
permitted in any district subject to rules and regulations necessary
to public health and safety. Area, lot, yard, height and other
regulations contained in this chapter may be modified by the
Zoning Hearing Board to achieve justice and secure public safety
and welfare.
12. Solar collectors and solar-related equipment.
A. Solar collectors and solar-related equipment shall be permitted in
any district as an appurtenance to a building or as a detached
accessory structure.
B. When a solar energy collection system is installed on a lot,
accessory structures or vegetation on an abutting lot shall not be
located so as to block the solar collector's access to solar energy.
The portion of the solar collector to be protected is defined by the
following:
(1) The portion located so as not to be shaded between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. by a hypothetical twelve-foot
obstruction located on the lot line.
(2) The portion which has an area of not greater than 1/2 of the
largest floor area of the structure served.
C. This subsection does not apply to accessory structures or
vegetation existing on an abutting lot at the time of installation of
the solar energy collection system or on the effective date of this
article, whichever is later. This subsection controls any accessory
structure erected on or vegetation planted in abutting lots after the
installation of the solar energy collection system.
D. A statement that a solar energy collection system is to be installed
on a lot shall be filed with the Township Zoning Officer on the date
the zoning permit for the solar system is issued with the date of
installation being the date of recordation. The solar facility must be
completed and the Zoning Officer notified of completion within one
calendar year from the date of permit issuance.
13. Solid waste storage facilities. All multifamily and nonresidential
buildings or uses shall include adequate facilities on site for the proper
storage of solid wastes in accordance with the provisions of the
Township refuse collection regulations and as hereinafter provided:
A. Storage areas shall have hardened, stabilized surfaces with
outdoor areas constructed to prevent accumulation of rainfall.
B. Storage areas shall be located such that collection vehicles will not
obstruct the public street or otherwise violate Township
regulations while parked for collection of refuse and shall be
§ 27-1502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1502
1:646
provided with accessways facilitating ready deposit and collection
of refuse.
C. Storage areas shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the
container capacity required to store the refuse accumulation
between collections but shall not be less than four by eight feet in
size or of other dimensions providing an approved equal space.
14. Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be permitted subject to the
following:
A. The property or the immediate area in which any outdoor pool
capable of containing water 24 inches or more in depth shall be
completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in
height which may be so constructed to have openings, holes or
gaps not larger than six inches in any dimension. Should the wall of
the pool be above ground the height of a required fence on the wall
may be reduced so that the total height of the wall of the pool and
the fence shall be not less than four feet.
B. A dwelling, accessory building or decorative wall feature may be
used as part of such enclosure (fenced area).
C. All gates or doors opening through the fence shall be equipped with
a self-closing and self-latching and locking device for keeping the
gate or door securely closed when not in actual use except that the
door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not
be so equipped.
D. It may not be located, including any walks or paved areas or
accessory structures adjacent thereto, closer than 20 feet to any
property line of the property on which located except that the
location of any pool situated in the R-V Residential Village District
shall be governed by the yard regulations provided for in said
district's regulations.
15. Apartment, accessory. Where permitted as a conditional use an
accessory apartment may be created in a single-family detached
dwelling; provided, that:
A. The apartment will be a complete and separate housekeeping unit
that can be isolated from the original unit.
B. One apartment will be created within a single-family detached
dwelling unit to be used/occupied by a person or persons related by
marriage or blood relative only.
C. The owner(s) of the residence in which the accessory unit is
created shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the
premises except for bona fide temporary absences.
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:647
D. The accessory apartment shall be deigned so that, to the degree
feasible, the appearance of the building remains that of a singlefamily
detached dwelling.
E. The design and size of the apartment conforms to all applicable
state and Township standards/codes.
F. The accessory apartment shall be no more than 30% of the
structure's total floor area, not greater than 400 square feet.
G. A minimum of 300 square feet of floor area shall be required.
H. At least a total of three off-street parking spaces are available for
use by the owner-occupant and tenant.
16. Automobile or gasoline service stations. In districts where permitted
service stations shall be subject to the following safeguards and
regulations:
A. Driveways and parking/loading areas be located as provided in
articles XVIII and XIX of this chapter.
B. All driveways and service areas shall be paved with a surfacing
material approved by the Township.
C. Driveway areas and service areas shall be distinguished from
sidewalk areas by painted lines.
D. Motor vehicles shall not be permitted to be parked or to stand on
sidewalk areas.
E. Minimum frontage on an interior lot shall not be less than 125 feet
and on a corner lot on a side street not less than 100 feet and the
front street not less than 125 feet.
F. Gasoline pumps shall be set not less than 20 feet from any street
line and not less than 30 feet from any residential zone boundary
line.
G. Hereafter, no service station shall be located nearer than 1,000 feet
to the lot line of any school, hospital, nursing home or convalescent
home. [Amended by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
17. Churches, hospitals, convalescent homes, nursing homes, municipal
buildings, schools and other public and semipublic buildings.
A. In districts where permitted these uses shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) The lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size,
yard requirements listed below and parking requirements but
in no case shall the lot area be less than the minimum lot area
permitted in the district in which it is located.
§ 27-1502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1502
1:648
(2) Lot coverage. Lot area covered by all buildings, including
accessory buildings, shall not be greater than 30% of the area
of the lot.
(3) Width regulations. The lot width at the required building line
shall be based on the building size and yard requirements but
in no case shall the lot width be less than the 100 feet in width.
(4) Yard regulations. Each lot shall have yards not less than the
following depths or widths:
(a) Front yard depth: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard — Two in number: Width, not less than 20 feet on
an interior lot. On a corner lot the side yard abutting the
street shall be not less than 50 feet in width.
(c) Rear yard depth: 50 feet.
(5) Height. The height of a building shall be not more than 35 feet
except as provided in § 27-1506 of this chapter.
B. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with
the provisions of Article XVIII hereof. Portions of the required front
yard setback may be used for off-street parking when authorized as
a special exception.
(1) Service and access drives shall be at lest 15 feet wide and not
over 25 feet wide and shall be permitted to cross required yard
areas, provided that the center line of the permitted drive shall
not be a lesser angle to the street than 60°. [Amended by
Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
(2) If greater controls are established for the district in which
these users are to be located, such control or controls shall
take precedence over any or all of the foregoing.
C. Existing structures cannot be remodeled, converted or otherwise
used for schools, hospitals, churches or other public uses until such
plans are presented to the Zoning Hearing Board together with
approvals as may be necessitated by state and local law and rules
and regulations of the Department of Labor and Industry, the State
Department of Environmental Resources and others. If the Zoning
Hearing Board finds any such plans and proposals are not in
conflict with the intent and purposes of this chapter, such uses may
be permitted.
18. Cemeteries. Where permitted, cemeteries may be established subject to
the following:
A. A cemetery shall not be located within 200 feet of a residential use;
provided, however, that this restriction does not apply to a
caretaker's residence.
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:649
B. A site development plan containing the following information shall
be submitted for review and approval:
(1) Site location.
(2) Metes and bounds of tract.
(3) Location of all existing and proposed structures and
identification of use.
(4) Layout of plots, vaults, etc.
(5) Location of utilities, access drives and parking.
(6) Existing and proposed contours.
(7) Proposed landscaping.
(8) Stormwater management plan.
C. All permits, licenses and approvals required by applicable
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania agencies shall be obtained before
issuance of local permits.
19. Golf courses and country clubs. Where permitted, the following
standards shall also apply:
A. A minimum of 10 acres shall be provided.
B. No building or structure shall be located closer than 75 feet from a
side or rear lot line.
C. At least 70% of the lot area shall be maintained with a vegetative
cover.
20. Medical centers and dental clinics. Where permitted, a building for use
as a medical center may be erected and used provided that:
A. The building shall be occupied and used only persons licensed to
practice the healing arts in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
their staffs.
B. The lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements, parking and access requirements and other
applicable standards but in no case shall be less than the minimum
lot area permitted in the district in which it is located.
C. The front yard depth shall be 35 feet; the side yard width shall be
35 feet; the rear yard depth shall be 35 feet.
D. Lot width shall be determined by the size of the building and
setbacks.
E. A buffer yard/screen planting of no less than five feet in depth shall
be maintained along all property lines abutting a residential use.
§ 27-1502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1502
1:650
F. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVIII, "off-street parking."
21. Townhouses. In all districts where permitted, townhouses shall comply
with the provisions set forth in § 27-705, Residential Multifamily
District, Subsection 1D. [Amended by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
22. Garden apartments. Where permitted, all garden apartments shall
comply with the following:
A. There shall be not more than 18 dwelling units per building.
B. No garden apartment building shall be in excess of three stories in
height.
C. Provisions set forth in Article VII, "residential multifamily district."
23. Wind energy conversion systems. Where permitted, windmills,
windwheels or wind energy conversion systems (WECS) shall be subject
to the following conditions:
A. The structure supporting the wind rotor unit, including any
necessary guideposts and supporting cables, shall be independent
of any occupied structure and located a minimum distance of the
tower height plus 10 feet from any existing aerial utility line or
occupied dwelling and shall not be more than 75 feet in height.
B. The minimum distance between the tower and any property line
shall be not less than twice the height of the tower.
C. The minimum distance between grade and the lowest point of the
rotor blade shall be 20 feet.
D. All electric lines/utility wires shall be buried underground.
E. Any mechanical equipment associated and necessary for operation,
including a building for batteries and storage cells, shall be
enclosed by a six-foot fence. The supporting structure shall also be
enclosed by a six-foot fence unless the base of the tower is not
climbable for a distance of 12 feet.
F. When building is necessary for storage cells or related mechanical
equipment the building shall not exceed 100 square feet.
G. One windmill, windwheel or WECS shall be permitted per lot.
H. The resultant energy harnessed from the wind shall not be used on
property other than that on which located unless all applicable
cogeneration requirements are met.
I. The supporting structure and generating unit shall be kept in good
repair and sound condition. Upon abandonment of use, the
supporting structure and related structures shall be dismantled
and removed from the property within 60 days.
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:651
J. The applicant shall demonstrate that any noise from the wind
generating unit shall not exceed 45 dBA measured at the property
line.
(1) A "decibel" shall mean a unit for measuring the relative
intensity of sounds. More specifically, a unit for expressing the
ratio of two amounts of acoustic signal power equal to 10 times
the common logarithm of this ratio.
(2) "A" weighted sound level shall mean the total sound level in
decibels of all sound as measured with a sound level meter
with a reference pressure of 20 micro-pascals using the "A"
weighted network (scale) at slow response. The unit of
measurement shall be defined as dB(A).
24. Satellite dish antennas. Dish antennas shall be a permitted accessory
use in any district and shall comply with the following conditions and
requirements:
A. All dish antennas shall meet the yard setback and height limitations
for the zoning district in which they are located.
B. Distance of any guy anchorage or similar device shall be at least 10
feet from any property line.
C. Dish antennas shall not be located in the front yard area of any lot.
D. The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any
required license by any federal, state or local agency.
E. No antenna shall be in excess of a height equal to the distance from
the base of the antenna to the nearest overhead electrical power
line less five feet.
F. Applications for a permit must include construction drawings
showing proposed method of installation, structural engineering
analysis and site plan depicting antenna on the property. At the
request of the Zoning Officer, documentation of a maintenance
program may be required.
G. The owner of such an antenna shall assume complete liability in
case of personal or property damage.
25. Heliports. Where permitted as a conditional use heliports shall comply
with the following:
A. Provide proof that the site/facility has been licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) as
complying with applicable approach, corridor, design and other
safety criteria.
§ 27-1502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1502
1:652
B. Has received such approval and clearance from the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) as may be required by the Federal
Aviation Regulations.
C. No such activities shall in any way detrimentally interfere with
operations of the Harrisburg International Airport.
D. A permit for establishment of such site/facility has been issued by
the Township. A permit shall not be required by the Township when
take off and landing activities are in conjunction with law
enforcement purposes or emergencies.
E. The permit shall be deemed automatically revoked if:
(1) PennDOT Bureau of Aviation revokes the license or refuses to
relicense the site/facility.
(2) The FAA withdraws or revokes its approval or clearance.
F. When a site/facility permit, license or clearance has been revoked
the operator shall immediately cause the site/facility to be closed to
all helicopter operations.
26. Municipal uses. In any district a building may be erected, altered or
extended and land may be developed which is arranged, intended or
designed for municipal uses including municipal recreation use.
27. Guesthouse and domestic employees quarters. As a conditional use a
guesthouse or domestic employee's quarters may be established on a
lot in any residential district as an accessory use to a principal singlefamily
detached dwelling subject to the following conditions:
A. The area of a lot proposed to contain either one or both accessory
uses shall be not less than two acres. This standard shall be applied
when such uses are detached from the principal dwelling unit.
B. Where public sewerage and/or water service is not provided the
minimum permitted lot area shall be increased if necessary to
adequately support on-lot sewage disposal and/or water supply.
C. Accessory uses established through this process shall be
administered under the definition of land development. A land
development plan shall be submitted and processed as required by
the Township Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
[Chapter 22].
D. Accessory uses established through this process shall not be
subdivided from the parent tract and assigned individual lot status.
A statement to this effect shall be included as a recorded restrictive
covenant running with the land. A similar statement shall be placed
on recorded final land development plans and building permits
issued for the construction of any such structures.
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:653
E. All other applicable standards of the district in which located shall
be complied with.
28. Containment of grazing animals as an accessory residential use. As a
conditional use in an residential district (except the R-MH District),
when associated with a single-family residential use, property owners
may be permitted to contain grazing animals subject to the following
conditions and standards:
A. Such animals are owned by the property owner or property lessee
with written permission of the property owner.
B. The location and use of such animals on the property is not for
commercial or business purposes. The use and/or consumption of
such animals is limited to the inhabitants of the property.
C. The grazing animals permitted by this provision and the ratio of
animal to open grazing area shall be as follows:
One equine (horse) per acre.
One bovine (cattle) per acre.
One — three bovine (sheep) per acre.
One — three caprine (goat) per acre.
The grazing area ratio per type of animal shall not be overlapping.
D. The required grazing area shall be located within the side and/or
rear lot areas.
E. The grazing area shall be enclosed with a fence of suitable
construction to provide for safe and adequate confinement of all
animals proposed to be located on the property.
F. The grazing area shall not include any portion of the minimum
permitted lot area per dwelling unit of the zoning district in which
located.
G. The storage of manure shall not be permitted within 100 feet of the
applicable property lines. The manure storage area must be located
within the required grazing area.
29. Country estate. Where permitted as a conditional use country estatetype
development may be established subject to the following
conditions:
A. The lot area shall be not less than five acres.
B. Panhandle or flag lots shall be designed so that the lot width at the
street right-of-way line is not less than 50 feet and arranged so that
not more than two have common property lines abutting one
another at the street right-of-way line.
§ 27-1502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1502
1:654
C. The permitted lot width at the location of the dwelling on such lots
shall be not less than 150 feet.
D. Unless abutting the turnaround portion of a cul-de-sac street, lot
lines so established shall be as parallel to one another as possible.
E. The stem or access portion of the lot shall maintain a minimum
width of 50 feet and shall not change direction more than once. The
stem shall not exceed 400 feet in length unless additional length is
needed to avoid disturbance of productive farmlands or some other
significant natural feature.
F. The application of Article XIX of this chapter ("motor vehicle
access") may be partially modified to allow for the creation of
dwelling lots that do not have separate individual vehicular access;
however, at a minimum, such lots must have vehicular access to a
joint-use driveway that serves no more than four individual
dwelling lots, all of which must be contiguous. Cross access
easements to ensure common use of, access to and maintenance of
joint-use driveways shall be implemented for each property relying
upon said joint-use driveway. Such cross-access easements shall be
required in language acceptable to the Township Solicitor. For the
purpose of establishing yards and setbacks upon lots using jointuse
driveways, the joint-use driveway shall be considered a "street
right-of-way" as defined herein. All joint use driveways shall have a
minimum cartway width of 16 feet and be stabilized as deemed
necessary by the Township Engineer and Board of Supervisors.
G. Residential lots created through this process, after the effective
date of this chapter, shall not be further subdivided nor shall such
lots be developed to contain more than one principal dwelling
except for an accessory apartment, guesthouse or servants
quarters which shall be considered accessory uses. A statement to
this effect shall be included as a recorded restrictive covenant
running with the land. A similar statement shall be placed on
recorded final subdivision/land development plans and building
permits issued for the construction of any such structures.
H. The minimum lot area shall be increased if necessary to support onlot
sewage disposal and/or water supply servicing accessory uses.
No portion of the stem area shall be used for on-site sewage
disposal.
I. All other applicable standards of the district in which located shall
be complied with.
J. Permitted accessory structures may be located within a required
yard adjacent to a private street or joint use driveway subject to the
following conditions and restrictions:
(1) The accessory structure is not intended for human habitation.
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:655
(2) The accessory structure is for farming or agricultural use
purposes.
(3) The accessory structure does not have a floor area greater than
800 square feet.
(4) The accessory structure may not be located nearer to the rightof-
way of the private street or joint use driveway than the
distance equal to 60% of the yard area or set back otherwise
required. For example, if the required side yard is 25 feet, the
accessory structure permitted under this subsection must be
set back from the right-of-way line a distance of no less than 15
feet.
(5) The applicant for a permit to erect the accessory structure
must own the parcel or lot on which the accessory structure is
to be erected or constructed and must also own the parcel or
lot which abuts the opposite side of the private road or joint
use driveway.
30. Residential bed-and-breakfast establishment. Where permitted,
residential bed-and-breakfast establishments may be established in an
existing dwelling as a conditional use subject to the following
standards:
A. The owner, or owner's agent, of the dwelling structure in which
such uses are conducted must reside in the dwelling structure.
B. The dwelling structure is served by an approved sewage system
and water supply.
C. Bedrooms shall not be used for cooking of any kind and all meals
shall be taken in substantially family type dining facilities.
D. No public restaurant service shall be conducted.
E. Bedrooms shall contain a minimum of 90 square feet of habitable
floor area for one person and a minimum of 120 square feet of
habitable floor are for two or three persons. The number of
bedrooms for such purposes shall not exceed the number existing
in the dwelling at the time the conditional use application is
submitted to the Township.
F. No more than three persons per bedroom shall be permitted.
G. The development standards set forth in the applicable zoning
district shall apply. The minimum lot area shall be increased as
necessary to accommodate off-street parking.
H. In the Village District a buffer yard/screen planting snail be
established along all property lines abutting an adjacent residential
use. In the Residential Agriculture District a buffer yard/screen
planting shall be established along all property lines abutting an
§ 27-1502 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1502
1:656
adjacent residential use when any portion of the proposed bed-andbreakfast
structure, parking area or outdoor activity set aside for
guests is located within 50 feet of an adjacent residential dwelling.
I. The conditional use application shall include a site development
plan providing the following information:
(1) A location map showing surrounding areas, including
identification of all streets and alleys, and existing zoning
districts.
(2) A property plan showing lot boundaries by metes and bounds,
showing all adjacent streets or alleys, locating and describing
all easements, providing topographic contour information and
all other salient physical features, indicating the existing uses
of all adjacent lands and showing the location of the existing
sanitary sewer and water supply systems to which the
establishment would be connected.
(3) A development plan which provides the following information:
(a) Internal conversion plan of the dwelling structure.
(b) Locations of all residential structures (existing and
proposed).
(c) Nondwelling structures, locations and uses (existing and
proposed).
(d) Street right-of-way and cartway widths.
(e) Location and width of access driveways.
(f) Stormwater management and erosion control plans.
(g) Buffer yard/screen planting areas.
(h) Off-street parking plan providing sufficient spaces for all
uses.
(i) Location of any outdoor activity area set aside for guests.
(j) Total lot coverage by percent of area.
(k) Distance of adjacent residential dwellings from the bedand-
breakfast structure, parking area and any outdoor
activity area set aside for guests.
(l) In allowing a conditional use the Board of Supervisors may
revise existing standards and attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed
in this chapter as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1503
1:657
§ 27-1503. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1503, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-1504. Uses prohibited. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1504, 4/11/1995]
1. Applications for conditional uses shall be processed in compliance with
§ 27-2109 of this chapter. In reviewing and deciding upon conditional
use application the following standards and criteria shall apply:
A. Compatibility. The proposed use will be reviewed as to its
relationship to and effect upon surrounding land uses and existing
environmental conditions regarding the pollution of air, land and
water; noise, potential of hazards and congestion; illumination and
glare; restrictions to natural light and circulation of air.
B. Purpose. Review the intended purposes of the proposed use as it
relates to the Township's development objectives established in the
Township Comprehensive Plan.
C. Suitability. The nature of activity and population serviced, numbers
of participating population, frequency of use, adequacy of space
and spatial requirements, potential generation and impact of
congestion will be reviewed as suitably related to the proposed
location of potential use.
D. Accessibility. Ingress to the site of the proposed use, circulation
and movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, parking
requirements and accessibility to the existing and proposed
Township highway system will be reviewed.
E. Serviceability. The adequacy of utility services and facilities such as
sanitary and storm sewers, water, trash and garbage collection and
disposal shall be revised and/or plans acceptable to the Township
shall demonstrate how services shall be provided.
F. Applicability. The proposed use will be reviewed as to its
application to the coordination with the planning policies of the
Township and its Comprehensive Plan and plans for land use,
highways, schools, parks, sewers, water distribution and
population growth.
G. Use standards and criteria contained in § 27-1502 of this chapter.
H. In granting a conditional use the Board of Supervisors may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this article, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter.
1. The following uses are prohibited in all districts throughout the
Township:
A. The incineration, reduction or storage (including transfer stations)
of garbage, offal, animals, fish or refuse unless by the authority of
or under the supervision of the Township. Specifications of the
§ 27-1503 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1504
1:658
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and the office
of the Fire Marshal shall be followed. The incineration which is
generally accessory to and conducted by individual home owners
is permitted, subject to rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
B. Dumps and dumping of any kind, other than an approved sanitary
landfill, unless by the authority of or under the supervision of the
Township. Solid waste activities shall comply with the Dauphin
County Solid Waste Management Plan.
C. Junkyards.
D. Race tracks for stock cars, midget cars and other motorized vehicle
racing.
E. Head shops. No person shall operate a head shop or any other
business which involves, in whole or in part, the sale, lease, trade,
gift or display for sale of any and all types of drug paraphernalia in
any zoning district within the Township.
F. Massage parlors in which there exists the offering or furnishing of
service in which "specified sexual activities":
(1) The treatment of any person of the opposite sex except upon
the signed order of a licensed physician, osteopath,
chiropractor or registered physical therapist, which order shall
be dated and shall specifically state the number of treatments
not to exceed 10. The date and hour of each treatment given
and the name of the operator shall be entered on such order by
the establishment where such treatments are given and shall
be subject to inspection by police. The requirements of this
provision shall not apply to treatments given in the residence
of the patient, the office of a licensed physician, osteopath or
registered physical therapist, chiropractor or in a regularly
established and licensed hospital or sanitarium.
(2) The massage, or physical contact, with the sexual or genital
parts of one person by any other person. Sexual or genital
parts shall include the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or
perineum of any person or the vulva or breasts of a female.
(3) The failure to conceal with a fully opaque covering the sexual
or genital parts of the body.
G. The establishment or operation of an adult bookstore, adult walk-in
picture theater or adult cabaret.
H. The establishment or operation of any business which involves, in
whole or in part, the sale, lease, trade, gift or display for sale, lease,
trade or gift of any and all types of obscene materials.
§ 27-1504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1505
1:659
§ 27-1505. Uses not provided for. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1505, 4/11/
1995]
Whenever in any district established under this chapter a use is neither
specifically permitted or denied and an application is made by a property
owner to the Zoning Officer for such use the Zoning Officer shall refer the
application to the Zoning Hearing Board which shall have the authority to
permit the use or deny the use. The use may be permitted if it is similar
to and compatible with permitted uses in the district and in no way is in
conflict with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
§ 27-1506. Height regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1506, 4/11/1995]
1. No residential building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet;
provided, however, that this height may be increased one foot for each
additional foot that the width of each yard exceeds the minimum
required but no approval shall be granted for a height increase in
excess of 40 feet.
2. Height regulations for a principal building located in a Commercial
Highway District or Office Park District may be increased in excess of
40 feet, providing the following conditions so warrant: [Amended by
Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
A. Buildings must be designed in accordance with all applicable
building codes and ordinances of South Hanover Township.
B. Site plans must be designed in accordance with all applicable codes
and ordinances of South Hanover Township.
C. When deemed necessary, the Chief of the Fire Department, or his
designated agent, will be consulted by the Zoning Officer for
comments on building and site plans with regards to built-in fire
protection and/or prefire planning.
D. Public water supply with adequate flows must be permitted to the
site. Fire hydrants shall also be provided on the site.
E. Buildings over 40 feet in height shall require all yard setbacks to be
equal to the height of said building.
F. Buildings over 40 feet in height shall be compatible with the
surrounding land uses.
3. Height regulations shall not apply to any of the following, provided the
use is not for human occupancy: agriculture buildings, spires, belfries,
cupolas, domes, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks,
bulkheads, public utility poles or towers, silos and ornamental or
necessary mechanical appurtenances.
4. The height of any accessory building located in a residential district
shall not exceed 14 feet other than under the following circumstances:
[Amended by Ord. No. 4-2017, 8/22/2017]
§ 27-1505 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1506
1:660
§ 27-1507. Lot area regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1507, 4/11/
1995]
§ 27-1508. Yard regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1508, 4/11/1995]
A. Accessory buildings devoted to farm use shall be exempt from
height regulations.
B. The height of an accessory building may be increased to 19 feet
subject to the following standards:
(1) The lot area of the lot upon which the accessory building is to
be located must be no less than two acres; and
(2) The accessory building may not be located any closer than 25
feet to any side lot line or rear lot line.
C. The height of an accessory building may be increased to more than
19 feet provided that the twenty-five-foot distance to the side lot
line or rear lot line is increased by one foot for each additional one
foot in height of the building; however, the maximum permitted
height shall not exceed 35 feet.
1. Lots not serviced by both a public water system and a public sanitary
sewer system shall be not less than 100 feet wide at the building
setback line and shall contain an area of not less than one acre.
2. On a unimproved lot held in single and separate ownership at the
effective date of this chapter which does not fulfill the regulations for
the minimum lot area and width for the district in which it is located a
building may be erected, altered and used thereon provided the yard
space is not less than the minimum specified herein (and further that
the proposed sanitary sewer system is approved the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources).
3. The area, width and depth of lots shall provide adequate open space for
off-street loading, unloading and/or parking space. When necessary,
septic tanks and drain fields shall be provided with open space in
addition to the open space required for off-street parking, other paved
areas and the area covered by the main building and buildings and
structures accessory thereto.
1. Yards shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth
herein and shall be planted with trees, shrubs, grass seed, sod, ground
cover excepting in cases where walks, access drives, off-street parking
lots, patios and other types of surfaces are permitted by this chapter. All
yards shall be maintained and kept free of all debris and rubbish.
A. Front yards — Setbacks. Where the street or private road upon
which the lot abuts is less than 50 feet in width the front yard depth
and the width of the side yard abutting the street or private road
§ 27-1506 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1508
1:661
shall be measured from a line parallel to and not less than 25 feet
from the center line of the street or private road.
B. Sight distance. Hereafter buildings, structures including signs and
plant materials shall be set back at street intersections to provide a
sight distance measured along the center line, 3 1/2 feet above
grade, of not less than 300 feet on arterial streets, 200 feet for
collector streets and 100 feet for minor streets. Such street
classifications are established in Table 7-2 of the South Hanover
Township Comprehensive Plan.
C. Adjustments to setbacks in front yards.
(1) When an unimproved lot is situated between two improved
lots, each having a principal building which extends into the
required front yard and has been so maintained since the
effective date of this chapter, the setback in the front yard of
such unimproved lot may be the same depth of the front yards
of such two adjacent improved lots notwithstanding the yard
requirements of the district in which it is located.
(2) Where an unimproved lot adjoins only one improved lot
containing a principal building within 25 feet of the common
side lot line, which extends into the required front yard, the
setback in the front yard of such unimproved lot may be the
average depth of the front yard of such adjacent improved lot
and the front yard required for the district notwithstanding the
yard requirements for such district.
(3) An accessory building shall not be erected or substantially
altered within any front yard.
D. Side yards.
(1) On a corner lot the side yard abutting the street shall have a
width equal to the depth of the front yard required in the
district and shall be subject to all front yard requirements of
this chapter.
(2) On a lot in a district where residential structures are
permitted, held in single and separate ownership at the
effective date of this chapter, with a lot width less than
required for the zone district, only one single-family dwelling
may be erected and side yards shall be provided according to
the following requirements:
(a) On interior lots with a width of 50 feet or more, two side
yards shall be provided as required by the district
regulations.
(b) On corner lots with a width of 50 feet or more, two side
yards shall be provided. The exterior side yard may be
§ 27-1508 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1508
1:662
reduced by the number of feet by which the lot width is
less than the district requires but may not be reduced
to less than the required interior side yard. The interior
side yard shall be provided as required by the district
regulations.
(c) On lots less than 50 feet but not less than 27 feet in width
two side yards shall be provided, each equaling 20% of the
lot width.
(d) On lots less than 27 feet but not less than 20 feet in width
the building shall be 16 feet in width and only one side
yard shall be provided, equaling in width the difference
between the lot width and 16 feet. One side wall of the
building shall be constructed abutting the lot line without
openings but shall not be constructed as party walls.
(e) On lots less than 20 feet in width a building shall be
constructed the full width of the lot. Side walls abutting
the lot lines shall have no openings and shall not be
constructed as party walls. For such dwellings constructed
to a depth of more than two rooms a court not less than six
feet in width shall be provided, abutting the side wall for
all rooms beyond the second room.
(3) On a lot, in a commercial or industrial district, held in single
and separate ownership at the effective date of this chapter,
with a lot width less than required for the zone district, the
required side yards shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing
Board upon application for a variance based on the same
criteria as listed under Subsection 1D(2) above for residential
structures.
(4) An accessory building may be erected within one of the side
yards or within the rear yard as follows:
(a) An accessory building may be attached to the main
building.
(b) When not attached to a main building the accessory
building shall be not less than 10 feet from the main
building except that when no windows are located in the
opposing walls the minimum distance can be reduced to
five feet.
(c) When a side or rear yard is along an alley the accessory
building shall be located not less than 20 feet from the
center line of the alley.
(d) When constructed in a rear yard the accessory building
may be located not less than five feet from the rear lot line.
§ 27-1508 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1508
1:663
(e) When constructed in a side yard the accessory building
shall be no less than five feet from the side lot line.
(f) A carport, open on three sides, may be erected within one
of the side yards when attached to a dwelling; provided,
the carport shall be not less than six feet from the side lot
line.
(g) When an accessory building is erected within the side or
rear yard adjacent to a side street on a corner lot, the
accessory building shall be not less than the required front
yard depth from the exterior side lot line.
(h) On a corner lot in any residential district an accessory
building shall not be erected within 30 feet of the exterior
side lot line (street line); provided, however, that when the
main building exists on both the corner lot and lot abutting
the rear of the corner lot an accessory building may be
erected at the average distance from the street line
established by the existing main building.
E. Courts. Courts shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) An open space in the form of an inner court or outer court shall
be provided in connection with any building in any residential
or business district wherever any room therein in which a
person or persons live, sleep or congregate cannot be
adequately lighted and ventilated. Such court shall be adjacent
to the room the windows of which shall open in such court.
(This section shall not apply where controlled light and/or
ventilation are required nor to climatized structures of all
kinds.)
(2) Outer court.
(a) The width of any outer court upon which windows open
from a living room, bedroom or dining room shall be not
less than the height of any wall opposite such windows.
(b) The depth of an outer court formed by walls on three sides
shall be not greater than 1 1/2 times the width.
(c) The width of an outer court shall be not less than twothirds
the height of any opposing wall forming said court.
(3) Inner court.
(a) The least dimension of an inner court shall be not less than
the full height of the walls enclosing such court but not
less than 50 feet for apartment buildings and not less than
10 feet for two-family dwellings.
§ 27-1508 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1508
1:664
(b) An open and unobstructed passageway shall be provided
for each inner court. Such passage of firefighting
equipment shall be continuous from the inner court to a
yard or an unobstructed open area with access to a street.
F. Buffer yards and screen plantings. Unless otherwise permitted,
where buffer yards are required by the terms of this chapter they
shall be provided in accordance with the following standards:
(1) A buffer yard of 50 feet shall be required in all cases where a
nonresidential use or district boundary abuts a residential use
or residential district boundary. [Amended by Ord. No.
3-2017, 8/22/2017]
(2) At least 20 feet of the buffer yard area shall be planted with a
dense screen planting having an opacity of 80% after the first
year and thereafter. The remainder of the buffer yard area
shall be planted with grass, seed, sod or ground cover. Buffer
yards shall be kept free of all debris and rubbish.
(3) When said district boundary is a public street the buffer yard
area shall be planted with a dense screen planting having an
opacity of 80% after the first year and thereafter. The
remainder of the buffer yard area shall be planted with grass,
seed, sod or ground cover. Buffer yards shall be kept free of all
debris and rubbish.
(4) The required yard space for the district in which the use is
located may be considered as all or part of the buffer yard area.
(5) No structure, storage area or parking, loading/unloading area
shall be permitted in the required screen planting area;
however, such area may be crossed by access drives.
Automobile parking may be permitted in that portion of the
buffer yard not required for screen planting.
(6) The screened buffer may consist of a masonry wall, wood
fence, trees, shrubs, berms or a combination thereof. In the
event a masonry wall or wood fence is used for screening
purposes, vegetative landscaping shall be placed and
maintained between the wall or fence and the property line
adjacent to the residential district or use to form an
ornamental screen.
G. Projections in yards.
(1) Cornices, eaves, gutters, bay windows and chimneys may not
project into the front, side or rear yard of a lot more than 24
inches. [Amended by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
(2) Covered porches and carports, whether enclosed or
unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the dwelling and
§ 27-1508 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1508
1:665
shall not project into any yard unless permitted under
Subsection 1D(4)(f) above.
(3) Patios, wooden decks, stoops, stairs and window wells
customarily incidental to the dwelling may project into front,
side or rear yards of a lot a distance not to exceed 48 inches.
(4) For residential single-family dwellings, driveways and adjacent
parking aprons shall be located no closer than two feet from a
side property line. [Amended by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/
2017]
H. Fences and walls.
(1) Fences and walls may be erected, altered and maintained
within yards; provided, that any such fence or wall in the front
yard shall not exceed 3 1/2 feet in height and any fence or wall
in the side or rear yard shall not exceed six feet or more in
height; provided, that any fence or wall exceeding six feet in
height shall contain openings therein equal to 50% of the area
of that portion of the wall or fence exceeding six feet.
(2) If the fence is wood cover on wood frame the framework must
face onto the interior of the lot unless the fence is so designed
as to provide equal frame and cover area to adjoining yards.
(3) If the fence is open metal mesh supported by posts and frame
of either pipe or wood, the posts and frames must be on the
interior of the mesh.
(4) If the fence is of masonry construction, a finished surface must
be provided on the exterior side.
(5) No fence shall be constructed in any street or alley right-ofway.
(6) All fences must meet the intersection visibility requirements
set forth in Subsection 1I of § 25-1508. [Amended by Ord.
No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
I. Obstructions to vision.
(1) No fence, sign or other structure shall be erected, altered and
no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained or
permitted which may cause danger to traffic on a street or
public road by obscuring the view.
(2) On corner lots, no walls, fences, signs or other structures in
excess of 3 1/2 feet in height shall be erected or altered and no
hedge or other plant material in excess of 3 1/2 feet in height
shall be permitted within 25 feet in any direction of the
intersection of the right-of-way.
§ 27-1508 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1508
1:666
§ 27-1509. Habitable floor area. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1509, 4/11/
1995]
The minimum habitable floor area of a dwelling unit or any building or
structure hereafter erected or used for living purposes shall be 600 square
feet. In case of apartment units and conversion/accessory apartments, the
minimum habitable floor area shall be not less than 300 square feet per
apartment except those apartments designed for and occupied extensively
by one person, which apartment shall each contain not less than 150 square
feet of habitable floor area.
§ 27-1510. Reduction of lot dimensions. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1510, 4/
11/1995]
The area, width or depth of any lot shall not be reduced by subdivision,
sale or development so that the lot width, lot area, lot area per dwelling
unit, courts and yards or other spaces are smaller or so that the coverage is
greater than prescribed herein.
§ 27-1511. Waste and sewage disposal. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1511, 4/
11/1995]
J. Storage - on-lot. Excepting in the case of agricultural, farm
machinery or automobile dealerships, no unlicensed commercial
vehicle, truck, tractor, trailer, mobile home, boat or any similar
vehicle, material or equipment shall be regularly parked or stored
for more than 24 hours in any district unless it is:
(1) In an enclosed structure.
(2) If not in an enclosed structure the vehicle, material or
equipment shall be screened from view from the adjoining
properties and the street at all seasons of the year. The
screening may be an evergreen hedge or fence or combination
of materials of a size and spacing as approved by the Township
Supervisors.
(3) The storage of the vehicle, material or equipment shall not be
permitted within any required front yard. Such storage may
occur in side and rear yards but not closer than 10 feet to a lot
line.
(4) The foregoing regulations do no apply to an occasional visitor
to a dwelling in a residential district.
1. All methods and plans for the on-lot disposal of sewage and waste shall
be designed in accordance with all applicable regulations pertaining to
the treatment and disposal of sewage and wastes. A certificate or
statement of adequacy from the Department of Environmental
Resources shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit.
§ 27-1508 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1511
1:667
§ 27-1512. Performance standards. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1512, 4/11/
1995]
A. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream
or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream.
B. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall not be stored outdoors unless
enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such
hazards. [Amended by Ord. No. 3-2017, 8/22/2017]
1. Hereafter, all uses of land, buildings and structures for industrial
processes shall be prohibited that may be noxious or injurious by
reason of the production or emission of dust, smoke, refuse matter,
odor, gas fumes, noise, vibration or similar substances or conditions;
provided, however, that any uses may be permitted except those
specifically prohibited in the district regulations or general provisions,
if adequate provisions, and safeguards to protect the health, safety,
morals and the general welfare of the community are established by a
written agreement, subject to the securing of a permit therefor and
subject to the carrying out of such provisions, restrictions and
safeguards.
A. Construction operations. Construction, alteration, remodeling,
demolition, and repair activities that a have current and valid
permit, as well as the delivery and removal of materials and
equipment associated with these activities, are limited to the hours
from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and from
9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Sunday and holidays, subject to the following
standards: [Amended by Ord. No. 5-2017, 9/12/2017]
(1) Impact construction or demolition operations, such as pile
drivers, jack hammers, concrete saws and similar machinery,
tools and equipment, shall be limited to between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and shall
not be permitted on Sunday or holidays.
(2) Agricultural and farming operations and work performed by
the owner and the owner's family at the owner's personal
residence, authorized emergency vehicles and emergency
utility company work are exempted from the standards of this
section.
(3) The limitations on construction hours shall be noted on the
building permit and approved building plans.
§ 27-1511 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1512
1:668
B. Odors. No continuous, frequent or repetitive emission of odors or
odor-causing substance which would be offensive at or beyond any
property line will be permitted. The existence of an odor shall be
presumed when the concentration of the odor-causing substance or
substances in the air at any point at or beyond the property line of
the source exceeds the lowest concentration listed as the odor
threshold for such substance or substances in Table III (odor
thresholds) appearing in Chapter 5 of the Air Pollution Abatement
Manual, as amended. Substances not cited in said table shall be
deemed odorous when analysis by a competent technician
demonstrates that a discernible odor is being emitted.
C. Offensive area. All areas for parking, recreation, service, utility
equipment, waste receptacles and/or other elements which
because of their appearance, odor and/or noise would be offensive
to those occupying the lot or adjoining lots or those on the street
shall be screened, landscaped or otherwise treated to eliminate the
offensive condition.
D. Lighting. Lighting of all types shall be directed so as to reflect away
from adjacent lots and public rights-of-way. Effort must also be
made to minimize glare on adjacent property.
E. Fire. No structure nor activity on a site or within a structure shall
pose a hazard of fire for adjacent lots and/or structures. Access for
firefighting men and equipment shall be provided for every
structure on the site.
F. Smoke. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the emission of
any smoke from any source whatever of a density equal to or
greater than that density described as No. 2 on the Standard
Ringelmann Chart published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines.
G. Toxic and noxious matters. No emission which would be
demonstrably injurious to human health, animals or plant life at or
beyond the boundaries of any lot will be permitted. Where such an
emission could result from an accident or equipment malfunction
adequate safeguards considered standard for safe utilization of the
toxic and noxious matters involved shall be taken.
H. Radiation hazards. The handling of radioactive materials, the
discharge of such materials into air and water and the disposal of
radioactive waste shall be in conformance with the applicable
regulations of the federal and state governments.
I. Fire and explosive hazards. The storage, utilization or manufacture
of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning
to intense burning is permitted but only if said materials or
products are stored, utilized or manufactured within a completely
enclosed building having an incombustible exterior and protected
throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
§ 27-1512 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1512
1:669
§ 27-1513. Stormwater management regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 1513, 4/11/1995; Ord. No. 12-1999, § 1, 12/14/1999]
§ 27-1514. Illumination. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1514, 4/11/1995; Ord.
No. 2-2007, § 15, 5/22/2007]
J. Glare and heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall
be performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure such
operation from view from any point along the property line except
during the period of construction of the facilities to be used and
occupied.
K. Electromagnetic radiation. In the interest of maintaining an
atmosphere fruitful to research there shall be no electromagnetic
interference that adversely affects at any point the operation of any
equipment other than that belonging to the creator of such
interference or that is not in conformance with the regulation of the
Federal Communications Commission.
L. Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors bases and other forms of air pollution.
No emission which can cause any damage to health, to animals or
vegetation or other forms of property or which can cause any
excessive soiling at any point and in no event any emission from
any chimney or otherwise of any solid or liquid particles in
concentrations exceeding three-tenths grain per cubic foot of the
conveying gas or air at any point shall be permitted. This shall be
measured at the point of emission.
M. Water. No emission of polluters (as defined by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources) into a waterway or
sewage extending beyond the property line shall be permitted.
1. Prior to obtaining a permit for any construction or earth moving
activities, the applicant must submit an erosion and sedimentation
control plan and surface water management plan for approval by the
Township Engineer.
2. The plan required by this section on land located within the Multi-Creek
Watershed shall comply with the provisions of the Multi-Creek
Watershed Stormwater Management Plan approved by the Dauphin
County Commissioners and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
3. In areas of the Township not governed by an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan, the plans required by this section shall
comply with the stormwater management provisions of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 22, Article VI, of the Code
of Ordinances of the Township).
1. The illumination of any sign shall comply with § 27-1703, Subsection
1CC, of this chapter.
§ 27-1512 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1514
1:670
§ 27-1515. Control of traffic and protection to public safety. [Ord.
No. 2-1995, § 1515, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-1516. Screening devices for dumpsters. [Ord. No. 2-2005, 5/24/
2005]
2. The illumination of the exterior grounds of commercial and industrial
establishments shall be arranged in such a manner that the direct rays
of the light source shall not enter any residential building or fall within
the right-of-way of any street or highway.
1. The application for a permit for any and all uses shall be accompanied
by a site plan showing building location, service and parking areas and
access to highways. Where a driveway or access road gives access to a
state road or highway, approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation shall be required.
2. Where a driveway or access road gives access to a Township road,
approval by the South Hanover Supervisors shall be required.
1. All dumpsters located in any multifamily residential district or any
nonresidential district and utilized for collection and storage of solid
waste and recyclable material shall be screened from view from
adjacent streets and properties by a screening device.
2. A required screening device may be made of brick, masonry block,
masonry with a stucco or mortar wash finish, cedar, redwood, chain-link
fence with interlocking polyethylene vertical slats or other similar
material approved by the Township Zoning Officer. The screening
device shall have openings through which light and air may pass and
shall have an opacity of no less than 75%. Materials similar to and
compatible with the materials used for the principal structure on the lot
are preferred.
3. The dumpster screening device shall be a three- or four-sided structure.
The height of the screening device shall be at least one foot higher than
the dumpster to be screened.
4. If the opening of the dumpster screening device is not visible from a
public street, a three-sided screening device is acceptable. If the
opening of the screening device is visible from a public street, a gate
equal in height to the height of the required screening device shall be
installed and shall be kept closed at all times except when the dumpster
is being loaded or unloaded.
5. The dumpster and dumpster screening device shall only be located at
the rear yard or a side yard and may not be located in any front yard.
6. The dumpster screening device shall be considered an accessory
structure and shall comply with the setback requirements of Chapter
27, Article XV, § 27-1508, Subsection 4D, of the Code of Ordinances of
the Township.
§ 27-1514 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1516
1:671
7. The screening requirement shall not be applicable to dumpsters placed
temporarily on a lot for collection of construction debris or for debris
and trash cleanup and removal from the premises on which the
dumpster is temporarily placed.
§ 27-1516 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1516
1:672
ARTICLE XVI
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 27-1601. Compliance with regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1601,
4/11/1995; Ord. No. 2-2007, § 16, 5/22/2007]
All lawful uses of land or of a lot, building or other structure, (except signs
as regulated by § 27-1706 of this chapter) existing on the effective date of
this chapter may be continued, altered, restored, reconstructed, changed,
sold or maintained even though such use may not conform to the use,
height, area, yard and other regulations of the district in which is it located;
provided, such nonconforming conditions shall comply with the following.
§ 27-1602. Continuation. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1602, 4/11/1995]
The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the proper registration of
premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use, building and/or structure
existing after the effective date of this chapter and issuance of a certificate
of nonconformance which shall be for the purpose of insuring to the owner
the right to continue such nonconformity in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. It is the property owner's responsibility to assist the Zoning
Officer in the identification and registration of nonconforming uses, lots,
buildings and structures they are accountable for.
§ 27-1603. Alterations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1603, 4/11/1995]
Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming
building or a building occupied by a nonconforming use; provided, such
alterations and repairs are in conformance with the regulations set forth
in this chapter and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the
Township.
§ 27-1604. Extensions or enlargements. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1604, 4/
11/1995]
1. The types of extensions and enlargements listed below are permitted
for nonconforming uses, buildings and structures existing on the
effective date of this chapter:
A. The extension of a nonconforming use of land upon a lot occupied
by such use.
B. The extension or enlargement of a conforming building occupied by
a nonconforming use.
C. The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building
occupied by a nonconforming use.
D. The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building
occupied by a conforming use.
§ 27-1601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1604
1:673
§ 27-1605. Changes in nonconforming uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 1605, 4/11/1995]
A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of
the same or more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use
has been changed to a more restricted classification or to a conforming
use, such use shall not hereafter be changed to a use of less restricted
classification.
§ 27-1606. Reconstruction/restoration. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1606, 4/
11/1995]
2. The foregoing extensions or enlargements of such nonconforming
buildings or uses shall be subject to the following conditions:
A. The extension or enlargement shall conform to the height, rear
yard and coverage regulations of the district in which it is located.
Where a building or structure is nonconforming as to a required
side or rear yard setback, the established nonconforming setback
may be continued so long as the proposed extension or
enlargement does not project further into any yard, whether side or
rear yard, than the original building line extended.
B. The entire building or use shall be provided with off-street parking
and loading spaces as required by Article XIX, "off-street parking,"
herein.
C. The extension or enlargement does not replace a conforming use.
D. The extension or enlargement of a building use for a
nonconforming use shall not be permitted to extend into vacant
parcels of land adjacent to the initial parcel of land existing and
occupied on the effective date of this chapter where such vacant
parcels have been recorded separately or acquired following the
effective date of this chapter.
1. A nonconforming structure, building or use which is damaged by fire,
explosion, windstorm or other natural or criminal acts may be
reconstructed and used for the same purposes; provided, that:
A. The reconstruction and/or restoration of the building or structure is
commenced within one year from the date of occurrence of the
damage and is carried to completion without undue delay. The one
year time may be extended if the delay is caused by insurance
regulations or investigations not caused by negligence or default by
the applicant.
B. The reconstructed building, structure or occupied area does not
exceed the height, area and volume of the original building,
structure and occupied area.
§ 27-1604 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1606
1:674
§ 27-1607. Discontinuance. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1607, 4/11/1995]
If a nonconforming use of land or building ceases operations for a
continuous period of more than 12 months, then such use and any
subsequent use of land or building shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter except when the discontinuance is due to a death and
administration of the decedent's estate, in which event the discontinuance
shall not be presumed to start until estate administration is terminated or a
court order concerning the disposition of the estate has been entered.
§ 27-1608. Nonconforming signs. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1608, 4/11/
1995; Ord. No. 2-2007, § 17, 5/22/2007]
Nonconforming signs shall be governed by the requirements of § 27-1706 of
this chapter.
§ 27-1609. District changes. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1609, 4/11/1995]
Whenever the boundaries or uses of a district shall be changed the
foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming lots, uses or
buildings existing therein or created thereby.
§ 27-1610. Unsafe structure. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1610, 4/11/1995]
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any portion of a structure or building declared unsafe by
proper authority.
§ 27-1611. Agricultural exemption. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1611, 4/11/
1995]
The nonconforming controls as set forth herein shall not apply to
agricultural structures when such structures are part of an active
agriculture program. An active farm situated, through action of the
Township Supervisors in enacting this chapter, in a zone where agricultural
uses become nonconforming is exempt. It is not the intent of this chapter to
hamper continued agricultural activities. However, should the agricultural
use be abandoned, thereafter agricultural buildings damaged or destroyed
in any manner shall be subject to the nonconforming rules and regulations.
§ 27-1612. Lots not required to have their principal frontage on a
street. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1612, 4/11/1995]
C. The remains of any such building, structure or other improvement
so destroyed shall be removed from the premises within six months
so that the same shall not remain as a safety or nuisance hazard.
1. Where any residential dwelling is in existence and is being used for
residential purposes on or before September 21, 1975, the same shall
not be required to have its principal frontage on a street provided that
the further conditions exist or are met:
§ 27-1606 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1612
1:675
A. The existing dwelling is situated more than 350 feet from any
public street.
B. The existing residential premises must be provided with access to a
public street by a private right-of-way having a minimum width of
20 feet.
C. The owner must execute a written agreement with the Township
restricting any development between the public street and the
subject premises providing for the private maintenance, repair and
improvement of the private right-of-way providing access for the
subject dwelling to the public street as aforesaid and such further
terms and conditions as the supervisors shall determine are
necessary under the particular circumstances to insure that any
further development shall be in accordance with all applicable
Township ordinances.
§ 27-1612 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1612
1:676
ARTICLE XVII
Signs
§ 27-1701. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-2007, § 18, 5/22/2007]
§ 27-1702. Sign area and height. [Ord. No. 2-2007, § 18, 5/22/2007]
1. To provide for signs as a means of effective visual communication.
2. To assure compatibility of signs with land uses and buildings in the
vicinity of the signs and in the community as a whole.
3. To improve the safety of pedestrians, vehicular traffic, and property.
4. To enhance the economic value of the community.
5. To enhance the aesthetic environment.
6. To minimize adverse effects of signs on nearby property.
7. To otherwise promote the public health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the community.
8. To regulate the use of signs through a sign permitting process.
9. To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
1. The following shall apply when interpreting area and height regulations
in this article:
A. Area. The area of a sign shall be the area of the smallest rectangle,
triangle, or circle that will encompass all elements of the sign, such
as letters, figures, symbols, designs, or other display.
(1) When the sign is a separate unit, the area shall include any
borders, framing, trim, decorative attachments, background,
and space between elements; it shall not include any
supporting structure unless that structure is illuminated, is in
the form of a symbol, or contains advertising elements.
§ 27-1701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1702
1:677
(2) When the sign is applied to a wall or otherwise has no definable
edges, the area shall include all color, artwork, or other means
used to differentiate the sign from the surface upon which it is
placed.
(3) When a single sign structure has more than one face with the
same message, and no two sign faces are more than three feet
apart at any point, the area shall be computed by determining
the greatest total area of all sign faces visible from any single
location.
B. Height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the average
ground level beneath the sign to the highest point of the sign. The
ground level shall be the lower of the ground level existing at the
time of construction or the ground level existing prior to
construction and prior to any earth disturbance at the site. This
prior ground level may be established by any reliable source,
including, without limitation, existing topographic maps, aerial
photographs, photographs of the site, or affidavits of people who
are personally familiar with the site. No person(s) shall artificially
increase the maximum height of a sign by altering the grade at the
base of the sign by any means.
(1) No sign shall be higher than the height limitation imposed by
this article.
(2) The height of freestanding signs shall be controlled by the
standards in Tables 1, 2 and 3 listed in § 27-1704 of this article.
(3) Wall signs may be at any height on the wall to which they are
attached, except that they may not extend higher than the top
of the wall.
(4) Roof signs may extend no more than five feet above the lowest
point where they are attached to the building and may not
extend above the highest point of the roof.
§ 27-1702 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1703
1:678
§ 27-1703. General regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2007, § 18, 5/22/2007]
1. The following regulations shall apply to all signs, in addition to the
specific regulations contained in the following provisions of § 27-1704
of this article. Where these general regulations are contradicted by a
specific regulation, the specific regulation shall control.
A. All signs shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in
good condition, and secured in a safe manner. All signs shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code (UCC).
B. When a sign becomes unsafe, the Zoning Officer shall give written
notice to the owner of the premises on which the sign is located
that the sign must be made safe or removed immediately.
C. The areas surrounding all signs shall be maintained in a neat,
clean, and attractive condition.
D. All signs shall be removed within three months if the purpose for
which they were erected no longer exists.
E. Each property that displays one or more permanent freestanding
signs and that is in an area where street addresses have been
assigned, must prominently display the address on one permanent
freestanding sign visible from the street. The address must include
the street number; the street name is optional. The address must
be of a size and design that is easily identifiable and legible from
moving traffic in the street at a distance of 100 feet (three-inch
high lettering/numerals with a 3/4 inch stroke). The area taken up
by the address does not count as part of the sign area. Planned
center signs are exempt from this requirement.
F. No temporary signs shall be permitted except as authorized
elsewhere in this article.
G. No sign shall be located within a street right-of-way, except a
government sign, a public utility sign, a sidewalk sign, a nonprofit
organization sign, or another sign approved by the Board of
Supervisors or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
H. No sign within any required clear sight triangle shall obstruct
vision between the heights of 30 inches and eight feet above the
elevation of the center line of the street.
I. No signs shall be painted, pasted, nailed, stapled, or otherwise
attached to utility poles, trees, fences, fire hydrants, or in an
unauthorized manner to walls or other signs, except insofar as such
signs comply with generally applicable rules, regulations, or
policies formally adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
J. No sign shall be located in a position that will endanger traffic on
nearby roads, access drive or driveways, by obscuring the view.
§ 27-1703 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1703
1:679
K. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct any door, stairway,
window, fire escape, or other means of egress or ingress.
L. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct ventilation or light from a
building.
M. (13)—. No overhead sign shall have a clearance of less than eight
feet between any pedestrian walk and the lowest part of the sign
nor less than 17 feet six inches between any roadway and the
lowest part of the sign.
N. No flat wall sign shall project more than 18 inches from the face of
the wall to which it is attached over a public sidewalk.
O. No wall projecting sign shall project more than 48 inches from the
face of the wall to which it is attached over a public sidewalk.
P. No sign shall have lights or other illuminating devices that
constitute a public safety or traffic hazard.
Q. No sign shall be permitted which imitates or which might be
confused with an official traffic sign or signal, such as by containing
the words "Stop," "Yield," "Detour," "Caution," "Work Area" or
"Danger" or by including red, green, or yellow traffic lights.
R. No sign or window display shall include a revolving beam or beacon
of light resembling an emergency vehicle or facility.
S. No sign shall advertise activities or products that are illegal under
federal, state, or local municipal laws or regulations.
T. No sign shall include statements, words, or pictures that are
considered to be vulgar, obscene, or pornographic. No sign shall
depict "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities,"
both as defined herein.
U. No streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel,
balloons or similar materials shall be displayed outside a building.
(See "Special Event Sign" in Temporary Sign Regulations Table for
regulations that apply to banners used as special events signs.)
V. In addition to any other signage permitted by this article, each
commercial or industrial use may display one flag not to exceed 35
square feet with a company or corporate identification logo on
premise on an approved, standard flagpole.
W. No sign shall emit smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound, or odor.
X. No sign shall be placed on an automobile, truck, or other vehicle if
that vehicle is being used primarily for displaying such sign.
Y. No inflatable signs shall be permitted.
§ 27-1703 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1703
1:680
Z. No open flames shall be permitted as part of a sign or in any other
way to attract attention.
AA. Advertising painted upon or displayed upon a barn or other
structure shall be considered a sign and shall comply with this
article.
BB. Any sign may be exempted from the regulations of this article as a
conditional use, if the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Board of Supervisors that the sign has been authenticated as
historically significant and accurate for its specific location,
whether original or a replica.
CC. The lighting of new, or relighting of existing, billboards and signs
shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall have fixtures
mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and aimed
downward. The fixtures shall be designed, fitted and aimed to
shield the source from off-site view and to place the light
output onto the billboard or sign and not to project their output
into the windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses,
past the face of the billboard or sign, skyward or onto a public
roadway. Lighting shall be by linear fluorescent sources. At no
point on the face of the sign or billboard and at no time shall
the illumination exceed 30 vertical footcandles during
nighttime.
(2) The light source for internally illuminated signs and billboards
shall not exceed 1,000 initial lumens per square foot of sign
face.
(3) The illumination of billboards shall be limited to the (IP and
CH) Districts and the illumination of billboards within 500 feet
of a residential use or (ESC, R-S, R-U, R-M, V or R-MH) District
shall not be permitted.
(4) The maximum illumination on the face of an externally
illuminated billboard or sign shall not exceed 30 footcandles
and shall have a maximum to minimum uniformity ratio not to
exceed 6:1.
(5) Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing, or oscillating light
sources, lasers, beacons, or strobe lighting shall not be
permitted except within the (IP and CH) Districts and not
within 500 feet of a signalized traffic intersection, a residential
use or any (ESC, R-S, R-U, R-M, V or R-MH) District.
(6) The use of highly reflective signage that creates nuisance glare
or a safety hazard shall not be permitted.
§ 27-1703 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1703
1:681
(7) Applications for the lighting or relighting of signs and
billboards shall be accompanied by a point-by-point plot of
illuminance on the sign or billboard face, catalog cuts of
proposed fixtures and any glare reduction devices and a
description of lamps, mounting locations, aiming angles and
proposed hours of operation and method for automatically
extinguishing the lighting.
(8) The light from any illuminated sign shall not adversely affect
the vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private
streets or parking areas, any (ESC, R-S, R-U, R-M, V or R-MH)
District, or property used for residential purposes.
(9) No lighting shall be permitted to outline signs or parts thereof
through the use of exposed neon tubing, strings of lights, or
other means with the exception of customary holiday
decorations, which may be installed 30 days prior to and
removed not later than 21 days after the holiday.
(10) Business signs in other than commercial and industrial
districts shall not be illuminated when the business is closed.
(11) All electrically illuminated signs shall be constructed to the
standard and listing of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
(UL). All electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in
accordance with the International Code Council (ICC)
Electrical Code and the National Fire Protection Association,
National Electrical Code, (NFPA 70).
(12) Signs incorporating dynamic message displays, as defined
herein, shall not be permitted except within the (IP and CH)
Districts and not within 500 feet of a signalized traffic
intersection, a residential use or any (ESC, R-S, R-U, R-M, V or
R-MH) District and shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Such signs shall employ sufficient size lettering and/or
symbols for immediate recognition by motorists;
(b) Such signs shall display simple and static messages for
immediate recognition by motorists. Messages shall be
complete in each display cycle and shall not require
viewers to see multiple display cycles to derive its
meaning;
(c) Such signs shall use instantaneous transitions from one
message display cycle to the next with no blank-outs,
scrolling, fading, streaming, zooming, flashing or any
other animated effect; and,
(d) Each message display cycle shall comply with the
following minimum time standards based upon the lowest
§ 27-1703 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1703
1:682
§ 27-1704. Specific sign requirements. [Ord. No. 2-2007, § 18, 5/22/
2007]
The tables on the following pages tabulate requirements imposed upon
permanent, temporary and planned center signs as permitted within the
Township.26
§ 27-1705. Signs permitted within the Eleemosynary School
Campus (ESC) District. [Ord. No. 2-2007, § 18, 5/22/2007]
speed limit of the road travel lane from which the sign is
visible:
Required Minimum Message Display Cycles
(seconds)
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour)
Total sign
area with
up to 64
square feet
Total sign
area with
between 64
and 300
square feet
Total sign
area with
more than
300 square
feet
25 mph 17 sec. 28 sec. 56 sec.
30 mph 14 sec. 24 sec. 48 sec.
35 mph 12 sec. 20 sec. 40 sec.
40 mph 11 sec. 18 sec. 36 sec.
45 mph 10 sec. 16 sec. 32 sec.
50 mph 9 sec. 14 sec. 28 sec.
55 and plus;
mph
8 sec. 12 sec. 24 sec.
1. Irrespective of regulations contained elsewhere within this article, the
following types of signs shall be permitted in the (ESC) District:
A. Business identification signs of buildings, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of 20 square feet; and
(2) Not more than one sign is placed for each separate building on
each property in single and separate ownership, unless such
property fronts upon more than one street, in which event one
such sign may be erected for each such building on each such
frontage.
B. Business directional signs, signs that are accessory to a principal
use on the site and that provide direction to the location of
buildings, provided that:
26.Editor's Note: The Sign Requirements Tables are included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 27-1703 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1705
1:683
§ 27-1706. Nonconforming signs. [Ord. No. 2-2007, § 18, 5/22/2007]
§ 27-1707. Billboards. [Ord. No. 2-2007, § 18, 5/22/2007]
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of 20 square feet; and
(2) Not more than one sign is placed for each separate building on
each property in single and separate ownership, unless such
property fronts upon more than one street, in which event one
such sign may be erected for each building on each such street.
C. On site directional signs that are accessory to a principal use on the
site and that provide direction to the location of parking lots,
receiving areas, loading spaces, rest rooms and other pertinent
information, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of 10 square feet; and,
(2) Each such sign is placed in such a manner that the attention of
motorists and pedestrians on public streets is not drawn to the
sign.
1. Any sign that legally existed on the effective date of this article that
does not comply with the provisions listed in this article, shall be
considered a nonconforming signs. All nonconforming signs may
continue for whichever is the shortest of the following continuance
periods of time:
A. Three months following cessation of the use for which the
nonconforming sign's message applies; or,
B. Five years from the effective date of this article.
2. No expansion or increase in the nonconforming aspect of a
nonconforming sign is permitted. After the above-described
continuance period, all nonconforming signs shall be removed, reconstructed
and/or altered so that they comply with all of the provisions
contained within this article. Any improvements, repairs,
reconstructions, or any other alterations made to the nonconforming
sign during the continuance period shall not waive the requirements for
elimination of the nonconforming signs at the end of the continuance
period. This section shall not apply to any legally-existing
nonconforming billboards.
1. Billboards, as defined herein, shall only be permitted by conditional use
within the (IP and CH) Districts, subject to the following criteria:
A. No billboard shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard;
B. All billboards shall be a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines
and any street right-of-way;
§ 27-1705 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1707
1:684
§ 27-1708. Permitting procedures and fees. [Ord. No. 2-2007, § 18,
5/22/2007]
C. All billboards shall be set back at least 300 feet from any land
within a (R-A) District and at least 1,000 feet from any land within a
(ESC, R-S, R-U, R-M, V, R-MH and/or R-C) District;
D. No billboard shall obstruct the view of motorists on adjoining
roads, or the view of adjoining commercial or industrial uses, which
depend upon visibility for identification;
E. No billboard shall exceed an overall size of 300 square feet, except
that a two-sided billboard shall not exceed an overall size of 600
square feet provided both sides are arranged back-to-back faces
and are no more than three feet apart at any point. No billboard
shall exceed 25 feet in height;
F. All billboards and properties upon which they are erected shall be
regularly maintained so as not to create a safety hazard due to
structural integrity nor a nuisance by means of weeds, litter or
vector habitation;
G. Any lighting used for billboards shall be designed in accordance
with § 27-1703, Subsection 1CC, of this article; and,
H. Billboards incorporating dynamic message displays, as defined
herein, shall comply with § 27-1703, Subsection 1CC(12), of this
article.
1. Permits for the placement of signs are required as indicated by the last
column in the tables listed in § 27-1704 of this article. All signs
requiring permits must have such permit prior to the erection,
installation, or alteration of the sign. Sign permit applications, forms,
plan requirements, and fees shall be established by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
A. Application for permit shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Officer and shall contain all information necessary for such officer
to determine whether the proposed sign, or the proposed
alterations, conform to the requirements of this article. All
applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by scaled plans
or diagrams showing the following:
(1) Exact dimensions of the lot including any right-of-way lines or
building upon which the sign is proposed to be erected;
(2) Exact size, dimensions, and location of the said sign on the lot
or building together with its type, construction, materials to be
used, and the manner of installation; and
(3) Any other lawful information that may be required of the
applicant by the Zoning Officer.
§ 27-1707 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1708
1:685
B. Applications for the lighting or relighting of signs and billboards
shall be accompanied by a point-by-point plot of illuminance on the
sign or billboard face, catalog cuts of proposed fixtures and any
glare reduction devices and a description of lamps, mounting
locations, aiming angles and proposed hours of operation and
method for automatically extinguishing the lighting.
C. No sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
regulations of this article, except upon order of the Zoning Hearing
Board, granted pursuant to the procedures established for the
issuance of a variance.
D. Permits shall be granted or refused within 30 days from date of
application, or within 30 days from the date of the Zoning Hearing
Board's decision, where applicable.
E. Sign permits shall include a signature by the owner of the property;
except that an owner's legal agent may sign the permit. When a
legal agent signs the permit, the owner shall be bound by the terms
of the permit.
§ 27-1708 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1708
1:686
ARTICLE XVIII
Off-Street Parking
§ 27-1801. General parking regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1801,
4/11/1995]
§ 27-1802. Facilities required. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1802, 4/11/1995;
Ord. No. 3-2005, § 5, 8/16/2005]
Any of the following facilities hereafter erected or enlarged and any facility
hereafter converted into one of the following facilities and any open space
hereafter used shall be provided with not less than the minimum parking
spaces as set forth below, together with adequate accessways, driveways or
other means of circulation and access to and from a street:
1. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the
streets. The facilities required herein shall be available to patrons
throughout the hours of operation of the particular business or use for
which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term "parking
space" includes either covered garage space or uncovered parking
space located off the public right-of-way.
2. Outdoor parking spaces shall not be deemed to be part of the open
space of the lot on which they are located.
3. A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of
the principal building or attached to the outer walls. If separated from
the principal building the garage shall conform to all accessory building
requirements. The garage may be constructed under a yard; provided,
that the level of such yard shall conform to the general level of the other
yards on the lot. The space above an underground garage shall be
deemed to be part of the open space of the lot on which it is located.
4. All commercial, public, institutional and industrial uses shall provide a
minimum of one handicapped parking space or 5% of the parking space
required, whichever is greater, the design to be approved by the
Township Engineer.
5. No part of any minimum front yard setback area shall be used for
parking purposes except that in residential districts the residential
driveway area located within the front yard setback may be used for
parking purposes.
6. The parking of any nonmotorized vehicle (including boats and trailers)
and any motorized vehicle not having a current and valid registration
and inspection certificate is prohibited within any street right-of-way.
§ 27-1801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1802
1:687
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
1. Automotive sales and
service garages
1 parking space for each 300 square
feet of floor area devoted to service
services or 2 spaces for each service
bay, whichever is greater, plus 1
space for each 200 square feet of
floor area devoted to sales facilities or
usage plus 1 space for each full-time
employee
2. Automobile wash 5 spaces for each washing machine
3. Banks or professional
offices other than medical
offices
1 space for each 200 square feet of
floor area
4. Bowling centers 5 spaces for each lane
5. Dance halls, swimming
pools, roller rinks, clubs,
lodges and other similar
uses
1 space for each 100 square feet of
floor area or of surface water area in
swimming pool
6. Elderly housing 1/2 space per dwelling (multifamily
dwellings) unit
7. Institutional care facility 1 space for every 2 plus 1 space for
each employee in the maximum
working shift
8. Day-care center 1 space for each nonresident
employee plus 1 space for passenger
loading/unloading per 4
nonresidential children
9. Food markets and
convenience stores
1 space for each 200 square feet of
floor area
10. Funeral homes, mortuaries 5 spaces for each parlor
11. Furniture or appliance
stores
1 space for each 200 square feet of
floor area
12. Home occupations (the
following standards are for
spaces in addition to the
ones required for the
residence)
A. Legal office 1 space for each employed person
(the resident attorney, an associate,
etc.), 2 additional spaces for clients
and occasional sales persons or
consultants
§ 27-1802 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1802
1:688
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
B. Architects and
landscape architects
1 space for the resident architect and
1 additional space for an employee, 2
additional spaces for clients and/or
other visitors
C. Engineers and
accountants
1 space for the resident and 1
additional space for an employee,
associate or other affiliated person
and 3 additional spaces for patients
D. Physicians and dentists 1 space for the resident and 1
additional space for the employee,
associate or other affiliated person
and 3 additional spaces for patients
E. Realtors, insurance
agents, offices of
elected officials
3 spaces
F. Barber shops and
beauty parlors
4 spaces. If there is only 1 customer
facility provided (1 barber chair, 1
dryer, etc.) 3 spaces may be
approved.
G. Dressmakers, milliners
and others
3 spaces
13. Hospitals, nursing and
convalescent homes
1 space for every 3 beds plus 1 space
for each employee
14. Hotels, motels, boarding
and lodging/rooming
houses, bed-and-breakfast
establishments
1 space for each guest room plus 1
space for each 2 employees in the
working shift. If a restaurant in
connection with said uses is open to
the public the off-street parking
facilities shall not be less than those
required for restaurants in addition to
that required above.
15. Industrial uses (mills,
manufacturing or assembly
plants, warehousing,
laboratories, etc.)
1 space for each 1,000 square feet of
floor area plus 1 space for each 2
employees in the maximum working
shift. The total parking area shall be
less than 25% of the floor area.
16. Medical centers/offices 5 spaces for each doctor
17. Multiple dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit
18. Nursery schools 1 space for each employee and 1
space for passenger loading/
unloading per 4 children
§ 27-1802 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1802
1:689
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
19. Places of public or private
assembly (churches,
community centers,
theaters or similar meeting
and assembly uses)
1 space for every 3 and every 3 1/2
seats or 1 space for each 100 square
feet of floor area where no seats are
provided
20. Restaurants, tea rooms,
taverns and nightclubs
1 space for every 2 1/2 seats
21. Retail stores and shops 1 space for each 120 square feet of
floor area
22. Schools 1 space per 17 classroom seats or 1
space for each 3 1/2 seats in the
auditorium
23. Single- and two-family
dwellings
1 18/2 space per dwelling unit or
family
24. Utility or communication
station
1 space per vehicle normally required
to service such facility
25. Trailer or monument sales 1 space for each 2,500 square feet of
lot area
26. Driving range or miniature
golf
1 space for each tee
27. Dwellings in the ESC
Eleemosynary School
Campus District for
employees and students of
eleemosynary schools
1 space for each resident employee,
plus 1 space for each nonresident
employee in the maximum working
shift, plus 1 space for every 6 student
beds
§ 27-1803. Location and management requirements. [Ord. No.
2-1995, § 1803, 4/11/1995]
1. Existing parking. Buildings and uses existing on the effective date of
this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this chapter so
long as the type or extent of use is not changed; provided, that any
parking facility now serving such structures or uses shall not in the
future be reduced below such requirements.
2. Changes in requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a building
or a change or extension of a use which increases the parking
requirements according to the standards, the total additional parking
required for the alteration, change or extension shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of that section.
3. Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that
interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
§ 27-1802 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1803
1:690
4. Continuing obligation. All required parking facilities shall be provided
and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were
designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities shall not reduced in the
total extent after their provision. Reasonable precautions are to be
taken by the owner or sponsor of particular uses to assure the
availability of required facilities for the employees or other persons
whom the facilities are designed to serve. They shall at no time
constitute a nuisance, hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
5. Drainage, surfacing and maintenance.
A. The area of parking lots, including driveways, shall be graded,
surfaced with asphalt or other suitable material and drained in
accordance with other applicable codes and ordinances enacted by
the Township and approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Parking areas shall be kept clean and free from rubbish and debris.
6. Joint use. Two or more uses located on the same parcel may provide for
required parking in a common parking lot if the total space provided is
not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use individually.
7. Computation of spaces. Where the computation of required parking
space results in a fractional number, any fraction shall be counted as
one.
8. Location of spaces.
A. Single- and two-family residential off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the same lot or premises with the use served.
B. Parking spaces for multiple dwelling buildings, commercial,
industrial and other nonresidential uses shall be readily accessible
to the buildings served thereby. Such spaces shall be on the same
lot and in the same zoning district as the principal building or open
area and conform to the following regulations:
(1) The required parking spaces shall be located within 600 feet of
the principal building or open space in question.
(2) The applicant for a use or building permit shall submit, with his
application, an instrument duly executed and acknowledged
which subjects such parcels of land to parking uses in
connection with the principal use to which it is accessory. This
shall bind the owner and his heirs or assigns to maintain the
required number of parking spaces throughout the life of such
use.
9. Lighting.
A. All public parking areas shall be adequately lighted during after
dark operating hours.
§ 27-1803 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1803
1:691
§ 27-1804. Design standards. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1804, 4/11/1995]
B. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas
shall be shielded from any street or residential use.
1. The minimum dimensions of parking facilities to be provided shall be as
follows:
A. In all districts parking spaces per vehicle shall be not less than nine
feet wide and 18 feet long.
B. Parking lot dimensions shall be not less than those listed in the
following table:
Parking Aisle Width
Angle of
Parking Stall Width
Stall
Depth* One-Way Two-Way
90° 9' 18' 24' 24'
60° 10' 22' 18' 20'
45° 10' 21' 15' 20'
30° 10' 19' 12' 20'
Parallel 8' 22' 12' 20'
Depth of shall is the perpendicular measurement from curb or
edge of the parking lot toward the interior portion of the lot to be
occupied by the parking vehicles and not including any part of the
drive.
C. All dead end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient
back-up area for the end stalls of the parking area.
D. Parking areas shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without
requiring the moving of any motor vehicle. [Amended by Ord. No.
3-2017, 8/22/2017]
E. Where more than 10 parking spaces are required a maximum of
40% of the parking spaces may be provided for compact vehicles.
Each such compact parking space shall be not less than eight feet
wide by 17 feet long. All compact parking spaces shall be located in
the same area and be marked to indicate spaces designated for
compact parking.
2. Setback for parking areas shall be provided as follows:
A. All parking spaces and access drives shall be located at least five
feet from any multiple dwelling building, office, commercial,
institutional, industrial and other similar nonresidential buildings
located on the lot. The five-foot corridor thus established between
§ 27-1803 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1804
1:692
§ 27-1805. Off-street loading and unloading. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 1805, 4/11/1995; Ord. No. 3-2005, § 6, 8/16/2005]
the parking area and building shall be for the purpose of providing
a pedestrian access walkway.
B. All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five feet from
any side or rear lot line, except where buffer yards or screen
plantings are required, in which case, the standards set forth in
§ 27-1508, Subsection 1F, herein shall apply.
C. No off-street parking area shall be located within a public right-ofway.
3. Separation.
A. In no case shall parking areas be designed to require or encourage
cars to back into a public or private street in order to leave the
parking areas.
B. All paved off-street parking spaces shall be marked so as to indicate
their location.
C. Unless deemed unnecessary by the Township, pedestrian
crosswalks and landscaped refuge islands to separate the parking
spaces from the exit, entrance and circulatory drive shall be
provided for and approved by the Township Engineer. Such
landscaped areas may be considered as part of the vegetative
coverage requirements set forth in the applicable zoning district
provisions or as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
4. Curb radius. No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be
permitted for all curblines in all parking lots.
1. Required berths and spaces.
A. In addition to the off-street parking requirements set forth herein,
any building erected, converted or enlarged for commercial, office,
manufacturing, institutional hospital, eleemosynary school or other
similar uses requiring the delivery or pickup of products or
materials shall provide adequate off-street areas for the loading
and unloading of vehicles. Such areas shall be provided as follows:
§ 27-1804 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1805
1:693
Use
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of
Spaces
Commercial,
wholesale,
manufacturing,
hospital laundries,
institutional and
similar uses
Under 8,000 1
8,000 to 40,000 2
Over 40,000 to 100,000 3
Over 100,000 to
250,000
4
Each additional
100,000
1
Office buildings,
hotels, and buildings
of eleemosynary
schools which
require the delivery
or pickup of products
or materials
Under 100,000 1
Over 100,000 to
300,000
2
Over 300,000 3
B. All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be provided and
maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were
designed to serve.
2. Design standards. Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to
conform to the following specifications:
A. Each required berth shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 45 feet
in length and 14 feet in height, exclusive of drives and maneuvering
space and located entirely on the lot being served.
B. There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or alley, as
well as adequate maneuvering space.
C. All accessory driveways and entranceways shall be graded,
surfaced, and drained in accordance with applicable codes and
ordinances of the Township.
§ 27-1805 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1805
1:694
ARTICLE XIX
Motor Vehicle Access
§ 27-1901. Access regulations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1901, 4/11/1995]
Wherever motor vehicle access is provided from the street (or private road)
onto the lot the following regulations shall apply.
§ 27-1902. Driveways and curbs. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1902, 4/11/
1995]
1. Access to the lot shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Access shall be by not more than two driveways for each 100 feet
frontage on any street.
B. No two of said driveways serving single-family and two-family
dwellings shall be closer to each other than 12 feet and no driveway
shall be closer to a side property line than three feet and no flare
shall cross an extended side property line. Except in the case of
single- and two-family dwellings the general layout shall be such
that there will be no need for motorists to back over public rightsof-
way.
C. Each driveway shall be paved and shall not exceed 35 feet in width,
measured at right angles to the center line of the driveway except
as increased by permissible curb return radii. The entire flare of
any return radius shall fall within the right-of-way.
D. Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way line within 40 feet
of the street right-of-way line of an intersecting street and in no
case less than 10 feet from the point of tangency when the
intersecting street lines are joined by a curve. Notwithstanding the
above and when deemed necessary for public safety by the Board of
Supervisors this dimension shall be increased for access drives to
shopping centers, other commercial, industrial, public or
institutional uses. Such access drives shall be located in a manner
to permit safe ingress and egress.
E. Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way within five feet of
a fire hydrant, catch basin or drain inlet.
F. Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way within 40 feet of
another driveway on the same lot, excepting in the case where dual
access drives are deemed necessary to permit safe ingress and
egress, these dimensions may be reduced to not less than 12 feet
between two access drives.
G. For multifamily developments and nonresidential uses, when
deemed necessary to permit safe ingress and egress, acceleration
and deceleration lanes paralleling the street shall be installed at
the expense of the property owners.
§ 27-1901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1902
1:695
§ 27-1903. Location of gasoline pumps. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1903, 4/
11/1995]
Gasoline pumps and all other service equipment shall be set back not less
than 25 feet from any street line and shall be so located that vehicles
stopped for service will not extend over the property line.
§ 27-1904. Emergency vehicle access. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1904, 4/
11/1995]
Stabilized emergency vehicle access shall be provided around all buildings
which are defined as "unlimited area building" by the BOCA National
Building Code [Chapter 5] or as otherwise required by the Township Board
of Supervisors. Stabilized areas shall be located as required by the
Township and consist of either paving in accordance with Township
standards or, in lawn areas, eight inches of #4 crushed aggregate or
approved equal, 18 feet in width and covered with sod. In lawn areas,
H. Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way for all multifamily
developments and in all commercial, industrial and other such
nonresidential uses, within 20 feet of a property line unless two
adjoining property owners mutually agree in a legally recorded
instrument to a common driveway.
I. For multifamily developments and nonresidential uses, where there
is an existing curb and gutter or sidewalks on the street or private
road, a safety island along the entire frontage of the property shall
be provided except for the permitted driveways. On the two ends
and street side of each such island shall be constructed a concrete
curb in accordance with other codes and ordinances of the
Township.
J. For multifamily developments and nonresidential uses where there
is no existing curb and gutter or sidewalks a curb, fence or pipe rail
shall be constructed along the entire length of the property line
except in front of the permitted driveway in accordance with other
codes and ordinances of the Township.
K. General safety requirements — Sight distance. Driveways shall be
located in safe relationship to sight distance and barriers to vision
and shall not exceed a slope of 10% within 12 feet of the street line.
Where drives enter a bank through a cut, unless a retaining wall is
used, the side slopes of the cut shall be graded to not more than
one-half foot vertical to one-foot horizontal within 10 feet of the
point the drive intersects with the right-of-way line.
L. Submission of plan. A scale drawing of proposed off-street parking
and loading areas, access drives and walks shall be submitted as
part of the required plot plan. Any plan requiring access onto a
state highway shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
§ 27-1902 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-1904
1:696
delineators shall be placed at fifty-foot intervals to identify the location of
the access lane.
§ 27-1905. Fire lanes. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 1905, 4/11/1995]
Fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 18 feet for the efficient and
effective use of fire apparatus. Designated fire lanes shall be maintained
free of obstructions and vehicles and shall be marked in an approved
manner. All designated fire lane signs or markings shall be maintained in
a clean and legible condition at all times and replaced when necessary to
ensure adequate visibility.
§ 27-1904 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1905
1:697

ARTICLE XX
Amendments
§ 27-2001. Procedure. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2001, 4/11/1995]
The Township Supervisors may, from time to time, amend, supplement or
repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter after public
notice and hearing. Before the public hearing each proposed amendment,
except those coming from the Township Planning Commission, must be
referred to the Township Planning Commission for its recommendations at
least 30 days prior to the hearing on such amendment. If, after any public
hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is changed
substantially or is revised to include land previously not affected by it
the Township Supervisors shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to
public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment. At least 30
days prior to the hearing on the amendment by the Township Supervisors
the Township shall submit the proposed ordinance or amendments to the
Dauphin County Planning Commission for recommendations. Within 30
days after enactment a copy of the amendment shall be forwarded to the
Dauphin County Planning Commission. Amendment procedures shall be in
compliance with Section 609 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247, as amended.
§ 27-2002. Procedure upon curative amendments. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 2002, 4/11/1995]
The procedure upon curative amendments shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended, Sections 609.1 and 609(2).
§ 27-2003. Publication, advertisement and availability of ordinance.
[Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2003, 4/11/1995]
1. Proposed zoning ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted
unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in
this section and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which
passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the Township
where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be
examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the
cost thereof. The Township Supervisors shall publish the proposed
ordinance or amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation
in the Township no more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to
passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment shall
include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary
prepared by the Township Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions
in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
A. A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at the time the public notice is
published.
§ 27-2001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-2003
1:699
§ 27-2004. Zoning amendment application requirements. [Ord. No.
2-1995, § 2004, 4/11/1995]
The Township Supervisors shall have the power to enact by resolution
zoning change application requirements for those requesting a zoning
change of a land area in the Township from one zoning classification to
another zoning classification.
B. An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
Dauphin County Law Library or other county office designated by
the county Commissioners who may impose a fee no greater than
that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.
2. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Township
Supervisors shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in
one newspaper of general circulation in the Township, a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a
summary of the amendments. If the proposed amendment involves a
Zoning Map change, notice of said public hearing shall be
conspicuously posted by the Township at points deemed sufficient by
the Township along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially
interested citizens. The affected tract shall be posted at least one week
prior to the date of the public hearing.
§ 27-2003 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-2004
1:700
ARTICLE XXI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 27-2101. Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer. [Ord. No.
2-1995, § 2101, 4/11/1995]
For the administration of this chapter a Zoning Officer, who shall not
hold any elective office in the Township, shall be appointed. The Zoning
Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms
and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any change
of use which does not conform to this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall
meet the qualifications established by the Township and shall be able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township a working knowledge of
municipal zoning.
§ 27-2102. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2102, 4/11/1995]
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and such power and authority as is necessary for enforcement is
hereby conferred upon the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall examine
all applications for permits, issue permits for construction and uses which
are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, record and file
all applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents and
make such reports as the Board of Supervisors may require. Permits for
construction and uses which are a special exception or a variance to
requirements of this chapter shall be issued only upon written order of the
Zoning Hearing Board. Permits which are a conditional use shall be used
only upon approval of such conditional use by the Township Supervisors.
§ 27-2103. Permits. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2103, 4/11/1995; Ord. No.
2-2007, § 19, 5/22/2007]
1. Requirements of permits. A building and/or zoning permit shall be
required prior to: (A) erection, addition or alteration of any building or
portion thereof; (B) the use or change in use of a building or land; (C)
the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and (D) the erection or
alteration of any sign requiring a permit as per § 27-1708 of this
chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work for the
erection or alteration of any building or for a change in land use until a
permit has been duly issued therefor.
2. Application for permits. All applications for permits shall be
accompanied by plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual
shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and
location of any buildings existing on the lot, the lines within which the
proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered, the existing
and intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of
families or dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate and
such information as may be necessary to determine compliance with
this chapter and all other ordinances. One copy of such plans shall be
§ 27-2101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-2103
1:701
§ 27-2104. Inspection by the Zoning Officer. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 2105, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-2105. Fees. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2106, 4/11/1995]
The Township Supervisors shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses as well as a collection procedure for zoning permits, certificates
of occupancy, appeals, variances, conditional uses, special exceptions,
returned to the owner when such plans have been reviewed and acted
upon by the Zoning Officer. Also, applications with accompanying plans
and documents shall become a public record after a permit is issued or
denied.
3. Issuance of permits. No permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer
has certified that the proposed use, building, addition or alteration
complies with all the provisions of this chapter as well as the provisions
of all other applicable ordinances. A permit issued hereunder shall
become void 12 months after issuance date unless a request for
extension has been submitted to and approved by the Zoning Officer.
Such request shall be filed with the Zoning Officer at least 30 days prior
to the permit expiration date.
4. Temporary permits. A temporary permit may be authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board for a structure or use which it deems necessary
to promote the proper development of the community; provided, that
such nonconforming structure or use shall be completely removed upon
expiration of the permit without cost to the Township. Such permits
shall be issued for a specified period of time not to exceed one year and
may be renewed annually for an aggregate period not exceeding three
years.
1. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, or his duly appointed
representative, to make he following minimum number of inspections of
property for which a permit has been issued:
A. At the beginning of construction. A record shall be made indicating
the time and date of inspection and the finding of the Zoning
Officer in regard to conformance of the construction with plans
submitted with the approved permit application. If the actual
construction does not conform to the application a written notice of
violation shall be issued by the Zoning Officer and such violation
shall be discontinued. Upon proper correction of the violation and
receipt of written notice from the Zoning Officer, construction shall
proceed.
B. At the completion of construction. A record shall be made
indicating the time and date of the inspection, the findings of the
Zoning Officer in regard to conformance to this chapter and the
opinion of the Zoning Officer in regard to the issuance of a
certificate of use permit.
§ 27-2103 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-2105
1:702
amendments, bonds and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The
schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Officer and may
be amended only by the Township Supervisors. Such fees shall be payable to
the Township and until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been
paid in full, the application shall be considered incomplete and no action
shall be taken on any application or appeal.
§ 27-2106. Certificate of use. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2106, 4/11/1995]
§ 27-2107. Certificate of nonconformance. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2107,
4/11/1995]
1. A certificate of use shall be a statement issued by the Zoning Officer
setting forth that a building, parcel and/or use of land complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
2. No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no structure or part of a
structure, hereafter erected, substantially altered or changed in use
shall be occupied or used until a certificate of use shall have been
issued by the Zoning Officer.
3. A certificate of use or occupancy of vacant land or for a change in the
use of land or for a change in the use of an existing building either for a
whole or part of a new building or for the alteration of an existing
building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
building or zoning permit and shall be issued or denied with 15 days
after a final inspection and approval by the Zoning Officer.
4. A certificate of use for changing or extending a nonconforming use,
existing at the time of the passage of this chapter, or of an amendment
thereto, shall be applied for and granted by the Zoning Hearing Board
before any such nonconforming use shall be changed or extended. Such
certificate shall be issued within 15 days after a final inspection by the
Zoning Officer.
5. A record of all certificates of use shall be kept on file in the office of the
Zoning Officer and a copy shall be furnished on request to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
1. A certificate of nonconformance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer to
the owner of any property which, at the time of the effective date of this
chapter, is identified as containing a nonconforming use or structure.
The owner's property and the issuance date of such certificate shall be
registered in the records of the Township as follows:
A. The certificate of nonconformance shall set forth in detail all of the
nonconforming conditions of said property.
B. A copy of the certificate of nonconformance shall be retained and
filed by the Zoning Officer for the Township registration.
§ 27-2105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-2107
1:703
§ 27-2108. Special exceptions. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2108, 4/11/1995]
Applications for any special exceptions to be granted permitted by this
chapter shall be made to the Zoning Hearing Board through the Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board shall refer the matter to the Planning
Commission for report thereon as to its effect on the Comprehensive Plan
of the Township of South Hanover pursuant to § 27-2112, Subsection 1D, of
this chapter.
§ 27-2109. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2109, 4/11/1995]
Conditional uses such as provided herein shall be allowed or denied by the
Township Supervisors pursuant to public notice and hearing and pursuant
to the standards set forth in this chapter. Applications for a conditional
use specified in this chapter shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer who
shall refer such applications to the Township Planning Commission for
review and comment. The Planning Commission shall review the application
pursuant to the standards set forth in this chapter and submit its
recommendations to the Township Supervisors. In allowing a conditional
use the Township Supervisors may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 27-2110. Appeals and applications. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2110, 4/11/
1995]
C. The certificate shall be for the purposes of insuring the owner, his
heirs, successors and assigns the right to continue a
nonconforming use in accordance with the regulations of this
chapter.
1. An appeal or application for an amendment, special exception,
conditional use or variance from the terms of this chapter shall be filed
with the Zoning Officer and shall contain:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected
by such proposal as well as names and addresses of all adjoining
property owners.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by
such proposal.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the appeal
or application is filed and reasons why it should be allowed or a
statement of the section of this chapter governing the situation in
§ 27-2107 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-2110
1:704
§ 27-2111. Violations. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2111, 4/11/1995]
which the alleged erroneous ruling is being appealed and reasons
for the appeal.
F. A reasonably accurate description of the present improvements
and the additions intended to be made under this application,
indicating the size of such proposed improvement, materials and
general construction thereof. In addition, there shall be attached a
plot plan of the real estate to be affected, as required to accompany
applications for building permits indicating the location and size of
the lot and locations of improvements now erected and proposed to
be erected thereon.
G. Any other pertinent data required by the Zoning Hearing Board,
Township Supervisors and/or Zoning Officer as appropriate to their
individual authorities set forth in this chapter.
1. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter, failure to secure a
permit, Zoning Hearing Board or Township supervisor's certification,
when required, previous to the erection, construction, extension or
addition to a building or failure to secure a certificate of use shall be
violations of this chapter.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter has been served by the Zoning Officer on the
owner, agent or occupant or contractor, such violation shall be
discontinued immediately.
(2) All appeals from determinations by the Zoning Officer under
this section shall be to the Zoning Hearing Board within 30
days of the date of the determination.
B. Causes of action. In case any building, structure or land is or is
proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the
proper officer of the Township or any aggrieved owner or tenant of
real property who shows that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
landscaping of land or to prevent, in or about such premises, any
act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any
such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that
action shall be served upon the Township at least 30 days prior to
the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on
the Township Supervisors. No such action may be maintained until
such notice has been given.
C. Enforcement remedies.
§ 27-2110 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-2111
1:705
§ 27-2112. Zoning Hearing Board. [Ord. No. 2-1995, § 2112, 4/11/
1995]
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has
violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation
unless the district justice determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis
for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in
which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney fees collected for the violation shall be paid over to
the Township of South Hanover.
(2) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order
of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or
interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the
Township the right to commence an action for enforcement
pursuant to this section.
1. The Township Supervisors shall appoint a Zoning Hearing Board which
shall be composed of three members, organized, empowered and
conducted in accordance with Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10901) existing or hereafter as
amended and supplemented (the "code"). The duly established Zoning
Hearing Board shall have the following functions:
A. Hearings. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and
make decisions in accordance with Section 908 of the code. Notice
shall be given to the public, the applicant, the county Planning
Commission, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the Zoning
Hearing Board shall designate and any person who has made
timely request for the same. Notice shall be given at such time and
in such manner prescribed by adopted rules of the Zoning Hearing
Board. The Township Supervisors may establish reasonable fees,
§ 27-2111 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-2112
1:706
based on cost, to be paid by the applicant and persons requesting
any notice or materials not required by ordinance.
B. Jurisdiction. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following
matters as set forth in the code.
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use
ordinance except those brought before the Board of
Supervisors pursuant to Sections 609(1) and 916.1(a)(2) of the
code.
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer
including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any
permit or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance
of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to
register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within
a land use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and
the Flood Hazard Ordinance [Article XIV of this chapter] or
such provisions within a land use ordinance pursuant to
Section 910.2 of the code.
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or the
Flood Hazard Ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance pursuant to Section 912.1 of the code.
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency
charged with the administration of any transfer of
development rights or performance density provisions of this
chapter.
(8) Appeals from the Zoning Officer or Township Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provisions thereof
with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving applications under Article V or VII
of the code.
C. Variances. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for
variances where it is alleged that the provisions of this chapter
§ 27-2112 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-2112
1:707
inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall prescribe the form of application and require
application to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may
grant a variance provided the following findings are made where
relevant in a given case:
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located.
(2) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(5) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
D. Special exceptions. Special exceptions may be granted or denied by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to expressed standards and
criteria contained in this chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance
with such standards and criteria and prescribe the application form
to be used. In granting a special exception the Zoning Hearing
Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall pursue the following procedure:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board's decision to grant a permit for use
by special exception shall be made only after application,
public notice and a public hearing. Such permit shall apply
specifically to the application and plans submitted and
presented at this public hearing. Any subsequent amendments
or additions shall be subject to review and public hearing by
the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
§ 27-2112 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-2112
1:708
(2) No application for a permit shall be granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board for any special exception use until said board
has first received and considered an advisory report on the
application from the Planning Commission with respect to the
location of such use in relation to the needs and growth pattern
of the Township of South Hanover and, where appropriate,
with reference to the adequacy of the site area and the
arrangement of buildings, driveways, parking areas, off-street
loading and unloading spaces and other pertinent features of
the proposal.
(3) The Planning Commission shall have 30 days from the date of
its receipt of the application within which to file its report
thereon. In the event that the Planning Commission shall fail to
file its report within 30 days such application shall be deemed
to have been approved by the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission may have representation at the public
hearing held by the Zoning Hearing Board on such application.
After receipt of the report the Zoning Hearing Board shall hear
the application in the same manner and under the same
procedure as it is empowered by law and ordinance to hear
cases and make exceptions to the provisions of this chapter.
The Zoning Hearing Board may thereafter direct the Zoning
Officer to issue a permit if, in its judgment, the request will not
be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the
Township.
(4) A special exception use for which a permit is granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be construed to be a conforming use.
E. Parties appellant before the Zoning Hearing Board. Appeals raising
the substantive validity of any land use ordinance (except those to
be brought before the Township Supervisors) pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, procedural questions or alleged
defects in the process of enactment or adoption of a land use
ordinance or from the determination of the Zoning Officer
including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit or
failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease
and desist order or the registration or refusal to register any
nonconforming use, structure or lot, from a determination of the
Zoning Officer or Township Engineer in the reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management
insofar as the same relate to development not involving subdivision
and development or planned residential development may be filed
with the Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or
agency of the Township or any person aggrieved. Requests for a
variance and for special exception may be filed with the Board by
any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such
landowner.
§ 27-2112 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-2112
1:709
F. Time limitation.
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the
Zoning Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application
for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by
the Township if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal
or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person
alleges and proves that he failed to receive adequate notice of
such approval. If such person has succeeded to his interest
after such approval, adequate notice to his predecessor in
interest shall be deemed adequate notice to him. The failure of
anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse
decision on a tentative plan or from an adverse decision by the
Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of this chapter or
an amendment hereto or map or an amendment thereto shall
preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case
where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative approval.
(2) No issue of alleged defect in the process of enactment of any
ordinance or map or any amendment thereto shall be raised in
any proceeding filed with the Board later than 30 days from the
time such ordinance, map or amendment takes effect unless
the person raising such issues alleges and proves that he failed
to receive adequate notice of the enactment or amendment. If
such person has succeeded to his interest after the enactment
of the ordinances, adequate notice to his predecessor in
interest shall be deemed adequate notice to him.
(3) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall
be filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the
determination is issued.
G. Stay of proceedings.
(1) Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning
Hearing Board and during its pendency before the Zoning
Hearing Board, all land development pursuant to any
challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer
or of any agency or body and all official action thereunder shall
be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate
agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such
stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which
case the development or official action shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board or by the court having jurisdiction of
zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer
or other appropriate agency or body. When an application for
development, preliminary or final, has been duly approved and
proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed
with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons other than the
§ 27-2112 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § 27-2112
1:710
§ 27-2113. Interpretation, purpose and conflict. [Ord. No. 2-1995,
§ 2113, 4/11/1995]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere with or
abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances; provided, that
where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings
or premises or upon the height of a building or requires larger spaces
than are imposed by such other rules, easements, covenants, restrictions,
regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post
bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the
Board.
(2) The question whether or not such petition should be granted
and the amount of the bond shall be within the sound
discretion of the court. An order denying a petition for bond
shall be interlocutory. An order directing the responding party
to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
§ 27-2112 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-2113
1:711
Appendix
Appendix A
ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
§ A-101. Annexation of territory.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
2-1971 11/8/1971 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Township a section of the Township of East
Hanover, adjacent to and north of the Township of
South Hanover
Appendix B
BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
§ B-101. Bond issues and loans.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-3-1960 3/7/1960 Increasing the indebtedness of the Township in the
amount of $6,000 for the purpose of meeting
current expenses and purchasing a road grader
1-1969 9/3/1969 Increasing the indebtedness of the Township in the
amount of $35,000 for the purpose of providing
funds for capital expenditures for certain municipal
improvements
39-1974 7/9/1974 Increasing the indebtedness of the Township in the
amount of $41,000 for the purpose of purchasing a
road grader
52-1975 12/23/
1975
Approving a report with respect to proceeding to
qualify certain lease rental debt of this Township,
subject to exclusion as self-liquidating debt, for
exclusion from the appropriate debt limit of this
Township as self-liquidating debt
53-1975 12/
23-1975
Increasing the indebtedness of the Township in the
amount of $156,400 for the purpose of financing a
sewer project
66-1977 5/10/1977 Increasing the indebtedness of the Township in the
amount of $520 for the purpose of financing a
sewer project
106-1980 5/5/1980 Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of
$250,000 for the purpose of financing a sewer
project
§ 27-2113 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § B-101
1:712
Ord./Res. Date Subject
3-1993 12/14/
1993
Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of
$390,000 for the purpose of financing a sewer
project
10-1999 11/23/
1999
Incurring lease rental indebtedness of the
Township in the amount of $550,000 for the
purpose of alterations and additional to the sewer
system
R-6-2015 3/21/2013 Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of
$5,158,000 for the purpose of providing a portion
of the cost of acquiring, constructing, enlarging,
improving and/or extending its Municipal Complex
and Emergency Services/Fire Station
Ord. No.
2-2015
8-11-2015 Authorizing the issuance of a general obligation
note in the maximum principal amount of
$5,158,000 to provide funds for new buildings to be
used as Township administrative offices, a
firehouse, storage of Township equipment and
supplies and other Township purposes
Res. No.
6-2015
7-14-2015 Accepting a bid or proposal for purchase, at private
sale, of a proposed general obligation note of the
Township
Ord. No.
1-2017
1-24-2017 Authorizing the issuance of a general obligation
bond in the maximum principal amount of
$5,158,000 to provide funds for refunding of
outstanding notes and the financing of a capital
project for new buildings to be used as Township
administrative offices, a firehouse, storage of
Township equipment and supplies and other
Township purposes
Appendix C
FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
§ C-101. Franchises and services.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
O-2-1969 10/7/1969 Granting to Garden Spot Cable T.V. Services, Inc.,
and its successors or assigns, a franchise for a
period of 25 years
R-3-1970 2/9/1970 Providing for an agreement with Pennsylvania
Power and Light Company for the furnishing of
streetlighting for Pleasant View Road
§ B-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § C-101
1:713
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-5-1970 7/13/1970 Providing for the assessment of the cost of the
maintenance of lights for a portion of Pleasant View
Road
R-1-1972 5/8/1972 Providing for the assessment of the cost of the
maintenance of lights for East Main Street,
between Hanover Street and East Canal Street,
and West Main Street, between Hanover Street and
West Canal Street
R-40-1974 2/26/1974 Providing for the reassessment of the cost of the
maintenance of lights for a portion of Pleasant View
Road
R-56-1975 1/6/1975 Providing for the reassessment of the cost of the
maintenance of lights for a portion of Pleasant View
Road
R-57-1975 1/6/1975 Providing for assessments for lighting East Main
Street between Hanover Street and East Canal
Street, and West Main Street, between Hanover
Street and West Canal Street
R-58-1975 1/6/1975 Providing for assessments for lighting North and
South Hanover Streets from Rt. 39 to West Canal
Street; Rt. 39 from North Hanover Street to a pt.
530' northwest; and Sunny Lane from Rt. 30 to
Broad View Lane
R-81-1976 1/5/1976 Providing for the assessment of the cost of the
maintenance of lights for a portion of Pleasant View
Road
R-82-1976 1/5/1976 Providing assessments for lighting North and South
Hanover Streets from Rt. 39 to a point 425' south
of West Canal Street; Rt. 39 from N. Hanover
Street to a pt. 530' northwest thereof; and Sunny
Lane from Rt. 39 to Broad View Lane
R-83-1976 1/5/1976 Providing assessments for lighting East Main
Street between Hanover Street and East Canal
Street; and West Main Street between Hanover
Street and West Canal Street
R-111-19771/3/1977 Providing for the assessment of the cost of the
maintenance of lights for a portion of Pleasant View
Road
R-112-19771/3/1977 Providing for assessments for lighting East Main
Street between Hanover Street and East Canal
Street; and West Main Street between Hanover
Street and West Canal Street
§ C-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § C-101
1:714
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-113-19771/3/1977 Providing for assessments for lighting Hanover
Street, Hgh. Rt. 39 and Sunny Lane
R-125-19781/3/1978 Providing for assessment for lighting a portion of
Pleasant View Road
R-126-19781/3/1978 Providing for assessments for lighting East Main
Street between Hanover Street and East Canal
Street; and West Main Street between Hanover
Street and West Canal Street
R-127-19781/3/1978 Providing for cost of the maintenance of lights
beginning at the intersection of North Hanover
Street and Rt. 30, continuing south on North and
South Hanover Streets to a pt. south of intersection
of West Canal and South Hanover Street; beginning
at the intersection of North Hanover Street and
Street Hgh. Rt. 30 and continuing northwest on Rt.
39 to a pt. 530' from intersection; beginning at the
intersection of Rt. 39 and Sunny Lane, continuing
east to the intersection of Sunny Lane and Broad
View Lane
R-139-19791/2/1978 Providing for the assessment for lighting a portion
of Pleasant View Road
R-140-19791/2/1979 Providing for assessments for lighting East Main
Street between Hanover Street and East Canal
Street; and West Main Street between Hanover
Street and West Canal Street
R-141-19791/2/1979 Providing for lighting beginning at the intersection
of North Hanover Street and Rt. 39, continuing
south on North and South Hanover Streets to a
point 425' south of West Canal and South Hanover
Street; beginning at intersection of North Hanover
Street and Street Hgh. Rt. 39, north on Rt. 39 to a
pt. approximately 530' from intersection; beginning
at the intersection of Rt. 39 and Sunny Lane, east
to intersection of Sunny Lane and Broad View Lane
R-152-19801/7/1980 Providing for the assessment of streetlighting for a
portion of Pleasant View Road between 2 bridges
crossing Swatara Creek
§ C-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § C-101
1:715
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-153-19801/7/1980 Providing for the assessment of streetlighting on
North and South Hanover Streets from the
intersection of North Hanover Street and Rt. 30 to
a pt. 425' south of intersection of West Canal and
South Hanover Street; beginning at intersection of
North Hanover Street and Street Hgh. Rt. 39 north
to Rt. 39 to a pt. 530' from the intersection;
beginning at the intersection of Rt. 39 and Sunny
Lane, east to intersection of Sunny Lane and Broad
View Lane
R-154-19801/7/1980 Providing for the furnishing of lighting on East
Main Street between Hanover Street and East
Canal Street; and West Main Street between
Hanover Street and West Canal Street
R-164-19811/5/1981 Providing for the assessment of the cost and
expense of the maintenance of lights for a portion
of Pleasant View Road
R-165-19811/5/1981 Providing for the lighting of East Main Street
between Hanover Street and East Canal Street;
and West Main Street between Hanover Street and
West Canal Street
R-166-19811/5/1981 Providing for the lighting from the intersection of
North Hanover Street and Rt. 39, south to a pt.
425' south of intersection of West Canal Street and
South Hanover Street; beginning at intersection of
North Hanover Street and St. Hgh. Rt. 39,
northwest on Rt. 39 to a pt. 530' from intersection;
beginning at intersection of Rt. 39 and Sunny Lane,
east to Broadview Street
R-174-19821/4/1982 Providing for the lighting of Pleasant View Road
between 2 bridges crossing the Swatara Creek
R-175-19821/4/1982 Providing for the lighting of East Main Street
between Hanover Street and East Canal Street and
West Main Street between Hanover Street and
West Canal Street
§ C-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § C-101
1:716
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-176-19821/4/1982 Providing for the lighting of an area beginning at
the intersection of N. Hanover Street and Rt. 39,
continuing south on North and South Hanover
Street to a point approximately 425' south of the
intersection of West Canal and South Hanover
Street; beginning at the intersection of North
Hanover Street and State Highway Rt. 39, and
continuing in a northwest direction on Rt. 39 to a
pt. approximately 530' from the intersection;
beginning at the intersection of Rt. 39 and Sunny
Lane, continuing in an easterly direction to the
intersection of Sunny Lane and Broadview Street
R-183-19831/3/1983 Providing for the assessment of the cost and
expense of the maintenance of lights for a portion
of Pleasant view Road
R-184-19831/3/1983 Providing for the assessment of the cost and
expense of the maintenance of lights for the area of
East Main Street between Hanover Street and West
Canal Street
R-185-19831/3/1983 Providing for the assessment of the cost and
expense of the maintenance of lights for a portion
of Pleasant View Road
R-197-19841/3/1984 Providing for the assessment of the cost and
expense of the maintenance of lights for a portion
of Pleasant View Road
R-198-19841/3/1984 Providing for the assessment of the cost and
expense of the maintenance of lights for a portion
of Union Deposit, Sunny Lane and Broadview
R-199-19841/3/1984 Providing for the assessment of the cost and
expense of lights for a portion of Union Deposit
R-201-19843/13/1984 Providing for an agreement with Pennsylvania
Power and Light Company for removal of
streetlighting from portions of Pleasant View Road
R-202-19843/13/1984 Providing for an agreement with Pennsylvania
Power and Light Company for removal of
streetlight from portions of Pleasant View Road and
reimbursing taxpayers for unused portion of taxes
R-1-1990 1/2/1990 Assessing the cost of maintenance of lights on East
Main Street between Hanover Street and East
Canal Street; and West Main Street between
Hanover Street and West Canal Street
§ C-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § C-101
1:717
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-2-1990 1/2/1990 Assessing the cost of maintenance of lights at
intersection of North Hanover Street and Rt. 39
south to a pt. 425' south of intersection of West
Canal Street and South Hanover Street;
intersection of North Hanover Street and Street
Hgh. Rt. 39 to a pt. 530' from intersection;
intersection of Rt. 39 and Sunny Lane east to
intersection of Sunny Lane and Broadview Street
R-9-1990 5/22/1990 Granting to Pennsylvania Power and Light
Company permission to operate and maintain its
facilities in the Township
R-1-1991 1/7/1991 Assessing the cost of maintenance of lights on East
Main Street between Hanover Street and East
Canal Street and West Main Street between
Hanover Street and West Canal Street
R-2-1991 1/7/1991 Assessing the cost of maintenance of lights
beginning at the intersection of North Hanover
Street and Rt. 39 continuing south on North and
South Hanover Streets to a pt. approximately 425'
south of the intersection of West Canal and South
Hanover Street; beginning at the intersection of
North Hanover Streets and State Highway 39 to a
pt. approximately 530' from the intersection;
beginning at the intersection of Rt. 39 and Sunny
Lane continuing in an easterly direction to the
intersection of Sunny Lane and Broadview Street
R-1-1992 1/6/1992 Assessing the cost of maintenance of lights on East
Main Street between Hanover Street and East
Canal Street and on West Main Street between
Hanover Street and West Canal Street
R-2-1992 1/6/1992 Assessing the cost of maintenance of lights
beginning at the intersection of North Hanover
Street and Rt. 39 continuing south on North and
South Hanover Streets to a pt. approximately 425'
south of the intersection of West Canal and South
Hanover Street beginning at the intersection of
North Hanover Street and State Highway 39 to a
pt. approximately 530' from the intersection;
beginning at the intersection of Rt. 39 and Sunny
Lane, continuing in an easterly direction to the
intersection of Sunny Lane and Broadview Street
§ C-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § C-101
1:718
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-17-1992 12/22/
1922
Assessing the cost of maintenance of lights
beginning at the intersection of North Hanover
Street and Rt. 39 continuing south or north on
South Hanover Streets to a pt. approximately 425'
south of the intersection of West Canal and South
Hanover Street; beginning at the intersection of
North Hanover Street and State Highway 39 to a
pt. approximately 530' from the intersection;
beginning at the intersection of Rt. 39 and Sunny
Lane, continuing in an easterly direction to the
intersection of Sunny Lane and Broadview Street
R-18-1992 12/22/
1922
Assessing the cost of maintenance of lights on East
Main Street between Hanover Street and East
Canal Street and West Main Street between
Hanover Street and West Canal Street
O-1-1995 1/24/1995 Granting a franchise to Suburban Cable T.V., Inc.,
to own, operate and maintain a cable
communication system in the Township
O-6-2008 10/14/
2008
Authorizing the execution of a franchise agreement
with Verizon Pennsylvania, Inc.
R-9-2013 7/9/2013 Amending the Municipal Snow Removal
Supplement by adding 1.04 miles to State Route
2010
R-12-2013 12/23/
2013
Assessing the cost and expense of the maintenance
of streetlights for various streets within the
Township
R-9-2014 12/30/
2014
Assessing the cost and expense of the maintenance
streetlight for various streets within the Township
Appendix D
GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
§ D-101. Governmental and intergovernmental affairs.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-12-1954 12/6/1954 Authorizing the Township to become a participant
in the Social Security System and extending
benefits to employees and officers
R-4-1968 5/7/1968 Recognizing the Tri-County Regional Planning
Commission as the area-wide agency designated to
perform regional planning in the Harrisburg
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area
§ C-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:719
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-6-1970 9/14/1970 Providing for the Lower Dauphin Local
Governments Association Interlocal Agreement to
be in existence for an initial period of 1 year,
thereafter continuing from year to year without the
necessity of formal renewal
R-2-1972 11/13/
1972
Providing for the expressing of interest in securing
insurance under the National Flood Insurance
Program and agreeing to comply with the
regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program
R-3-1972 11/13/
1972
Authorizing the implementation of the objectives of
the Flood Insurance Program
O-34-1973 1/9/1973 Signifying the joint desire and intention of the
municipalities of the Borough of Highspire, the
Borough of Hummelstown, the Township of Lower
Swatara, the Borough of Middletown, the Borough
of Penbrook, the Township of South Hanover, the
Township of Swatara and the Borough of Steelton
to furnish a solid waste disposal system
O-46-1975 8/12/1975 Authorizing the execution of a Solid Waste
management contract with the Lower Dauphin
Council of Governments Solid Waste Authority
R-121-19777/12/1977 Approving withdrawal of the Borough of Highspire
and the Borough of Penbrook from the Lower
Dauphin Council of Governments Solid Waste
Program
O-172-198110/27/
1981
Authorizing the adoption of the August 8, 1981,
PennDOT road occupancy permit fees and
exemptions
R-179-19823/23/1982 Adopting the Pennsylvania State Association of
Boroughs Deferred Compensation Plan for
voluntary participation of eligible Township
employees
R-186-19832/22/1983 Providing for a Response Plan in case of an
incident at the Three Mile Island Nuclear Station
R-187-19834/12/1983 Designating the Harrisburg Credit Bureau as
Collection Agent for the Township of South
Hanover
R-204-19849/11/1984 Authorizing the adoption of a handicapped
nondiscrimination policy and establishment of a
handicapped nondiscrimination grievance
committee and procedure
§ D-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § D-101
1:720
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-211-19854/9/1985 Providing that the Township will, from time to time,
designate in writing to the Lower Dauphin Council
of Governments those joint bidding programs (for
materials and equipment) in which it wishes to
participate
R-215-19858/13/1985 Expressing the recognition of the fact that the
existing Dauphin County Solid Waste Management
Plan is outdated and in need of revision to reflect
current conditions
R-216-198510/8/1985 Requesting authorization form the Pennsylvania
Department of General Services to participate in
purchase contracts of said department
R-8-1987 1987 Resolving that the Board of Supervisors supports
the formation of the Dauphin County
(Intermunicipal) Solid Waste Management
Authority by the Board of Commissioners of the
County of Dauphin, for the purpose of addressing
county wide solid waste management needs
R-13-1987 12/22/
1987
Authorizing the Township of South Hanover to join
with other local government units as a settlor of
the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment
Trust for the purpose of purchasing shares of the
trust
R-6-1988 2/9/1988 Authorizing Lower Dauphin School District to
exonerate Act 511 Per Capita Taxes for South
Hanover Township
R-12-1988 12/13/
1988
Authorizing the Township of South Hanover to join
with other local government units as a settlor of
the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment
Trust for the purpose of purchasing shares of the
trust
R-9-1989 9/26/1986 Requesting the Borough of Highspire, the Borough
of Hummelstown, the Borough of Middletown, the
Borough of Penbrook, the Borough of Steelton,
Lower Swatara Township, South Hanover
Township, Swatara Township and West Hanover
Township to approve and endorse the termination
of the Lower Dauphin Council of Governments
Solid Waste Authority
R-14-1990 5/22/1990 Appointing Statewide Tax Recovery, Inc., as
delinquent Tax Collector to collect all delinquent
Township per capita taxes
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:721
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-22-1990 8/28/1990 Supporting the passage of legislation to authorize
municipalities to impose fair and equitable impact
fees on new development to pay for the costs of the
infrastructure improvements needed to serve that
development
R-6-1991 7/9/1991 Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township fund and providing for the application of
such transferred moneys
R-11-1991 10/8/1991 Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township general fund and providing for the
application of such transferred moneys
R-12-1991 10/22/
1991
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township general fund and providing for the
application of such transferred moneys
R-13-1991 11/12/
1991
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township general fund and providing for the
application of such transferred moneys
R-14-1991 11/12/
1991
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT sewer revenue
fund to the Township sewer revenue fund and
providing for the application of such transferred
moneys
R-15-1991 11/12/
1991
Adopting a new Comprehensive Plan pursuant to
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code
R-16-1991 11/26/
1991
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township general fund and providing for the
application of such transferred moneys
R-17-1991 12/23/
1991
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township general fund and providing for the
application of such transferred moneys
R-3-1992 1/28/1992 Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township general fund and providing for the
application of such transferred moneys
§ D-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § D-101
1:722
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-6-1992 4/7/1992 Supporting the filing of an application for a State
Planning Assistance Grant for the preparation of a
municipal zoning ordinance
R-7-1992 4/14/1992 Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township general fund and providing for the
application of such transferred moneys
R-10-1992 6/9/1992 Imposing a charge for returned checks
R-11-1992 8/11/1992 Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT sewer revenue
fund to the Township sewer revenue fund and
providing for the application of such transferred
moneys
R-12-1992 8/25/1992 Requesting permission to participate in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Cooperative
Purchasing Program
R-13-1992 11/10/
1992
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT sewer revenue
fund to the Township sewer revenue Fund and
providing for the application of such transferred
moneys
R-19-1992 1992 Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-20-1992 12/22/
1992
Appointing Grace, Reed and Kreider, P.C., public
accountants, to audit the accounts of the Township
of South Hanover and its officers for the 1992 fiscal
year
O-1-1993 3/23/1993 Providing for entering into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement with other municipalities
located within Dauphin County for the purpose of
establishing a zone emergency management
agency for those participating municipalities
O-2-1993 4/13/1993 Authorizing the adoption and execution of a mutual
aid agreement for reciprocal emergency assistance
by and between certain political subdivisions
R-8-1993 7/27/1993 Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the general budgetary
reserve fund to the Township sewer revenue fund
and providing for the application of such
transferred moneys
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:723
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-4-1995 7/11/1995 Resolving to provide winter traffic services for the
commonwealth during the winter seasons of
1995-96, 1996-97, 1997-98, 1998-99
R-10-1995 12/12/
1995
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered moneys
of the Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township general fund and providing for the
application of such transferred moneys
R-11-1995 12/12/
1995
Authorizing the locally elected Tax Collector to
provide real estate tax certifications and
authorizing said Tax Collector to collect and retain
a fee for such service
R-15-1995 12/26/
1995
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-16-1995 12/26/
1995
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-17-1995 12/26/
1995
Recognizing and expressing appreciation for the
service of Frank Tomazin
R-18-1995 12/26/
1995
Appointing Grace, Reed and Kreider, P.C., a firm of
certified public accountants, to audit the accounts
of the Township of South Hanover and its officers
for the 1995 fiscal year
R-2-1996 2/17/1996 Authorizing Edna Young to execute on behalf of the
Township all required forms and documents for the
purpose of obtaining financial assistance under the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency
Assistance Act
R-3-1996 3/12/1996 Authorizing Edna Young to execute on behalf of the
Township all required forms and documents for the
purpose of obtaining financial assistance under the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency
Assistance Act
R-4-1996 3/12/1996 Adopting a drug and alcohol personnel policy
applicable to employees and applicants for
employment who are required to have a CDL
license for their employment by the Township
O-1-1996 3/26/1996 Joining with other local government units as a
member of the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental
Risk Management Association for the purpose of
entering into an intergovernmental contract to
form a local government risk pool
§ D-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § D-101
1:724
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-6-1996 8/13/1996 Designating Fulton Bank as depository for
Township funds
R-7-1996 9/24/1996 Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from the PLGIT general fund to the
Township general fund
R-11-1996 12/30/
1996
Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from one account to another
R-12-1996 12/30/
1996
Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from one account to another
R-13-1996 12/30/
1996
Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from one account to another
R-1-1997 1/6/1997 Appointing Grace, Reed and Kreider, P.C., a firm of
certified public accountants to audit the Township's
accounts
R-7-1997 11/11/
1997
Applying for grants to PA Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources for planning
implementation and technical assistance for the
Swatara Creek Watershed
R-11-1997 12/23/
1997
Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from one account to another
R-12-1997 12/23/
1997
Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from one account to another
R-13-1997 12/23/
1997
Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from one account to another
R-1-1998 1/5/1998 Appointing Grace, Reed and Kreider, P.C., a firm of
certified public accountants to audit the Township's
accounts
R-2-1998 5/26/1998 Supporting the Pennsylvania Civil Justice Coalition
R-3-1998 6/9/1998 Supporting the efforts of the EMS services to
develop more effective emergency medical services
R-7-1998 9/8/1998 Supporting AMP against the hostile takeover by
Allied Signal
R-8-1998 11/10/
1998
Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from the PLGIT capital reserve fund to
the Township general fund
R-9-1998 12/22/
1998
Providing for the assessment of cost and expense of
the maintenance of streetlights on various streets
of the Township
R-13-1998 12/22/
1998
Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from one account to another
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:725
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-14-1998 12/22/
1998
Transferring unencumbered monies of the
Township from one account to another
R-1-1999 1/4/1999 Appointing Grace, Reed and Kreider, P.C., a firm of
certified public accountants to audit the Township's
accounts
R-3-1999 5/25/1999 Requesting permission to participate in the
Pennsylvania Department of General Services
cooperative purchasing program for the
procurement of supplies, services or construction
R-4-1999 8/10/1999 Supporting the Swatara Creek Greenway and River
Conservation Plan and the Swatara Creek
Recreation and Conservation District Study
R-5-1999 8/24/1999 Recognizing the contributions of John Kohr to the
citizens of the Township and his service to the
Township
R-8-1999 11/23/
1999
Authorizing the Township to join with other local
government units as a settler of the Pennsylvania
Local Government Investment Trust for the
purpose of purchasing shares of the trust
R-9-1999 11/23/
1999
Authorizing and approving a lease termination
agreement, between this Township and South
Hanover Township sewer authority
R-10-1999 12/28/
1999
Providing for the assessment of cost and expense
for the maintenance of streetlights for various
streets within the Township
R-14-1999 12/28/
1999
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-15-1999 12/28/
1999
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-16-1999 12/28/
1999
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-1-2000 1/4/2000 Appointing Grace, Reed and Kreider, P.C., a firm of
certified public accountants to examine and audit
the accounts of the Township for the 1999 fiscal
year and setting the compensation for such
services
§ D-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § D-101
1:726
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-6-2000 9/12/2000 Approving a settlement agreement between UGI
Utilities, Inc., and South Hanover Township in
connection with an easement condemnation
proceeding and damages due to the Township by
reason thereof
R-7-2000 9/26/2000 Supporting the Swatara Creek Watershed
Conservation Plan
R-9-2000 11/14/
2000
Joining the Lower Dauphin Area Regional Planning
Group
R-10-2000 11/14/
2000
Authorizing participation by the Township in the
Dauphin County purchasing cooperative
R-11-2000 12/26/
2000
Providing for the assessment of cost and expense
for maintenance of streetlights
R-13-2000 12/26/
2000
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-14-2000 12/26/
2000
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-15-2000 12/26/
2000
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-1-2000 1/4/2000 Appointing Grace, Reed and Kreider, P.C., a firm of
certified public accountants to examine and audit
the accounts of the Township for the 1999 fiscal
year and setting the compensation for such
services
R-2-2001 1/2/2001 Appointing Grace, Reed and Kreider, P.C., a firm of
certified public accountants to examine and audit
the accounts of the Township for the 2000 fiscal
year and setting the compensation for such
services
R-4-2001 2/13/2001 Declaring support for the Route 39/743 study
group
R-6-2001 3/13/2001 Adopting a procedure for the sale of personal
property of the Township
R-7-2001 3/13/2001 Appointing a firm of certified public accountants to
audit all of the accounts of the Township for the
2000 fiscal year
O-1-2001 5/22/2001 Authorizing intergovernmental cooperation in joint
purchases by South Hanover Township and other
local governmental units
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:727
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-9-2001 8/14/2001 Endorsing the termination of the Lower Dauphin
Council of Governments Solid Waste Authority
R-10-2001 10/23/
2001
Authorizing submission of a grant application to
the Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources in connection with the proposed
Meadows Park Recreation Development project
R-11-2001 12/11/
2001
Authorizing participation in the PACC (PA Capital
City) Automotive and Equipment Contract
R-14-2001 12/26/
2001
Providing for the assessment of cost and expense
for the maintenance of streetlights for various
streets within the Township
R-16-2001 12/26/
2001
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-17-2001 12/26/
2001
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-18-2001 12/26/
2001
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-2-2002 1/22/2002 Appointing a firm of certified public accountants to
audit all of the accounts of the Township for the
2001 fiscal year
R-4-2002 5/14/2002 Consenting to the transfer of control and internal
reorganization due to the merger of Comcast
Corporation with AT&T Broadband Corp.
R-5-2002 5/28/2002 Authorizing the locally elected Tax Collector to
provide real estate tax certifications and
authorizing said Tax Collector to collect and retain
a fee for such service
R-6-2002 5/28/2002 Supporting the Route 39/Route 743 study
R-8-2002 12/23/
2002
Providing for the assessment of cost and expense
for the maintenance of streetlights for various
streets within the Township
R-10-2002 12/23/
2002
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-11-2002 12/23/
2002
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
§ D-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § D-101
1:728
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-12-2002 12/23/
2002
Providing for the transfer of unencumbered monies
of the Township from one Township account to
another
R-1-2003 1/6/2003 Appointing a firm of certified public accountants to
audit all of the accounts of the Township for the
2002 fiscal year
R-4-2003 4/8/2003 Authorizing the manager of engineering and
community services to execute for and in behalf of
the Township all required forms and documents for
the purpose of obtaining financial assistance under
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and
Emergency Assistance Act
R-5-2003 8/12/2003 Confirming the appointment of the members and
alternate member of the Township Zoning Hearing
Board and reestablishing the terms of office for
said members and alternate member
R-4A-2003 9/9/2003 Restatement of the Township Nonuniformed
Pension Plan as found on file in the Township Office
O-2-2008 7/22/2008 Authorizing and entering into an agreement for
police protection with the Township of Derry and
authorizing the adoption of the joint municipal
agreement for law enforcement services
O-7-2008 11/11/
2008
Authorizing the Township to join other political
subdivisions as a member of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Health Insurance Cooperative (PMHIC)
R-1-2014 1/6/2014 Appointing a firm of certified public accountants to
audit all of the accounts of the Township for the
2013 fiscal year
O-1-2014 12/30/
2014
Authorizing the participation of the Township in the
PSATS unemployment compensation group trust
R-1-2015 1/5/2015 Appointing a firm of certified public accountants to
audit all of the accounts of the Township for the
2014 fiscal year
R-3-2015 1/13/2015 Adopt and place into immediate effect the
Emergency Operations Plan of Dauphin County
Res. No.
5-2015
6/9/2015 Authorizing the submission of a traffic signal
application to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation
Res. No.
7-2015
7/28/2015 Authorizing the signing of an agreement
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:729
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. No.
9-2015
11/24/
2015
Adopting the Dauphin County 2015 Hazard
Mitigation Plan as the official Hazard Mitigation
Plan of the Township
Ord. No.
3-2015
12/29/
2015
Authorizing an intergovernmental cooperation
agreement for police protection with the Township
of Derry
Res. No.
13-2015
12/29/
2015
Recognizing Robert E. Cassel for his years of
service to the Township
Res. No.
14-2015
12/29/
2015
Recognizing Edward M. Mimnagh for his years of
service to the Township
Res. No.
1-2016
1/4/2016 Appointing a firm of certified public accountants to
audit all of the accounts of the Township for the
2015 fiscal year
Res. No.
5-2016
3/22/2016 Authorizing the signing of an grant agreement for
the South Hanover Township park improvements
project
Res. No.
6-2016
3/22/2016 Authorizing the execution of all required forms and
documents for the purpose of obtaining financial
assistance under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act
Res. No.
7-2016
8/23/2016 Urging the General Assembly to free municipalities
and taxpayers from the undue fiscal burden placed
on them by the Pennsylvania Prevailing Wage Act
442 of 1961
Res. No.
8-2016
12/13/
2016
Recognizing Jeffrey L. Shaffer for his years of
service to the Township
Res. No.
1-2017
1/3/2017 Appointing a firm of certified public accountants to
audit all of the accounts of the Township for the
2016 fiscal year
Res. No.
3-2017
1/24/2017 Authorizing the locally elected Tax Collector to
provide real estate tax certifications and duplicate
real estate tax bills and to collect and retain a fee
for such services
Res. No.
5-2017
1/24/2017 Adopting the Dauphin County Emergency
Operations Plan
Res. No.
6-2017
3/20/2017 Congratulating the Volunteer Fire Company of
Union Deposit on its 100-year anniversary of
service
Res. No.
7-2017
4/25/2017 Authorizing the intermunicipal transfer of a
restaurant liquor license
Res. No.
8-2017
11/28/
2017
Prohibiting location of a Category 4 casino facility
within the Township
§ D-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § D-101
1:730
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. No.
12-2017
12/12/
2017
Authorizing the submission of a traffic signal
application to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation
Res. No.
1-2018
1/2/2018 Appointing a firm of certified public accountants to
audit all of the accounts of the Township for the
2017 fiscal year
Res. No.
3-2018
1/23/2018 Setting forth rules of conduct for public comment
at meetings of the Township Board of Supervisors
Res. No.
7-2018
2/27/2018 Adopting the South Hanover Township Municipal
Park Map
Res. No.
8-2018
5/8/2018 Setting the amount of bond for the Township
Manager
Res. No.
12-2018
10/23/
2018
Adopting standard operations and maintenance
agreements relating to the administration and
enforcement of the Stormwater Management
Ordinance
Res. No.
18-2018
12/26/
2018
Amending the Township's Right-to-Know Policy to
appoint the Open Records Officer
Res. No.
2-2019
1/7/2019 Amending the Township's Right-to-Know Policy to
appoint the Open Records Officer
Res. No.
5-2019
1/22/2019 Appointing a firm of certified public accountants to
audit all of the accounts of the Township for the
2018 fiscal year
Res. No.
6-2019
3/26/2019 Appointing a firm as the exclusive collector of
delinquent per capita taxes
Res. No.
7-2019
3/26/2019 Establishing reasonable costs of collection for
delinquent taxes and imposing the cost of such
collection upon the delinquent taxpayer
Res. No.
9-2019
4/23/2019 Adopting the Dauphin County Emergency
Operations Plan
Appendix E
PLAN APPROVAL
§ E-101. Plan approval.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-2-1995 4/11/1995 Adopting the South Hanover Township
Comprehensive Recreation, Park and Open Space
Plan
Appendix F
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § E-101
1:731
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ F-101. Public property.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-136-197811/14/
1978
Approving the purchase of the Rambo Tract of land
containing 20.433 acres
R-10-2012 11/13/
2012
Approving the acquisition of 129 Victor Street
R-11-2012 11/13/
2012
Approving the acquisition of 13 East Canal Street
R-7-2013 4/9/2013 Authorizing the acquisition of certain real
properties (Exh. A) in the Township under the
terms and conditions of the Hazard Mitigation
Grant Program
R-8-2013 7/9/2013 Authorizing the purchase of real property for the
construction and operation of a Municipal and
Emergency Services Complex
Res. No.
8-2015
8/11/2015 Authorizing the acquisition of easements for the
construction and operation of a Municipal and
Emergency Services Complex
Res. No.
13-2018
11/13/
2018
Authorizing the acquisition of real property for the
construction, expansion and operation of a
Municipal Public Works Complex
Appendix G
SEWERS
§ G-101. Sewers.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-4-1970 6/8/1970 Providing for adherence to the planning
requirements of Act 241, "The Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act"
R-1-1971 2/8/1971 Providing for the adoption of the "Sewerage Plan"
prepared by the Dauphin County Planning
Commission as a plan for sewerage systems to
serve the Township
R-42-19746/11/1974 Accepting the Plan Revision Module for Land
Development, Meadows of Hanover, to comply with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act
§ E-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § G-101
1:732
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-61-19755/13/1975 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for the R.E. and
P. A. Conrad Subdivision as part of the official plan
for the Township
R-62-19755/13/1975 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for the
Brownstone Mobile Home Park as part of the
Township's official plan
R-64-19757/22/1975 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Sections 2
and 3 of the Banbury Cross Subdivision as part of
the Township's official plan
R-65-19758/26/1975 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Section 1 of
the Banbury Cross Subdivision as part of the
Township's official plan
R-66-19759/9/1975 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Section 1,
Greenbriar Associates, as part of the Township's
official plan
R-67-19759/9/1975 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Section 2,
Greenbriar Associates, as part of the Township's
official plan
R-68-19759/9/1975 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Section 3,
Greenbriar Associates, as part of the Township's
official plan
R-70-197510/14/
1975
Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Long Lane
Acres, Sections 1, 2, 3, 4 and 9 as part of the
Township's official plan
R-71-197510/14/
1975
Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Long Lane
Acres, Section 5, as part of the Township's official
plan
R-72-197510/14/
1975
Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Shetland
Drive Vista, Section A, as part of the Township's
official plan
R-73-197510/14/
1975
Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Shetland
Drive Vista, Section B, as part of the Township's
official plan
R-74-197510/14/
1975
Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Milton
Hershey School Alumni Association as part of the
Township's official plan
R-75-197510/14/
1975
Adopting the sewage disposal plan of the Paul L.
Teets Subdivision as part of the Township's official
plan
R-76-197510/28/
1975
Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Hillymead,
Sections 4 to 8, as part of the Township's official
plan
§ G-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § G-101
1:733
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-77-197511/25/
1975
Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Hanover Hills
as part of the Township's official plan
R-88-19762/2/1976 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Banbury
Cross, Sections 4 and 5, as part of the Township's
official plan
R-89-19762/2/1976 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Banbury
Cross, Sections 6 and 7, as part of the Township's
official plan
R-90-19762/2/1976 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for the Stilwell
Newton Subdivision as part of the Township's
official plan
R-92-19765/11/1976 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for the R.E. and
P.A. Conrad Subdivision as part of the Township's
official plan
R-93-19765/11/1976 Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Greenbriar
Associates, Sections A and B, as part of the
Township's official plan
R-94-19765/11/1976 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Shetland
Drive Vista, Section C, as part of the Township's
official plan
R-95-19766/8/1976 Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Melvin F. and
Mary E. Shaffer as part of the Township's official
plan
R-100-197610/12/
1976
Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Banbury
Cross, Sections 6-9 lots, and 7-8 lots, as part of the
Township's official plan
R-102-197611/9/1976 Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Max E.
Hauck, 2 lots, as part of the Township's official plan
R-103-197611/9/1976 Adopting the sewage disposal plan for Long land
Acres, Section 6, 11 lots, as part of the Township's
official plan
R-104-197611/9/1976 Assigning the right, title and interest of the
Township of South Hanover to the South Hanover
Township Sewer Authority
R-114-19773/22/1977 Adopting the sewage disposal plan of the Proposed
Hershey Water Treatment Plant as part of the
Township's official plan
R-115-19773/22/1977 Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Charles M.
Blouck Subdivision as part of the Township's
official plan
§ G-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § G-101
1:734
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-116-19773/31/1977 Approving the contracting and financing by the
south Hanover Township Sewer Authority of a
sewer construction project
65-1977 5/10/1977 Granting to the South Hanover Township Sewer
Authority certain rights and privileges within the
Township for connection with said authority's
sewer system
R-122-19778/9/1977 Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Greenbriar
Phase II as part of the Township's official plan
R-131-19788/8/1978 Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Dan-D Village
East and West as part of the Township's official
plan
R-144-19798/14/1979 Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Greenbriar
Phase I as part of the Township's official plan
R-149-197911/13/
1979
Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Hillymead
Phase II North as part of the Township's official
plan
R-150-197911/13/
1979
Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Fred Groff as
part of the Township's official plan
R-151-197911/13/
1979
Adopting the sewage disposal plan of High Ridge
as part of the Township's official plan
R-159-19809/23/1980 Adopting the sewerage collection in the Greenbriar
Phase I as part of the Township's public sewerage
collection system
R-160-198010/14/
1980
Adopting the sewer mains, pumping station and
appurtenances in the Greenbriar Phase I area as
part of the Township's sewerage collection system
R-203-19846/12/1984 Resolving that the wastewater originating in the
service areas within the South Hanover Township,
to the extent of 32,000 gallons per day, shall be
treated in the expanded Swatara Plant
R-210-19852/12/1985 Adopting the sewage disposal plan of Hillymede
Estates as part of the Township's official plan
R-214-19857/23/1985 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
the Meadows of Hanover
R-218-198510/22/
1985
Approving the Act 537 Sewage Plan update as
prepared by the Township's sewage enforcement
officer, and submitting same for approval by the
Department of Environmental Resources
§ G-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § G-101
1:735
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-219-198511/12/
1985
Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Fox Meadows Farms
R-227-198611/11/
1986
Approving the Act 537 Sewage Plan update as
prepared by the Township's sewage enforcement
officer and submitting same for approval by the
Department of Environmental Resources
R-5-1987 4/7/1987 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module
proposed by Marian Cassell for an individual
sewage system
R-6-1987 6/23/1987 Approving the Act 537 Sewage Plan update as
prepared by the Township's sewage enforcement
officer and submitting same for approval by the
Department of Environmental Resources
R-4-1988 2/9/1988 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module
proposed by Charles T. Isaacs for an individual
sewage system
R-9-1988 9/13/1988 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module
proposed by W. David Keller for an individual
sewage system
R-11-198811/15/
1988
Providing for raising the stipend of the sewer
authority board members from $10 to $25 per
meeting
R-5-1989 5/9/1989 Adopting a plan for sewage services within the
Township pursuant to the provisions of the Sewage
Facilities Act and directing that said plan be
submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources
R-6-1989 8/8/1989 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Fox Meadow Farms
R-7-1989 8/8/1989 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Esther P. and James P. Landis for an individual
sewage system
R-8-1989 9/12/1989 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Homestead Manor
§ G-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § G-101
1:736
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-13-198912/26/
1989
Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Pennsylvania American Water Company for an
individual sewage system
R-10-19904/10/1990 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Maple View Estates for individual sewage systems
R-11-19904/10/1990 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Ethel Frances Watts for individual sewage systems
R-12-19905/22/1990 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Lawrence and Dorothy Baker for individual sewage
systems
R-15-19906/12/1990 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
South Hanover Elementary School for community
sewage systems
R-16-19906/26/1990 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Edward Smyser and Brenda Peffley for individual
sewage systems
R-17-19907/10/1990 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
Robert and Kristina Wallish for individual sewage
systems
R-18-19907/10/1990 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module of
James and Fay Orwan for individual sewage
systems
R-19-19907/10/1990 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Anna Abbondanza for individual sewage systems
R-23-199012/11/
1990
Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Charles and Alma Isaacs for individual sewage
systems
R-28-199012/26/
1990
Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Tracy A. and Lois E. Cassel for individual sewage
systems
§ G-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § G-101
1:737
Ord./Res. Date Subject
R-3-1991 4/9/1991 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
C.R. and Betty B. Allwine for individual sewage
systems
R-4-1991 4/23/1991 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Dr. Richard Cramer for a sewer extension
R-5-1991 7/9/1991 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
William I. Hoffer for individual sewage systems
R-7-1991 8/13/1991 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
C.R. and Betty B. Allwine for individual sewage
systems
R-8-1991 10/8/1991 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
William Hoffer for retaining tanks
R-9-1991 10/8/1991 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Matthew S. Tierney for individual sewage systems
R-10-199110/8/1991 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Ethel Frances Watts for individual sewage systems
R-5-1992 3/10/1992 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Joseph W. Batz, Jr., for individual sewage systems
R-8-1992 5/12/1992 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Brenda Peffley and Edward Smyser for individual
sewage systems
R-9-1992 6/9/1992 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Jean W. and James R. Landis for individual sewage
systems
R-1-1993 3/9/1993 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Hershey Trust Company for sewer tap-ins
R-7-1993 6/22/1993 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Nolan A. and Anna B. King and Nolan E. and
Eleanor G. King for individual sewage systems
§ G-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § G-101
1:738
Ord./Res. Date Subject
1-1994 1/25/1994 Entering into a lease termination agreement, to be
dated as of December 15, 1993, with the Township
as lessee and the authority as lessor
R-1-1995 3/28/1995 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Patricia K. Osman for individual on-lot sewage
systems
R-3-1995 6/13/1995 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
David W. and Luanne J. Knutson for individual onlot
sewage systems
R-7-1995 11/14/
1995
Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Robert J. Wallish for individual on-lot sewage
systems
R-1-1996 2/13/1996 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
William I. Hoffer
R-5-1996 6/25/1996 Transferring unencumbered monies of the PLGIT
sewer reserve fund to the Township sewer revenue
fund and providing the application of such transfer
of monies
R-14-199612/30/
1996
Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Ethel F. Watts
R-2-1997 2/25/1997 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Ethel F. Watts
R-4-1997 9/9/1997 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Howard G. Smith
R-5-1997 9/23/1997 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
A.A.C.A. Museum, Inc.
R-4-1998 7/14/1998 Submitting for approval to the Department of
Environmental Resources the planning module for
Richard E. Cassel
R-5-1998 7/28/1998 Accepting the dedication of the Kellock Run Pump
Station by Greenbriar Meadows Associations
§ G-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § G-101
1:739
R-12-2001 12/11/
2001
Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Protection for its approval as a
revision to the Official Sewage Facilities Plan the
planning module for the individual on-lot system in
the final subdivision plan for Russell E. Palmer
R-3-2002 3/26/2002 Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Protection for its approval as a
revision to the Official Sewage Facilities Plan the
planning module for the sewer tap-ins, sewer
extension and pumping station in the Meadows of
Hanover
Res. No.
5-2018
2/13/2018 Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Protection for its approval as a
revision to the Official Sewage Facilities Plan the
planning module for individual on-lot systems for
the Mills Subdivision
Res. No.
10-2018
6/26/2018 Adopting an Official Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan
for the Township
Appendix H
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ H-101. Streets and sidewalks.
This appendix contains an alphabetical listing of streets; and, under each
street, a listing of all ordained activities.
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Apple Tree
Lane
Accept Dan-D Village West R-161-198011/18/
1980
Ardmore
Drive
Accept Greenbriar
Development
R-84-1976 1/5/1976
Ardmore
Drive
Accept/
Portion
— R-106-197612/14/
1976
Ardmore
Drive
Vacate Unopened portion as
shown on the plan of
Resubdivision of Lot
Not. 60, Section 2 and
Lot No. 61, Section 1,
of Greenbriar
Associates
Development
R-102-197912/11/
1979
Arthur
Street
Accept From 22049 to Lot No.
25
R-11-1959 11/24/
1959
§ G-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § H-101
1:740
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Arthur
Street
Accept Extended R-2-1970 1/5/1970
Arthur
Street
Accept Entire length
Arwin Drive Accept From Grandview Drive,
in a southwest and
southeast direction by
various courses to
another pt. on said
Street
R-37-1973 12/11/
1973
Banbury
Circle
Accept/
Portion
— R-110-197612/28/
1976
Banbury
Road
Accept/
Portion
Banbury Cross Plan R-49-1974 10/8/1974
Banbury
Road
Accept/
Portion
— R-110-197612/28/
1976
Banbury
Square
Accept/
Portion
— R-110-197612/28/
1976
Belmont
Road
Accept From Oakshire Drive to
Rexford Road
R-36-1973 9/11/1973
Blackbird
Lane
Accept/
Portion
Meadows of Hanover,
Phases 9 and 13
Res. No.
4-2017
3/28/2017
Brimpton
Road
Accept From Oakshire Drive to
Roxbury Drive
R-36-1973 9/11/1973
Broadview
Drive
Dedicate — R-190-19838/9/1983
Chalfont
Circle
Accept Greenbriar Phase II,
Section A
R-147-197910/9/1979
Cheltenham
Drive
Accept/
Portion
— R-106-197612/14/
1976
Christopher
Court, East
Accept Greenbriar Phase II,
Sections A and B
R-146-197910/9/1979
Christopher
Court, West
Accept Greenbriar Phase II,
Sections A and B
R-146-197910/9/1979
Clarks Way Accept Grandview Estates,
Phase I and Phase II
Res. No.
3-2016
3/22/2016
Crestview
Road
Accept From Oakshire Drive to
Hilldale Place
R-36-1973 9/11/1973
Dobbs Lane Accept Grandview Estates,
Phase I and Phase II
Res. No.
3-2016
3/22/2016
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:741
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Dorchester
Road
Accept/
Portion
Greenbriar
Development
R-85-1976 1/5/1976
Dorchester
Road
Accept/
Portion
— R-106-197612/14/
1976
Dorchester
Road
Vacate/
Portion
Plan of Subdivision of
Greenbriar Associates
1-1990 12/26/
1989
Duke Street Accept Entire length R-1-1970 1/5/1970
Dunover
Court
Accept High Ridge, Section III R-169-19818/11/1981
East Field
Road
Accept/
Portion
— R-129-19786/30/1978
East Field
Road
Accept/
Portion
— R-135-197810/24/
1978
Elm Avenue Accept From Poplar Avenue to
a pt. 560' northwest
R-3-1968 1/2/1968
Fox Chase
Circle
Accept Extending north to a pt.
approximately 160'
from Fox Chase Drive
R-7-1972 12/11/
1972
Fox Chase
Drive
Accept From Red Top Road to
Hillymede Drive
R-37-1973 12/11/
1973
Fox Run
Road
Dedicate Big Oak Farms R-6-1993 6/8/1993
Fox
Meadow
Drive
Dedicate Fox Meadow Farms R-4-1992 1/28/1992
Fox
Meadow
Drive
Accept Final subdivision plan
of Howard M. and Mary
E. Landis
R-8-1995 11/14/
1995
Galway
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Hanover Hills
Development
R-119-19777/12/1977
Glen Circle Accept Greenbriar Phase II,
Sections A and B
R-146-197910/9/1979
Goldfinch
Lane
Accept/
Portion
Meadows of Hanover,
Phases 9 and 13
Res. No.
4-2017
3/28/2017
Grandview
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Greenbriar Phase II,
Sections A and B
R-146-197910/9/1979
Grandview
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Additional right-of-way,
Ridgewood
Res. No.
14-2018
11/13/
2018
Harrogate
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Hanover Hills
Development
R-117-19775/10/1977
§ H-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § H-101
1:742
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Hemlock
Street
Accept/
Portion
Sylvan View Plan R-48-1974 10/8/1974
Hickory
Road
Accept From Duke Street to a
pt. 265' east
R-1-1970 1/5/1970
Hilldale
Place
Accept From Crestview Road
to Larchmont Road
R-36-1973 9/11/1973
Hillymede
Drive
Accept From Fox Chase Drive
to Red Top Road
R-37-1973 12/11/
1973
Hillymede
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Plan of Hillymede R-47-1974 8/13/1974
Jeff Lane Accept Entire Length R-4-1964 4/7/1964
Kellock's
Run Drive
Dedicate Kellock's Run
Subdivision
R-5-1993 5/25/1993
Larchmont
Road
Accept From Oakshire Drive to
Roxbury Drive
R-36-1973 9/11/1973
Long Lane
Drive
Accept Extending north to a pt.
approximately 564' Red
Top Road
R-6-1972 11/13/
1972
Long Lane
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Long Lane Acres
Subdivision
R-52-1974 11/12/
1974
Maple
Avenue
Accept From Poplar Avenue to
Elm Avenue
R-3-1968 1/2/1968
Margate
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Greenbriar Subdivision,
Phase II, Sections A
and B
R-146-197910/9/1979
Margate
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Greenbriar Subdivision,
Phase II, Section A
R-21-1990 7/24/1990
May Apple
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Long Lane Acres R-78-1975 11/25/
1975
Meadowood
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Long Lane Acres
Subdivision
R-52-1974 11/12/
1974
Meadowood
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Long Lane Acres
Development
R-138-197812/26/
1978
Merion
Court
Dedicate Greenbriar Subdivision,
Phase II, Section C
R-14-1989 12/26/
1989
Merion
Lane
Accept Greenbriar Phase II,
Sections A and B
R-146-197910/9/1979
Museum
Drive
Accept AACA Museum, Inc. R-7-2003 9/9/2003
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:743
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Oakdale
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Hanover Hills
Development
R-117-19775/10/1977
Oakglade
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Hanover Hills
Development
R-119-19777/12/1977
Oakshire
Drive
Accept Entire length R-10-1959 10/5/1959
Parklea
Drive
Accept From Rexford Road to
Oakshire Drive
R-36-1973 9/11/1973
Parkside
Avenue
Accept/
Portion
— R-106-197612/14/
1976
Poplar
Avenue
Accept From Willow Avenue to
Elm Avenue
R-3-1968 1/2/1968
Ramsgate
Drive
Accept Shetland Drive Vista
Plan
R-51-1974 11/12/
1974
Red Fox
Court
Dedicate Fox Meadow Farms R-2-1992 1/28/1992
Rexford
Drive
Accept From Oakshire Drive
north 207' to a dead
end
R-36-1973 9/11/1973
Rosemont
Court
Accept/
Portion
Greenbriar Subdivision,
Phase II, Section A
R-21-1990 7/24/1990
Roxbury
Drive
Accept From Larchmont Road
to Brompton Road
R-36-1973 9/11/1973
Rt.
2003-B08
Sewer Entire length R-9-1993 8/10/1993
Rt. 22007 Vacate Abandoned section R-4-1963 4/16/1963
Sandy Hill
Road
Accept High Ridge, Section III R-170-19818/11/1981
Savannah
Drive
Accept Grandview Estates,
Phase I and Phase II
Res. No.
3-2016
3/22/2016
Scenic
Ridge Drive
Accept Ridgewood Res. No.
6-2018
2/27/2018
Silver Fox
Court
Dedicate Fox Meadow Farms R-4-1992 1/28/1992
Smoke
House Lane
Accept Dan-D Village East R-171-19818/25/1981
Sophia Lane Accept Grandview Estates,
Phase I and Phase II
Res. No.
3-2016
3/22/2016
Stoudt Road Accept/
Portion
Additional right-of-way,
Ridgewood
Res. No.
14-2018
11/13/
2018
§ H-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § H-101
1:744
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Stout Drive Accept/
Portion
Greenbriar Phase II,
Sections A and B
R-146-197910/9/1979
Sunny Lane Accept From Pa. Rt. 39 to a pt.
633' north
R-37-1973 9/11/1973
Sycamore
Road
Accept Sylvan View Plan R-48-1974 10/8/1974
Thomas
Street
Accept From Wagner Avenue
to Arthur Street
R-11-1959 11/24/
1959
Thistledown
Drive
Accept/
Portion
— R-129-19786/30/1978
Timberline
Place
Accept Shetland Drive Vista
Plan
R-50-1974 10/8/1974
Tulane Road Accept From Oakshire Drive to
Roxbury Drive
R-36-1973 9/11/1973
Unnamed
Street
Vacate Proposed street in
Section #1, Hillymede
R-100-197911/13/
1979
Vista Drive Accept Ridgewood Res. No.
11-2018
10/9/2018
Wagner
Circle
Accept/
Portion
Grandview Manor West R-86-1976 1/5/1976
Waverly
Drive
Accept/
Portion
Greenbriar Phase II,
Sections A and B
R-146-197910/9/1979
Waverly
Drive
Dedicate Greenbriar Subdivision,
Phase II, Section C
R-14-1989 12/26/
1989
Waverly
Drive
Accept Greenbriar Subdivision,
Phase II, Section A
R-21-1990 7/24/1990
Whippoorwill
Lane
Accept/
Portion
Meadows of Hanover,
Phases 9 and 13
Res. No.
4-2017
3/28/2017
Willow
Avenue
Accept From Rt. 22049 to
Poplar Avenue
R-3-1968 1/2/1968
Woods Edge
Drive
Accept Ridgewood Res. No.
11-2018
10/9/2018
Appendix I
WATER
§ I-101. Water.
(Reserved)
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § I-101
1:745
Appendix J
ZONING; PRIOR ORDINANCES
§ J-101. Zoning; prior ordinances.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
48-1975 9/23/1975 1975 Zoning Ordinance; superseded by Ord. No.
2-1995
57-1976 9/13/1976 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
61-1976 12/14/
1976
Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
62-1976 12/14/
1976
Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
63-1977 3/8/1977 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
75-1977 7/12/1977 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
77-1977 12/13/
1977
Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
78-1977 12/13/
1977
Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
81-1977 12/12/
1977
Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
96-1979 3/27/1979 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
98-1979 6/12/1979 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
101-1979 11/20/
1979
Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
108-1980 10/28/
1980
Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
110-1980 12/23/
1980
Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
111-1980 12/23/
1980
Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
114-1981 3/24/1981 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
123-1983 7/6/1983 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
127-1985 9/10/1985 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
2-1988 1/4/1988 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
3-1988 1/4/1988 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
R-4-1989 3/4/1989 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
3-1989 5/23/1989 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
6-1989 12/5/1989 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
§ I-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § J-101
1:746
Ord./Res. Date Subject
5-1990 10/9/1990 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
4-1994 1994 Amendment; superseded by Ord. No. 2-1995
Key to the Disposition of Ordinances
Chapter KO
KEY TO THE DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCES
§ KO-101. Key to the disposition of ordinances.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1-1959 Subdivision and Land
Development
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2-1970
1-1960 — Repealed by Ord.
No. 2-1972
2-1960 Solid Waste Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1994
1-1966 Earned Income Tax Ch. 24, Art. I
10-1967 — Repealed by Ord.
No. 2-1972
1-1968 Solid Waste Repealed by Ord.
No. 8-1972
2-1968 Code Enforcement Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-1972
3-1968 Solid Waste Repealed by Ord.
No. 8-1972
4-1968 Code Enforcement Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-1972
1-1969 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
2-1969 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
1-1970 Mobile Homes and
Mobile Home Parks
Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-1995
2-1970 Subdivision and Land
Development
Repealed by Ord.
No. 74-1977
3-1970 Junkyard License Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-1995
4-1970 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. I
§ J-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:747
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1-1971 Subdivision and Land
Development
Superseded by
Ord. No. 74-1977
2-1971 Annexation of
Territory
Appendix A
1-1972 Subdivision and Land
Development
Superseded by
Ord. No. 74-1977
2-1972 Repealer
3-1972 Solid Waste Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1994
4-1972 Junkyard License Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
5-1972 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. I
6-1972 Tax Collector Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1997
7-1972 Planning Commission Ch. 1, Art. III
8-1972 Solid Waste Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-1995
9-1972 Disorderly Conduct Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-1995
10-1972 Public Property Ch. 6, Art. I
11-1972 Vegetation Superseded by
Ord. No. 15-1992
12-1972 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
13-1972 BOCA Building Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 76-1977
14-1972 Fire Prevention Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 71-1977
15-1972 Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 24, Art. IV
34-1973 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
35-1974 Subdivision and Land
Development
Superseded by
Ord. No. 74-1977
36-1974 Subdivision and Land
Development
Superseded by
Ord. No. 74-1977
37-1974 Building Code Superseded by
Ord. No. 76-1977
38-1974 Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 21, Art. I
39-1974 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
§ KO-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KO-101
1:748
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
40-1974 Junkyard License Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
41-1974 Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 21, Art. II
42-1974 Subdivision and Land
Development
Superseded by
Ord. No. 74-1977
43-1975 Subdivision and Land
Development
Superseded by
Ord. No. 74-1977
44-1975 Sewers Repealed by Ord.
No. 89-1978
45-1975 Subdivision and Land
Development
Superseded by
Ord. No. 74-1977
46-1975 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
47-1975 Sewers Repealed by Ord.
No. 89-1978
48-1975 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
49-1975 Zoning Repealed by Ord.
No. 5-1990
50-1975 — Repealed by Ord.
No. 51-1975
51-1975 Zoning Repealer
52-1975 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
53-1975 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
54-1976 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. I
55-1976 Building Code Superseded by
Ord. No. 76-1977
56-1976 Parks and Recreation
Board
Ch. 1, Art. V
57-1976 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
58-1976 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
59-1976 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
60-1976 Sewer Authority Ch. 1, Art. IV
61-1976 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:749
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
62-1976 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
63-1977 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
64-1977 Real Estate Tax Ch. 24, Art. III
65-1977 Sewers Appendix G
66-1977 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
67-1977 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
68-1977 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. II
69-1977 Code Enforcement Repealed by Ord.
No. 11-1992
70-1977 BOCA Plumbing Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-1992
71-1977 Fire Prevention Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-1992
72-1977 National Electrical
Code
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-1992
73-1977 Declaring of
Emergencies
Ch. 1, Art. VI
74-1977 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
75-1977 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
76-1977 BOCA Building Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 12-1992
77-1977 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
78-1977 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
79-1977 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
80-1977 BOCA Building Code Superseded by
Ord. No. 12-1992
81-1977 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
82-1978 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
§ KO-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KO-101
1:750
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
83-1978 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
84-1978 Code Enforcement Superseded by
Ord. No. 14-1992
85-1978 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
86-1978 Code Enforcement Superseded by
Ord. No. 11-1992
87-1978 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. II
88-1978 Township Manager Ch. 1, Art. II
89-1978 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. I
90-1978 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. I
91-1978 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
92-1978 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
93-1979 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
94-1979 Parks and Recreation
Board
Ch. 1, Art. V
95-1979 Sewer Rentals Ch. 18, Art. III
96-1979 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
97-1979 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
98-1979 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
99-1979 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
101-1979 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
103-1980 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
104-1980 BOCA Building Code Superseded by
Ord. No. 11-1992
105-1980 Realty Transfer Tax Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
106-1980 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:751
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
106A-1980 Mobile Homes and
Parks; Subdivision and
Land Development
Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-1995; Ch.
22
107-1980 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. I
108-1980 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
109-1980 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
110-1980 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
111-1980 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
112-1980 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
113-1981 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
114-1981 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
115-1981 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
116-1981 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
117-1981 Sewers; Subdivision
and Land Development
Ch. 18, Art. I; Ch.
22
118-1981 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
119-1981 Mobile Homes and
Parks
Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-1995
119A-1981 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
168-1981 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
172-1981 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
120-1982 Vegetation Superseded by
Ord. No. 15-1992
121-1982 Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 21, Art. I
122-1982 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
122A-1982 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
§ KO-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KO-101
1:752
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
123-1983 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
124-1984 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
125-1984 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
126-1984 Township Manager Ch. 1, Art. II
127-1985 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
128-1986 Township Supervisors Ch. 1, Art. I
129-1986 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. I
130-1986 Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 21, Art. II
131-1986 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
132-1986 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
133-1986 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
134-1986 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
1-1987 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
2-1987 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. I
3-1987 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
1-1988 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
2-1988 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
3-1988 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
1-1989 Zoning Repealed by Ord.
No. 5-1990
2-1989 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
3-1989 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
4-1989 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:753
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
5-1989 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-1995
6-1989 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
7-1989 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
1-1990 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
3-1990 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
4-1990 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
5-1990 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
1-1991 Retaining Tanks Ch. 18, Art. IV
1-1992 Transient Retail
Merchants
Ch. 13, Art. I
2-1992 Unassigned
3-1992 Unassigned
4-1992 Unassigned
5-1992 Unassigned
6-1992 Unassigned
7-1992 Unassigned
8-1992 Unassigned
9-1992 Unassigned
10-1992 Unassigned
11-1992 Office of Code
Enforcement
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2-1999
12-1992 BOCA Building Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-1999
13-1992 BOCA Plumbing Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 4-1999
14-1992 BOCA Electrical Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 5-1999
15-1992 BOCA Property
Maintenance Code
Repealed by Ord.
No. 6-1999
16-1992 BOCA Fire Prevention
Code
Repealed by Ord.
No. 7-1999
1-1993 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
§ KO-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KO-101
1:754
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2-1993 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
3-1993 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
4-1993 Sewer Rates Ch. 18, Art. III
1-1994 Sewers Appendix G
2-1994 Solid Waste Ch. 20, Art. I
3-1994 Noise Disturbances Ch. 2, Art. I
4-1994 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-1995
5-1994 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
1-1995 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
2-1995 Zoning Ch. 27
3-1995 Adopting Ordinance
4-1995 Sewer Rentals and
Charges
Ch. 18, Art. III
1-1996 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
1-1997 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
2-1997 Tax Collector Ch. 1, Art. I
3-1997 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
1-1998 Motor Vehicles Ch. 15
2-1998 Zoning Ch. 27
3-1998 Zoning Ch. 27
4-1998 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
5-1998 Per Capita Tax Ch. 24, Art. II
1-1999 Zoning Ch. 27
2-1999 Department of Code
Enforcement
Ch. 5, Art. I
3-1999 BOCA Building Code Ch. 5, Art. II
4-1999 BOCA Plumbing Code Ch. 5, Art. IV
5-1999 National Electric Code Ch. 5, Art. III
6-1999 BOCA Property
Maintenance Code
Ch. 5, Art. VI
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:755
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
7-1999 BOCA Fire Prevention
Code
Ch. 5, Art. V
8-1999 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
9-1999 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
10-1999 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
11-1999 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
12-1999 Zoning Ch. 27
1-2000 Zoning Ch. 27
2-2000 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
3-2000 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. II
4-2000 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. III
1-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
1-2002 Zoning Ch. 27
2-2002 Taxation, Special Ch. 24, Art. II
1-2003 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
2-2003 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
Ch. 15
3-2003 Administration and
Government
Ch. 1, Art. VIII
4-2003 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
5-2003 Housing Ch. 11, Art. I
1-2004 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
2-2005 Zoning Ch. 27
3-2005 Zoning Ch. 27
3-2004 5/25/2004 Uniform Construction
Code
Ch. 5, Art. VII
1-2006 7/25/2006 Stormwater
Management
Repealed by Ord.
No. 6-2018
1-2007 4/24/2007 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
2-2007 5/22/2007 Zoning Ch. 27
§ KO-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KO-101
1:756
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1-2008 2/20/2008 Appointment of Chief
Administrative Officer
for Nonuniformed
Pension Plan
Not Codified
2-2008 7/22/2008 Intergovernmental
Agreement
Appendix D
3-2008 5/13/2008 Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15
4-2008 5/13/2008 Parks and Recreation Ch. 16, Art. I
5-2008 5/13/2008 Park and Recreation
Board
Ch. 1, Art. 5
6-2008 10/14/
2008
Cable Franchise
Agreement
Appendix C
7-2008 11/11/
2008
Pennsylvania
Municipal Health
Insurance Cooperative
(PMHIC)
Appendix D
1-2010 10/12/
2010
Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
2-2010 11/23/
2010
Sewers Ch. 18
3-2010 12/14/
2010
Stormwater
Management
Repealed by Ord.
No. 6-2018
1-2011 4/26/2011 Property Maintenance
Code
Ch. 5, Art. VI
1-2012 2/28/2012 Street Vacation Not Codified
2-2012 4/25/2012 Zoning Ch. 27
3-2012 8/4/2012 Motor Vehicles Ch. 15
4-2012 12/26/
2012
Sewers Ch. 18
5-2012 12/26/
2012
Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement
System
Not Codified
2-2013 1/7/2013 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
1-2014 12/30/
2014
PSATS Unemployment
Compensation Group
Trust
Appendix D
1-2015 2/10/2015 Zoning Ch. 27
2-2015 8/11/2015 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:757
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
3-2015 12/29/
2015
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
1-2016 7/12/2016 Zoning Ch. 27
1-2017 1/24/2017 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
2-2017 8/22/2017 Zoning Ch. 27
3-2017 8/22/2017 Zoning Ch. 27
4-2017 8/22/2017 Zoning Ch. 27
5-2017 9/12/2017 Zoning Ch. 27
6-2017 10/24/
2017
Motor Vehicles Ch. 15
1-2018 2/27/2018 Zoning Ch. 27
2-2018 2/27/2018 Zoning Ch. 27
3-2018 4/24/2018 Administration and
Government:
Attorneys' Fees for
Collection of Municipal
Claims and Liens;
Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer
Authority Rental Rates
Ch. 1, Art. VIII;
Ch. 18, Art. III
4-2018 9/25/2018 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer
Authority Rental Rates
Ch. 18, Art. III
5-2018 9/25/2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
Not Codified
6-2018 10/23/
2018
Stormwater
Management
Ch. 26
7-2018 12/11/
2018
Zoning Ch. 27
1-2019 2/12/2019 Zoning Ch. 27
2-2019 3/12/2019 Taxation, Special: Per
Capita Tax
Ch. 24, Art. II
3-2019 4/23/2019 Conduct: Fireworks Ch. 6, Art. II
Key to the Disposition of Significant Resolutions
Chapter KR
KEY TO THE DISPOSITION OF SIGNIFICANT RESOLUTIONS
§ KO-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:758
§ KR-101. Key to the Disposition of Significant Resolutions.
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
12-1954 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
10-1959 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
11-1959 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
3-1960 Governmental Affairs Appendix B
4-1963 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
4-1964 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
1-1968 Tax Rate 1968 Not Codified
2-1968 Per Capita Tax Superseded by
Ord. No. O-5-1998
3-1968 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
4-1968 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
1-1969 Tax Rate 1969 Not Codified
1-1970 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
1-1970A Tax Rate 1970 Not Codified
2-1970 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
3-1970 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
4-1970 Sewers Appendix G
5-1970 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
6-1970 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
7-1970 Tax Rate 1971 Not Codified
1-1971 Sewers Appendix G
4-1971 Tax Rate 1972 Not Codified
1-1972 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
2-1972 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
3-1972 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
4-1972 Per Capita Tax Superseded by
Ord. No. O-5-1998
6-1972 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
7-1972 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
8-1972 Tax Rate 1973 Not Codified
33-1973 Street Lighting Expired
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:759
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
34-1973 Street Lighting Expired
36-1973 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
37-1973 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
38-1973 Tax Rate 1974 Not Codified
40-1974 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
41-1974 Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 21, Art. I
42-1974 Sewers Appendix G
47-1974 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
48-1974 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
49-1974 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
50-1974 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
51-1974 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
52-1974 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
55-1974 Tax Rate 1975 Not Codified
56-1975 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
57-1975 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
58-1975 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
61-1975 Sewers Appendix G
62-1975 Sewers Appendix G
64-1975 Sewers Appendix G
65-1975 Sewers Appendix G
66-1975 Sewers Appendix G
67-1975 Sewers Appendix G
68-1975 Sewers Appendix G
70-1975 Sewers Appendix G
71-1975 Sewers Appendix G
72-1975 Sewers Appendix G
73-1975 Sewers Appendix G
74-1975 Sewers Appendix G
75-1975 Sewers Appendix G
§ KR-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:760
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
76-1975 Sewers Appendix G
77-1975 Sewers Appendix G
78-1975 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
80-1975 Tax Rate 1976 Not Codified
81-1976 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
82-1976 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
83-1976 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
84-1976 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
85-1976 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
86-1976 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
88-1976 Sewers Appendix G
89-1976 Sewers Appendix G
90-1976 Sewers Appendix G
92-1976 Sewers Appendix G
93-1976 Sewers Appendix G
94-1976 Sewers Appendix G
95-1976 Sewers Appendix G
100-1976 Sewers Appendix G
102-1976 Sewers Appendix G
103-1976 Sewers Appendix G
104-1976 Sewers Appendix G
106-1976 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
109-1976 Tax Rate 1977 Not Codified
110-1976 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
111-1977 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
112-1977 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
113-1977 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
114-1977 Sewers Appendix G
115-1977 Sewers Appendix G
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:761
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
116-1977 Sewers Appendix G
117-1977 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
119-1977 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
121-1977 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
122-1977 Sewers Appendix G
123-1977 Tax Rate 1978 Not Codified
124-1977 Tax Rate 1978 Not Codified
125-1978 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
126-1978 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
127-1978 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
129-1978 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
130-1978 Code Enforcement
Fees
Superseded by
A.O.
131-1978 Sewers Appendix G
134-1978 Sewers Ch. 18, Art. I
135-1978 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
136-1978 Public Property Appendix F
137-1978 Tax Rate 1979 Not Codified
138-1978 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
100-1979 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
102-1979 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
139-1979 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
140-1979 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
141-1979 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
142-1979 Parks and Recreation Ch. 16, Art. I
144-1979 Sewers Appendix G
146-1979 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
147-1979 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
149-1979 Sewers Appendix G
§ KR-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:762
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
150-1979 Sewers Appendix G
151-1979 Sewers Appendix G
152-1980 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
153-1980 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
154-1980 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
156-1980 Code Enforcement Superseded by
Res. No. 11-1992
159-1980 Sewers Appendix G
160-1980 Sewers Appendix G
161-1980 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
162-1980 Tax Rate 1980 Not Codified
164-1981 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
165-1981 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
166-1981 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
169-1981 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
170-1981 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
171-1981 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
174-1982 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
175-1982 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
176-1982 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
179-1982 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
181-1982 Tax Rate 1983 Not Codified
183-1983 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
184-1983 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
185-1983 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:763
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
186-1983 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
187-1983 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
190-1983 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
194-1983 Tax Rate 1984 Not Codified
197-1984 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
198-1984 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
199-1984 Street Lighting Appendix C
201-1984 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
202-1984 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
203-1984 Sewers Appendix G
204-1984 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
205-1984 Tax Rate 1985 Not Codified
206-1984 Budget 1985 Not Codified
207-1984 Tax Rate 1985 Not Codified
208-1985 Street Lighting Expired
209-1985 Street Lighting Expired
210-1985 Sewers Appendix G
211-1985 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
214-1985 Sewers Appendix G
215-1985 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
216-1985 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
218-1985 Sewers Appendix G
219-1985 Sewers Appendix G
220-1985 Budget 1986 Not Codified
221-1985 Tax Rate 1986 Not Codified
222-1985 Tax Rate 1986 Not Codified
223-1986 Street Lighting Expired
224-1986 Street Lighting Expired
227-1986 Sewers Appendix G
1-1987 Street Lighting Expired
§ KR-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:764
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2-1987 Street Lighting Expired
3-1987 Tax Rate 1987 Not Codified
4-1987 Tax Rate 1987 Not Codified
5-1987 Sewers Appendix G
6-1987 Sewers Appendix G
8-1987 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
10-1987 Tax Rate 1988 Not Codified
11-1987 Budget 1988 Not Codified
12-1987 Tax Rate 1988 Not Codified
13-1987 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
2-1988 Street Lighting Expired
3-1988 Street Lighting Expired
4-1988 Sewers Appendix G
6-1988 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
9-1988 Sewers Appendix G
11-1988 Sewers Appendix G
12-1988 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
13-1988 Tax Rate 1989 Not Codified
14-1988 Budget 1989 Not Codified
15-1988 Tax Rate 1989 Not Codified
1-1989 Street Lighting Expired
1-1989 Street Lighting Expired
4-1989 Zoning Superseded by
Res. No. 3-1995
5-1989 Sewers Appendix G
6-1989 Sewers Appendix G
7-1989 Sewers Appendix G
8-1989 Sewers Appendix G
9-1989 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
10-1989 Budget 1990 Not Codified
11-1989 Tax Rate 1990 Not Codified
12-1989 Tax Rate 1990 Not Codified
13-1989 Sewers Appendix G
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:765
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
14-1989 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
1-1990 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
2-1990 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
9-1990 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
10-1990 Sewers Appendix G
11-1990 Sewers Appendix G
12-1990 Sewers Appendix G
13-1990 Budget 1990 Not Codified
14-1990 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
15-1990 Sewers Appendix G
16-1990 Sewers Appendix G
17-1990 Sewers Appendix G
18-1990 Sewers Appendix G
19-1990 Sewers Appendix G
21-1990 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
22-1990 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
23-1990 Sewers Appendix G
24-1990 Sewer Fees Superseded by
Ord. No. 1-1991
25-1990 Budget 1991 Not Codified
26-1990 Tax Rate 1991 Not Codified
27-1990 Per Capita Tax 1991 Not Codified
28-1990 Sewers Appendix G
1-1991 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
2-1991 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
3-1991 Sewers Appendix G
4-1991 Sewers Appendix G
5-1991 Sewers Appendix G
§ KR-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:766
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
6-1991 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
7-1991 Sewers Appendix G
8-1991 Sewers Appendix G
9-1991 Sewers Appendix G
10-1991 Sewers Appendix G
11-1991 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
12-1991 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
13-1991 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
14-1991 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
15-1991 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
16-1991 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
17-1991 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
18-1991 Budget 1992 Not Codified
19-1991 Tax Rate 1992 Not Codified
20-1991 Per Capita Tax 1992 Not Codified
1-1992 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
2-1992 Franchises and
Services; Streets and
Sidewalks
Appendix C;
Appendix H
3-1992 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
4-1992 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
5-1992 Sewers Appendix G
6-1992 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
7-1992 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
8-1992 Sewers Appendix G
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:767
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
9-1992 Sewers Appendix G
10-1992 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
11-1992 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
12-1992 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
13-1992 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
14-1992 Per Capita Tax 1993 Not Codified
15-1992 Budget 1993 Not Codified
16-1992 Tax Rate 1993 Not Codified
17-1992 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
18-1992 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
19-1992 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
20-1992 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
1-1993 Sewers Appendix G
5-1993 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
6-1993 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
7-1993 Sewers Appendix G
8-1993 Administration and
Government
Appendix D
9-1993 Streets Sidewalks Appendix H
1-1995 Sewers Appendix G
2-1995 Plan Approval Appendix E
3-1995 Sewers Appendix G
4-1995 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
5-1995 Fees Not Codified
6-1995 Fees Not Codified
7-1995 Sewers Appendix G
8-1995 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
9-1995 Fees Not Codified
§ KR-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:768
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
10-1995 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
11-1995 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
12-1995 Budget 1996 Not Codified
13-1995 Tax Rate 1996 Not Codified
14-1995 Per Capita; Fire
Hydrant; Fire
Protection Tax Rate
1996
Not Codified
15-1995 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
16-1995 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
17-1995 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
18-1995 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
1-1996 Sewers Appendix G
2-1996 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
3-1996 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
4-1996 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
5-1996 Sewers Appendix G
6-1996 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
7-1996 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
8-1996 Budget 1997 Not Codified
9-1996 Tax Rate 1997 Not Codified
10-1996 Per Capita Tax 1997 Not Codified
11-1996 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
12-1996 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
13-1996 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
14-1996 Sewers Appendix G
1-1997 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
2-1997 Sewers Appendix G
3-1997 Motor Vehicles Ch. 15
4-1997 Sewers Appendix G
5-1997 Sewers Appendix G
6-1997 Motor Vehicles Ch. 15
7-1997 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
8-1997 Budget 1998 Not Codified
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:769
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
9-1997 Tax Rate 1998 Not Codified
10-1997 Per Capita Tax 1998 Not Codified
11-1997 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
12-1997 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
13-1997 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
1-1998 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
2-1998 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
3-1998 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
4-1998 Sewers Appendix G
5-1998 Sewers Appendix G
6-1998 Fees Not Codified
7-1998 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
8-1998 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
9-1998 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
10-1998 Budget 1999 Not Codified
11-1998 Tax Rate 1999 Not Codified
12-1998 Per Capita Tax 1999 Not Codified
13-1998 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
14-1998 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
1-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
2-1999 Fees Not Codified
3-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
4-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
5-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
6-1999 Fees Not Codified
7-1999 Fees Not Codified
8-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
9-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
10-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
11-1999 Budget 2000 Not Codified
12-1999 Tax Rate 2000 Not Codified
13-1999 Per Capita Tax 2000 Not Codified
14-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
§ KR-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:770
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
15-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
16-1999 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
1-2000 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
2-2000 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
3-2000 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
4-2000 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
5-2000 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
6-2000 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
7-2000 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
8-2000
9-2000 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
10-2000 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
11-2000 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
12-2000 Tax Rate 2001 Not Codified
13-2000 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
14-2000 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
15-2000 Budget 2001 Not Codified
1-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
2-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
3-2001 Fees Not Codified
4-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
5-2001 Sewers Appendix G
6-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
7-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
8-2001 Fees Not Codified
9-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
10-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
11-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
12-2001 Plan Approval Appendix E
13-2001 Budget 2002 Not Codified
14-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
15-2001 Tax Rate 2002 Not Codified
16-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:771
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
17-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
18-2001 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
1-2002 Fees Not Codified
2-2002 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
3-2002 Plan Approval Appendix E
4-2002 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
5-2002 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
6-2002 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
7-2002 Budget 2003 Not Codified
8-2002 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
9-2002 Tax Rate 2003 Not Codified
10-2002 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
11-2002 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
12-2002 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
1-2003 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
2-2003 Fees Not Codified
3-2003 Administration and
Government
Ch. 1, Art. IX
4-2003 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
5-2003 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
6-2003 Fees Not Codified
7-2003 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
6-2004 Fees Not Codified
2-2006 Fees Not Codified
3-2006 Fees Not Codified
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
9-2012 9/25/2012 Emergency Operations
Plan
Not Codified
10-2012 11/13/
2012
Public Property Appendix F
11-2012 11/13/
2012
Public Property Appendix F
§ KR-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:772
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
12-2012 11/13/
2012
Appointment Not Codified
13-2012 12/26/
2012
Sewer Rental Discount Not Codified
14-2012 12/26/
2012
Appointment Not Codified
15-2012 12/26/
2012
Appropriation Not Codified
16-2012 12/26/
2012
Streetlight Assessment Not Codified
17-2012 12/26/
2012
Per Capita and Special
Tax Rates
Not Codified
1-2013 1/7/2013 Appointment of
Auditors
Not Codified
3-2013 1/7/2013 Sewage Facilities Plan Not Codified
4-2013 1/22/2013 Emergency Operations
Plan
Not Codified
5-2013 3/21/2013 Bond Not Codified
6-2013 3/21/2013 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
7-2013 4/9/2013 Public Property Appendix F
8-2013 7/9/2013 Public Property Appendix F
9-2013 7/9/2013 Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
10-2013 10/8/2013 Disposition of Records Not Codified
11-2013 12/23/
2013
Appropriation Not Codified
12-2013 12/23/
2013
Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
13-2013 12/23/
2013
Taxation Ch. 24, Art. II
14-2013 12/23/
2014
Commendation Not Codified
1-2014 1/6/2014 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
2-2014 1/6/2014 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
3-2014 1/28/2014 Street Acceptance Not Codified
4-2014 3/25/2014 Commendation Not Codified
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:773
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
5-2014 4/8/2014 Acceptance of
Property
Not Codified
6-2014 7/8/2014 Grant Application Not Codified
7-2014 8/26/2014 Opposing Request for
Designation as Utility
Not Codified
8-2014 12/30/
2014
Appropriation Not Codified
9-2014 12/30/
2014
Franchises and
Services
Appendix C
10-2014 12/30/
2014
Taxation Ch. 24, Art. II
1-2015 1/5/2015 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
2-2015 1/5/2015 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 22
3-2015 1/13/2015 Governmental Affairs Appendix D
4-2015 1/27/2015 Public Safety Advisory
Board Membership
Not Codified
5-2015 6/9/2015 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
6-2015 7/14/2015 Bond Issues and Loans Appendix B
7-2015 7/28/2015 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
8-2015 8/11/2015 Public Property Appendix F
9-2015 11/24/
2015
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
10-2015 12/29/
2015
Budget 2016 Not Codified
11-2015 12/29/
2015
Streetlight Assessment
2016
Not Codified
12-2015 12/29/
2015
Tax Rate 2016 Not Codified
13-2015 12/29/
2015
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
§ KR-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:774
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
14-2015 12/29/
2015
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
1-2016 1/4/2016 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
2-2016 1/4/2016 Fees Not Codified
3-2016 3/22/2016 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
4-2016 3/22/2016 Fees Not Codified
5-2016 3/22/2016 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
6-2016 3/22/2016 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
7-2016 8/23/2016 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
8-2016 12/13/
2016
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
9-2016 12/13/
2016
Budget 2017 Not Codified
10-2016 12/13/
2016
Streetlight Assessment
2017
Not Codified
11-2016 12/13/
2016
Tax Rate 2017 Not Codified
1-2017 1/3/2017 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
2-2017 1/3/2017 Fees Not Codified
3-2017 1/24/2017 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
4-2017 3/28/2017 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
5-2017 1/24/2017 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
6-2017 3/20/2017 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:775
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
7-2017 4/25/2017 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
8-2017 11/28/
2017
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
9-2017 12/12/
2017
Budget 2018 Not Codified
10-2017 12/12/
2017
Streetlight Assessment
2018
Not Codified
11-2017 12/12/
2017
Tax Rate 2018 Not Codified
12-2017 12/12/
2017
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
1-2018 1/2/2018 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
2-2018 1/2/2018 Fees Not Codified
3-2018 1/23/2018 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
4-2018 1/23/2018 Fees Not Codified
5-2018 2/13/2018 Sewers Appendix G
6-2018 2/27/2018 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
7-2018 2/27/2018 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
8-2018 5/8/2018 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
9-2018 Number Not Used
10-2018 6/26/2018 Sewers Appendix G
11-2018 10/9/2018 Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
12-2018 10/23/
2018
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
13-2018 11/13/
2018
Public Property Appendix F
§ KR-101 SOUTH HANOVER CODE § KR-101
1:776
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
14-2018 11/13/
2018
Streets and Sidewalks Appendix H
15-2018 12/11/
2018
Budget 2019 Not Codified
16-2018 12/11/
2018
Tax Rate 2019 Not Codified
17-2018 12/11/
2018
Streetlight Assessment
2019
Not Codified
18-2018 12/26/
2018
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
1-2019 1/7/2019 Fees Not Codified
2-2019 1/7/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
3-2019 1/22/2019 Fees Not Codified
4-2019 1/22/2019 Fees Not Codified
5-2019 1/22/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
6-2019 3/26/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
7-2019 3/26/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
8-2019 4/23/2019 Fees Not Codified
9-2019 4/23/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D
§ KR-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KR-101
1:777