


SOUTH LEBANON  TOWNSHIP
ORDINANCE NUMBER 323



AN ORDINANCE :OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ADOPTIN G THE  2009  EDITION  OF THE  INTERNATIONAL  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE  CODE, REGULATI NG AND  GOVERNING  THE CONDITIONS AND MAINTENANCE  OF ALL PROPERTY, BUILDINGS AND  STRUCTURES; BY PROVIDING THE  STANDARDS FOR SUPPLIED UTILITIES AND FACILITIES AND OTHER PHYSI CAL THINGS AND CONDITIONS ESSENTIAL TO E    SURE THAT STRUCTURES ARE SAFE, SANITARY AND FIT FOR OCCUPATION AND USE; AND THE CONDEMNATION  OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY AND USE, AND THE DEMOLITION  OF SUCH EXISTING  STRUCTURES  IN SOUTH LEBANON  TOWNSHIP ;  PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE  OF PERMITS AND COLLECTION  OF FEES THEREFORE ; REPEALING ALL OTHER  ORDINANCES AND
.P	RTS OF THE ORDINANCES OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP IN CONFLICT  THEREWITH .	. .

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, County of Lebanon , Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION ONE.	That a certain document, three (3) copies of which

are on file in the office of South Lebanon Township, being marked and designated as the International Prop ertyMaintenance  Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Prop erty Maintenance Code of South Lebanon Township, in the State of
P nnsylvania for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of

all property; buildin gs and structures; by providing the standard s for





,. .
 

supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structure s are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issu ance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of South Lebanon Township are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section Two of this ordinance.
SECTION TWO.	The following sections are hereby revised:

 
Section 101.1.

Lebanon Township.

Section 103.5
 
The name of the jurisdiction shall be South




South Lebanon Township shall adopt a fee
 

schedule as it related to inspections and legal actions to be taken against those parties who are in violation of this ordinance from time to time by Resolution.
Section 112.4	The fine to be imposed shall be no less than

$100.00 nor mor e than $1,000.00.

 
Section 302.4

Section 304.14

Section 602.3
 
The height shall be twelve inches (12").

April 1to November 1;

October 1to May 1;
 

Section 602.4	October 1to May 1.


SECTION THREE.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances of South Lebanon Township in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION FOUR.	If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. South Lebanon Township hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
SECTION FIVE.	Nothing in this ordinance or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section Three of this ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance.
SECTION SIX.	This ordinance and the rules, regulations,

provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect five (5) days from and after the date of its final passage and adoption .
 

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 24th day of May, 2011 by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of South Lebanon, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, in lawful session duly assembled.
 
ATTEST:
 
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP


  J J'11-	(SEAL)
Chairman
 


 

 































 
 

SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 329
AN ORDINANCE OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP, AMENDING ORDINANCE NUMBER 323 (THE 2009 ADDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE), SECTION 108.4.1 (PLACARD REMOVAL) BY PROHIBITING THE DEFACEMENT OR REMOVAL OF A CONDEMNATION PLACARD WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF THE CODE OFFICIAL AND PRESCRIBING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, County of Lebanon, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,  and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:

SECTION ONE:	South Lebanon Township Ordinance Number 323 adopting the 2009 addition of the International Property Maintenance Code does hereby amend Section 108.4.1 (Placard Removal) to add the following as the last sentence of the Section:

"Any person who defaces  or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the Code Official shall be subject to a penalty of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).

 


days.
 
SECTION TWO:	This Ordinance shall become effective in five (5)
 

ADOPTED this 25th day of April, 2012.

 
ATTEST:
 
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 
(/do&	v
 



BY:
 
1JCh;f!.l
 
BY:	(\
M-Chairllia

 
 
SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP
CURFEW ORDINANCE 262


AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SOUTH LEBANON TO ESTABLISH A CURFEW	FOR MINORS, REGULATING THE USE OF STREETS DURING NOCTURNAL HOURS AND PROVIDING FOR RELATED MATTERS SUCH AS REGULATIONS,	EXCEPTIONS, PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY, POLICE PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP, AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED  BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE SAME AS FOLLOWS:

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE-this Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Curfew Ordinance.


SECTION 2. CURFEW  HOURS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS

No minor under the age of 18 years of age shall be upon the streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public places in the Township of South Lebanon between 11:00 PM and 5:00 AM, prevailing time, unless such minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of such minor person, or is going to or returning from a school-sponsored function, or whose legally recognized employment makes it necessary for such minor person to be in or upon such streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public places between 11:00 PM and 5:00 AM

SECTION 3.  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY

No parent, guardian or other person having the legal care or custody of any minor child under 18 years of age shall allow or permit such minor to be in or upon any of the streets, highways, alleys, parks or public places of South Lebanon Township between the hours of 11:00 PM and 5:00 AM except as specified herein, or unless reasonable necessity can be shown.

SECTION 4.  PROCEDURE UPON VIOLATION

Police officers finding any such minor under the age of 18 years of age in or on any of the streets, highways, alleys, parks or public places of South Lebanon Township in violation of any provisions of this Ordinance between the hours of 11:00 PM and 5:00 AM may issue a citation to the minor under the provisions of this Ordinance and shall issue a written notice and warning to the parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of said minor, and after the first written notice, the parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of said minor child shall be issued a citation under the provisions of this Ordinance. The minor child shall be released to the parent, guardian, or other person having legal care or custody of said minor child. If the minor is under 10 years of age and if no parent, guardian or other person having legal care or
 

custody of the minor child can be located, the child may be turned over to the appropriate public social services agency.

SECTION 5.  PENALTIES

Any person who violates or permits a violation of the Ordinance shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a district justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $300.00, plus costs of prosecution and/or in the case of a parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of the minor child, a term of imprisonment in the Lebanon County Correctional Facility for a term not to exceed 48 hours.

SECTION 6.  EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall be effective in five (5) days.




ADOPTED THIS 14TH DAY OF MAY, 2002




ATTEST:	SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 


/£.
 
QtJ/(J
 
Secretary	Chairman
 
SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. 330

AN. ORDINANCE  RELATING TO GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION GROWING IN THE TOWNSHIP OF SOUTH LEBANON REQUIRING THE REMOVAL, TRIMMING OR CUTIING THEREOF UNDER · CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES, BY THE OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF THE PREMISES WHERE THE SAME ARE GROWING, OR BY THE TOWNSHIP AT THE EXPENSE OF SUCH OWNER OR OCCUPANT IN DEFAULT; AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.

BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWNSHU> OF SOUTH LEBANON AS FOLLOWS:

SECTIONl:
The following words, as used in this ordinance, shall  have the meanings hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
A.	PERSON -any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
B.	WEEDS - any canadian or Russian thistle, chicory, burdock, nettle, poison ivy, sumac, goldenrod, wild lettuce, wild mustard, wild parsley, ragweed, milkweed, multifloral rose, Johnson grass and other weeds added hereafter to the noxious weeds_ list by the Noxious Weed Control Committee pursuant to Act 74 of 1982, H.B. l429; adopted April 7, 1982,effective June 6, 1982.

SECTION2:
Every person, owning or ocrupying any premises within the Township of South Lebanon upon which grass or weeds are in excess of six inches (6") in height, shall cut or remove such grass or weeds or cause the same to be cut or removed.

SECTION3:
The following types of areas are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance:
A.	All areas containing crops planted for some useful purpose.
B.	All wooded areas.
C.	All erosion control filter strips.
D.	All areas planted with vegetation designed to prevent erosion of steep slopes.
E.   All state games lands.
F.	All cultivated fields and similar areas used for agricultural purposes.
G.	All areas adjacent to streams (within 20 feet).
H.	All mature hedge rows.
I.	All areas containing wildflowers and other ornamental plantings.
J.	All areas determined to be wetlands.
K.	All stormwater management areas maintained as natural areas.


SECTION4:
Grass or weeds as defined inthis ordinance growing to a height in excess of six inches (6") which are not cut or removed in accordance .with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and harmful to the health and welfare of the citi_zens and residents of the Township of South Lebanon.

SECTIONS: .
Written notice shall be given by personal service or by first class mail to the last known address of said owner or occupant of any property whereon grass or weeds are growing or remain in violation ·of the provisions of this ordinance.  The notice shall direct and require such owner or occupant to cut or remove all
 
such grass or weeds in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance within five (S) days ?fter receipt of such notice.  Notification shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year.	·

SECTION6:
In case a.ny person shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such noti e within the period of time stated therein, or in the event the notice sent by U. S. mail is undelivered within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing, the oard of Supervisors may cause such grass or w eds to be removed or cut and the cost thereof together with any penalty authorized by law may be collected from such person .in the manner provided by law.

SECTION 7:
In those cases where the owner or occuP,ant fails or refuses to cut such grass or eeds, South Le.banon Township shall cut or remove the grass or weeds at a rate of $75.00 per man hour.·This rate may be changed by Resolution as needed.

.S	ECTION 8:
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall,
upon conviction thereof  before any District J.udge, be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not more than
$100.00 plus costs of prosecution. Each day's vi.olation shall constitute a separate offense.


SECTION 9:
This Ordinance repeals Ordinances 34 and 10·2.


SECTION 10: .
Any ordinance  or parts of any ordinance  inconsistent with the  provisions of this ordinan e are  hereby
repealed insofar as the same affects this ordinance.


SECTION 11:
If any section or part of this ordinance is found to be invalid for any reason, the other sections of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
 
ORDAINED AND ENACTED into law this. a. rl/ day of   JtfJJ/[_
days from the date hereof.
 

2012, to becom.e effective five (5)
 

SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP
                            BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Chairman
















" .
 






SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. 149

AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING OWNERS, CUSTODIANS AND KEEPERS OF DOGS FROM ALLOWING SUCH DOGS TO RUN AT LARGE IN SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP; PROVIDING FOR THE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDING OF SUCH DOGS WHEN AT LARGE; REQUIRING THE REIMBURSEMENTS OF CHARGES INCURRED BY REASON OF SUCH DETENTION OF DOGS; PROHIBITING LOUD OR HARSH NOISES OR DISTURBANCES CAUSED BY DOGS OR OTHER DOMESTIC ANIMALS; PROHIBITING ANY ANIMAL FROM DEFILING, BEFOULING, CORRUPTING OR OTHERWISE DESECRATING PUBLIC PROPERTY OR THE PROPERTY OF ANOTHER; REPEALING ORDINANCE NUMBERS FIVE AND EIGHTY-THREE; AND PROVIDING
A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.

NOW THEREFORE, be it ordain d and enacted by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the Authority of the same as follows:
SECTION ONE:	DEFINITIONS

(a)	"Dog" means and includes all dogs, cats, domesticated animals, nondomesticated animals and fowl.
(b)	"Owner", when applied to the proprietor­ ship of a dog, includes every person having a right or property in such dog and every person who
keeps or harbors such dog or has it in his care or custody, and every person who permits such dog
to remain on or about any premises owned or acquired
 



by him.

SECTION TWO:	It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, and the duty of the parent or guardian of any minor owner of any dog, to keep the dog securely tied or penned in an enclosure in such a manner that the dog cannot break loose and run at large over the streets, alleys or public grounds and parks, in the Township of south Lebanon or upon the property of anyone other than the owner, custodian or keeper of such dog, unless accompanied by the under the immediate control of such owner, custodian or keeper.
SECTION THREE:	It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian

or keeper of any dog, while traveling on the streets, alleys or public grounds in the Township of South Lebanon, to have the dog on a leash at all times, and to prevent the dog from entering upon the property of any person or persons in the Township of South . Lebanon without the property owner's consent.
SECTION FOUR:	Any police officer, constable or peace officer is hereby authorized to seize and impound any dog found running at large, unattended in the Township of South Lebanon and to convey it to the place designated by the Township Supervisors as a pound.	Notice of such seizure shall be sent to the owner of such dog in the manner prescribed by law and such dog may be redeemed by the owner thereof within the time specified by law, upon payment of the charges incurred by reason of such detention.
SECTION FIVE:	No person shal allow. any dog confined on that person's premises to make any loud or harsh noise or
 
 






disturbance which will interfere with or deprive the peace, quiet, rest or sleep of any person within the neighborhood.
SECTION SIX:	No person shall allow any dog owned by him or under his control to defile, befoul, corrupt or otherwise dese- crate any sidewalk, walkway, street, public ground, public park or any other property of another within South Lebanon Township.
SECTION SEVEN:	IMPOUNDING; COSTS

Any dog, whether bearing a proper license tag or not, seized and detained under the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be properly kept and fed, and immediate notice, either personal or by registered mail, shall be given by the officer to the owner of the dog, or his agent, directing the owner or agent to claim the dog in three days.
The owner of a licensed dog so detained shall pay all fines

and costs imposed by this ordinance for the violation thereof and also the expense of impounding and keeping the dog before the dog is returned.  If, after three days from the giving of such
notice, the dog has not been claimed by its owner, the officer

may remove the collar and tag, dispose of the dog by sale or cause the same to be destroyed in some humane manner.
SECTION EIGHT:	OBSTRUCTING OFFICER

Any person who shall obstruct any officer or other person appointed under this Ordinance of carrying out the provisions of
this Ordinance, or who shall willfully or maliciously obstruct or
'•.
molest the officer in the seizure or transportation of dogs in
 



violation of this Ordinance, shall be liable, upon conviction thereof, under the penalties provided in this article.
SECTION NINE:	AGREEMENTS WITH HUMANE SOCIETY

The Supervisors of South Lebanon Township are hereby author- ized and empowered to enter into agreements, if not heretofore entered into, with any officially recognized humane society for the purpose of assisting in carrying out the intention of this article.	Without limiting the scope of the proceeding sentence, this shall be deemed to include finding homes for dogs which have been seized under the provisions of this Ordinance and assisting in their destruction according to law.
SECTION TEN:	DOG POUND

The Township of south Lebanon may provide a suitable pen or pound within or without the Township limits for the keeping of such dogs as may be found running at large in violation of this Ordinance.	The Supervisors of South Lebanon Township are hereby authorized to appropriate and expend such funds as are deemed necessary for the maintenance of such pounds and the keeping of such dogs.
SECTION ELEVEN:	Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the Courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
SECTION TWELVE:	All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances,

specifically Ordinance Numbers 5 and 83, in conflict with this

Ordinance or consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give the Ordinance full force and effect .
SECTION THIRTEEN:	Any person violating any of the provi- sions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine to the Township of South Lebanon of not less thah five (5.00) Dollars nor more than Six Hundred (600.00)   Dollars for each and every offense, and costs of prosecution.

ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP
 

I do hereby  cer tif y  that  the  foregoing  is  a  true  and  correct  copy  of O rdinance # 149 adopted by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township  on  August  2,  l988.


SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 219

AN ORDINANCE REPEALING CHAPTER SIX (FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT) OF ORDINANCE NUMBER 164 (SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION LAND USE ORDINANCE) IN ITS ENTIRETY AND ADOPTING A NEW CHAPTER SIX (FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT) IN ORDER TO MONITOR THE SUBDIVISION AND/OR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD PLAIN AREAS IN ORDER TO PROMOTE AND PROTECT THE GENERAL HEALTH, WELFARE, AND SAFETY OF THE COMMUNITY; TO REQUIRE THAT EACH SUBDIVISION LOT IN FLOOD PLAIN AREAS BE PROVIDED WITH A SAFE BUILDING SITE WITH ADEQUATE ACCESS; TO INSURE THE PUBLIC FACILITIES WHICH SERVE SUCH LOTS OR DEVELOPMENT BE DESIGNED AND INSTALLED TO PROCLUDE FLOOD PLAIN DAMAGE; AND TO
PROTECT INDIVIDUALS FROM PURCHASING LAND WHICH ARE UNSUITABLE FOR

DEVELOPMENT BECAUSE OF FLOODING.

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION ONE:	Chapter Six (Flood Plain Management) of Ordinance Number 104 (South Lebanon Township's Subdivision Land Use Ordinance) is hereby repealed.
SECTION TWO:	Ordinance Number 164 (South Lebanon Township's Subdivision Land Use Ordinance) is hereby amended to provide the following Chapter Six (Flood Plain Management) :
CHAPTER 6 - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT SECTION 6.01 INTENT
The purpose of the regulations set forth in this Chapter is
to monitor the subdivision and/or development of flood plain
 



areas in order to promote and protect the general health, welfare, and safety of the community; to require that each subdivision lot in flood plain areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate access; to insure that public facilities which serve such lots or development be designed and installed to preclude flood damage; and to protect individuals from purchasing lands which are unsuitable for development because of flooding.	The subsequent sections shall be considered requirements supplemental to those procedures and standards specified elsewhere in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance , municipal zoning ordinances, the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code, and any other applicable ordinances and codes.

SECTION 6.02 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS UTILIZED IN THIS CHAPTER

A.	Base Flood - The flood, also known as the 100 Year Flood, which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equalled in any given year; the flood which has been selected to serve as the basis upon which the flood plain management
provisions of this and other ordinances have been prepared.

B.	Base Flood Elevation - The determination by the Federal Insurance Administrator of the water surface elevation of the Base Flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.

C.	. Building - A structure which has a roof supported by
columns, piers, or walls, which is intended for the shelter , housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel or which is to house a use of a commercial or manufacturing activity.

D.	Construction - The term "constructions" shall include the building , reconstructions, extension, expansion, alteration, substantial improvement, erection or relocation of a building or structure, including manufactured homes, and gas or
liquid storage tanks.	For flood plain purposes, "new con­
struction" includes structures for which the "start of con­
struction" commence on or after the effective date of a flood
plain management regulation adopted by the municipality.

E.	Development - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings, manu­ factured homes, or other structures, mining , dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or the storage of equipment or materials.

F.	Flood - A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas by water from waterway overflows or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source.
 
•'   ..










G.	Flood Plain - (1) A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation by water;
(2) an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
or runoff of surface water from any source.	For the purpose of this Ordinance, the flood plain shall be con­ sidered to be the One Hundred (100) Year Flood Plain which is a flood plain having a one percent (1%) chance of being subject to the above conditions during any
given year.

H.	Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved to discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point.

I.	Manufactured Home - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.	For flood plain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes (1) all mobile homes and (2) camping trailers, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, and other similar
vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

J.	Manufactured Home Park and/or Subdivision - A lot or area which is a planned development and designated to contain two or more manufactured homes for rent or for sale.	Any
lot or area proposed to utilize such design where individual manufactured home sites are proposed for sale shall be
known as a manufactured home subdivision.

K.	One Hundred (100) Year Flood (Base Flood) - A flood selected as the Base Flood, that has a one percent (1%) or greater change of occurring in any given year.

L.	structure - A walled or roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank (principally above ground), a manu­ factured home, or any other man-made object usually assembled of interdependent parts or components which is designed to have a more or less fixed location, whether or not permanently attached at that location.

SECTION 6.03 - APPLICATIONS PROCEDURES AND PLAT REQUIREMENTS

The following procedures shall be required in addition to those specified otherwise in these regulations.

A.	Pre-Application Procedures

1.	It is suggested that prospective developers consult the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Pro-
 



tection and the municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer concerning soil suitability when on-site sewage disposal facilities are proposed.

2.	Prospective developers shall consult the County Conservation District representative concerning erosion and sediment control and the probable effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development. Concurrently, a determination should be made as to whether or not any flood hazards either exist or will be created as a result of the proposed sub­ division or development.

B.	Preliminary Plan Requirements

The following information shall be required as part of the Preliminary Plan when a subdivision is in a floodplain lain area and shall be prepared by a registered surveyor:

l.	A map illustrating the location of the proposed sub­ division or and development with respect to the municipality's flood plain areas including information on, but not limited to, Base Flood Elevations, boundaries of flood plain areas, proposed lots and
sites, fill, and flood or erosion protective facilities.

2.	All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments shall provide base flood delineations; however, subdivision proposals and other proposed new development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, shall include actual base flood elevation data.	It shall be the responsibility of the developer to provide the required base flood elevation data, in a form comparable to HEC-2, which will be certified
as accurate by a Registered Professional Engineer o

3.	Where the subdivision or land development lies partially or completely in the flood plain area or where the sub­ division borders on the flood plain area, the pre­ liminary plan map shall include detailed information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities, and building lots.	All such maps shall also show contours at intervals of two (2) feet and identify accurately the boundaries of the flood plain area.

c.	Final Plan Requirements

The following information shall be required as part of the Final Plan and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor:

l.	All information required for submission of the Preliminary Plan plus any changes required by the
 




Planning Department and/or the local municipal governing body.

2.		A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings, structures, roads, and public utilities to be constructed in flood plain areas.	All such maps shall show contours at inter­ vals of two (2) feet and identify accurately the boundaries of the flood plain area.

SECTION 6.04 DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS

The design standards and improvements specified herein shall be considered requirements in addition to those of Chapter 5 and otherwise listed in this Ordinance.

A.	General

1.	Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land located in flood plain areas may be platted for development with the provision that
the developer construct all buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance with this and any other laws and ordinances regulating such development.

2.	Building sites for residences or any other type of dwellings or accommodations and building sites for structures or buildings other than residential uses shall be permitted in the flood plain only when in compliance with appropriate municipal zoning ordinances, the Lebanon county Floodproofing Building Code, and any other applicable regulations.

3.	If the Planning Department and/or the local municipality determine that only a part of a proposed plat can be safely developed, the shall limit development to that part and shall require that development proceed con­ sistent with this determination.

4.	When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the Planning Department and/or the local municipality determine that additional controls are required to insure safe development, they may require the developer to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land.	Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every recorded plat.

5.	Whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a watercourse within the designated flood plain,
the developer shall notify, in writing by certified mail, all adjacent communities and the
 



Penna. Department of Community Affairs of all such intended activities prior to any alteration
or relocation of the watercourse.	Copies of such notification shall be submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator.	The developer shall also assure the local municipally governing body in writing that the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse in question will be maintained.

6.	No new construction or development shall be located within a designated floodway . Where the floodway
has not been specifically identified for a stream or waterway, no new construction or development shall
be permitted within the stream channel (from top of bank to top of bank) . Furthermore, construction or development outside the stream banks but within the flood plan district shall be permitted only when in compliance with this Ordinance and Penna. Department of Environmental Protection permit requirements.

7.	Lots which are within the flood plain shall be subject to the following:

a.	Any lots created or revised shall have not more than 50% of their area within the flood plain, except that large lots may be exempted provided a minimum 1 acre area of said lot is outside the flood plain.

b.	Lot access to a public road shall not be re­ stricted or prevented by flood plain areas.

B.	Excavation, Grading and Use of Fill

Any excavation activities, grading and use of fill shall be in compliance with all applicable terms of the municipal zoning ordinance and the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code.
Furthermore, where excavation or grading is proposed or
where any existing trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover will
be removed, the developer shall consult the County conservation
District representative concerning plans for erosion and sediment
control and to also obtain a report on the soil characteristics
of the site so that determination can be made as to the type and
degree of development the site may accommodate.	Before undertaking any excavation or grading, the developer shall obtain a Grading and Excavation Permit if such is required by the municipality.

C.	Drainage Facilities

Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface water without damage to persons or property.	The
 




system shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings and on-site disposal sites.

Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Department.	The Planning Department may also require a primarily underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.

D.	streets

The finished excavation of proposed streets shall be no more than two (2) feet below the Base Flood Elevation.	The Planning Department may require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets to determine compliance with this requirement.
Drainage and bridge openings shall be sufficient to discharge
flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.

E.	Sewer Facilities

All sanitary sewer systems located in flood plain areas, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to a point two
(2)	feet above the Base Flood Elevation.

1.	The Planning Department may prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil ab­ sorption systems where such systems will not function due to high ground water, flooding, or unsuitable soil characteristics.	The Planning Department may require that the developer note on the face of the plat and in any deed of conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited  in designated areas.

2.	The Planning Department may prescribe adequate methods for waste disposal.	If a sanitary sewer system is located on or within 1000 feet of the pro­ posed subdivision and/or land development, the Planning Department and/or the local municipality shall require the developer to provide sewage facilities to connect to this system where practical, and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed
by the developer in connecting to the system.

F.	Water Facilities

All water systems located in flood plain areas, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to a point two (2) feet above the Base Flood Elevation.	If there is an existing public water supply system on or near the subdivision, the Planning Department and/or the local municipality shall require the
 
. ..








developer to connect to this system where practical, and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed by the developer in connecting to the system.

G.	Other Public and/or Private Utilities and Facilities

All other public and/or private utilities and facilities shall be elevated or floodproofed to a point two (2) feet above the Base Flood Elevation.

SECTION 6.05 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE

No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Department and the local municipality until the improvements required by this Ordinance are completed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the local municipality and the Planning Department . In lieu of such construction, approval may be granted prior to completion providing:

A.	The developer enters into an agreement with the local municipality or county guaranteeing that improvements will be installed in accordance with the plans, specifications, and schedules approved by the municipality prior to plat approval.	This agreement shall also guarantee that no lot will be sold or building constructed in any flood plain
area prior to completion of all protective works or measures
planned for such lot and necessary access to facilities; and

B.	The developer provides a fiscal surety to guarantee per­ formance of this agreement and completion of the improve­ ments as planned.	The surety may include a certified check, escrow account, irrevocable letter of credit or other bond acceptable to the municipality.	The  procedural requirements of Section 5.18 of this Ordinance shall apply to any such bonding proposal.

SECTION 6.05 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY

The grant of a permit or approval of a subdivision and/or land development plan in the identified flood plain area shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the municipality or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the municipality, its officials or employees.

Adopted this 27th day of August, 1996.
 
.· .. , ........,,









 
ATTEST:
 

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP

 








Member
 


SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO.#	2 70





AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND AND TO BE INCORPORATED INTO THE EXISTING SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION LAND USE ORDINANCE, ORDINANCE NO. 164, AMENDING  CHAPTER 5 "REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS", BY ADDING A NEW SECTION 5.02.0, PUBLIC DEDICATION OF PARK AND OPEN SPACE LAND; AND BY AMENDING CHAPTER 4, "PLANS AND PLATS: REQUIRED INFORMATION", SECTIONS 4.02.D AND 4.02.E.



WHEREAS, the South Lebanon Township Supervisors have adopted a Recreation, Parks and Open Space Plan which contains recommendations for the mandatory dedication of park and open space land; and,

WHEREAS, South Lebanon Township has previously adopted a Subdivision Land Use Ordinance,Ordinance No. 164, as South Lebanon Township's ordinance governing subdivision and land development; and,

WHEREAS, South Lebanon Township does not currently provide for such dedication as a requirement of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance; and

WHEREAS,  the  South  Lebanon Township  Supervisors  have deemed  it necessary for the protection, health, and welfare of the residents of South Lebanon Township to adopt an ordinance, which mandates and regulates the dedication of park and open space land.

NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the South
Lebanon Township Supervisors, as follows:







"SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 164, THE SUBDIVISION
LAND USE ORDINANCE" is hereby amended for all subdivision and land development in South Lebanon Township in the following manner:
 
SECTION 1:  Chapter 4, Section 4.02, Minor Subdivisions, is hereby amended by adding new subsection 0-(6), as follows:


"D (6).	,Each subdivision and land development shall include the mandatory de_dication of park and open space land or the payment of a fee-in­ lieu thereof, consistent with the provisions of this ordinance. The plan shall
include notes which explain the calculation of the amount of land or the fee-in-lieu thereof, and the applicant's intention to offer same, or pay same, whichever may be appropriate, to the Township at the time recording of the approved plan."

SECTION 2: Chapter 4, Section 4.02, Minor Subdivisions,  is hereby amended by
adding new subsection E-(5),as follows:

"E(5). The Owner's certification and dedication statement shall include mandatory dedication of park and open space land or the payment of a fee-in­ lieu thereof consistent with and as required by this ordinance ."

SECTION 3: Chapter 5, Section 5.02, Required Improvements and Design Standards, is hereby amended by adding new subsection 0., as follows:

1.	Parkland and Open Space Requirements:

2.	The land reserved and dedicated to the Township for park and open space	usage shall be a single lot which shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance, the South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance, and the following specific requirements :

a.	The land, where feasible, must be a minimum of 5 acres in size (unless the intended use is for a special use park or linear park development).

b.	The land, where feasible, shall be in such a location that additional adjacent land abutting two or more boundary lines shall be undeveloped, and .available for purchase by the Township for expansion of the recreation area, and of such character (terrain, topography, physical features, etc.) that the adjacent land can reasonably be developed into a park or recreational land which assessment and determination shall be made by the Township Supervisors.

c.	The land shall be easily and safely accessible for vehicles, pedestrians, and/or bicycles.

d.	A maximum of 15% of the tract may consist of floodplain, wetland, steep slopes, utility easements or rights-of-way, or other features that otherwise render the lots undevelopable for its intended
 
recreation use.


e.	The tract shall have accessibility to utilities including, water, sewer ,
. and power, unless deemed unnecessary by the Township for the
.intended park facility development such as a greenway/linear  park development.

f.	The tract shall not contain stormwater facilities designed to detain or retain stormwater for the parent tract or another site.

2.	Consistent with the standards of the South Lebanon Township Recreation, Park and Open Space Plan, the amount of park and open space land required to be dedicated shall equal at least 10 acres of park land per 1,000 residents , or 0.025 acres of land per residential lot or equivalent residential dwelling shall be dedicated under this part.

3.	Where the Township Supervisors determine that because shape, location, access, topography, or other physical features of the land, that it is impractical to dedicate land to the Township or set aside recreation area as required by Section 5.02(0)(2) above, the Township Supervisors shall require payment of a fee-in-lieu of such land which shall be payable to the Township prior to recording each final plan and shall be in an amount equal to the percentage of the total number of dwelling units for each phase.

The initial fee in lieu of land shall be set at $750 per residential lot or equivalent dwelling unit.  This fee may be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the Township Supervisors . The fees collected hereunder shall be utilized by the Township for recreational purposes and shall be administered in accordance with Section 503 (11) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities  Planning Code.

A fee authorized under this Section shall, upon its receipt by the Township be deposited in an interest bearing account.  Interest earned on such an · account shall become funds in that account.  Funds from such accounts shall be expended to acquire land and/or design and construct recreation facilities , and/or pay for recreational planning and plan development.

4.	Upon agreement by the developer, the Township may accept the construction of recreational facilities, the payment of fees-in-lieu thereof , the private reservation of land for recreational purposes, the dedication of land in other areas of the Township, or a combination of the above.

If the developer proposes the private reservation of land, through either the inclusion of such land as common elements of a condominium or planned community as contained in the Pennsylvania Uniform
 

Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.ss 3103 et seq.or the Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 Pa. C. S. ss 5101 et seq., then such documentation shall be recorded, and shall provide that the land cannot
be further developed . Furthermore, the Township shall be granted the
rights.to maintain the land as set forth in Article VII of the Municipalities Planning Code dealing with the maintenance of common open space in planned residential developments . Notwithstanding the foregoing, the developer may request that the Township Supervisors approve transfer of the land to an organization dedicated to the conservation of natural · resources with deed restrictions preventing further development acceptable to the Township Solicitor.

5.	The landowner shall enter into an agreement with the Township setting forth the fees to be paid, the facilities to be constructed, or the land to be privately reserved and the method of its maintenance. All such agreements shall be executed prior to final plan approval.



SECTION 4: All ordinances or part of ordinances conflicting with the Provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.

SECTION 5: Except as modified herein, the South Lebanon Township Subdivision Land Use Ordinance as presently enacted shall remain in full force and effect.


SECTION  6:  This  Ordinance  shall  become effective  upon   its enactment. ORDAINED and ENACTED this ;.rel	day of  1!W£ ,2003



 
 




SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE





























ORDINANCE NO. 332 SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP
LEBANON, COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA






Adopted at a Public Meeting held on January 22, 2013
 

SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 332


An Ordinance repealing Ordinance Number 269 (Storm Water Management Ordinance) and adopting a new Storm Water Management Ordinance regulating Storm Water Management within South Lebanon Township.


BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS	1
101.	Statement of Findings	1
102.	PUipose	2
103.	Statutory Authority	2
104.	Applicability	3
105.	General Requirements	3
106.	Repealer	4
107.	Severability	4
108.	Compatibility with Other Ordinance Requirements	4
109.	Erroneous Permit	4
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS	5
ARTICLE ill. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT	15
301.	General Requirements	15
302.	Stonnwater Man.agement Districts	18
303.	Stonnwater Man.agement District Implementation Provisions
(Performan.ce Stan.dards)	19
304.	Volume Reduction Requirements (Groundwater Recharge)	20
305.	Water Quality Requirements	24
306.	Retention and Detention Basins	25
307.	Pipes and Conveyance Facilities	27
308.	Inlets and Manholes	28
309.	Channels	29
310.	Streets	30
311.	Calculation Methodology..................·	30
312.	Best Man.agement Practices (BMP)	33
313.	Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control	37
314.	Floodplain Delineation	38
315.	Catch Basin Markings	39
ARTICLE IV. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS	40
401.	General Requirements	40
402.	Exemptions	40
403.	SWM Site Plan Contents ............·	43
404.	SWM Site Plan. Submission	47
405.	SWM Site Plan. Review	48
406.	Modification of Approved SWM Site Plans	49
·407. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plan.s	49
408. Authorization to Construct and Tenn ofValidity	50
409. As-Built Plans, Completion Certificate and Final lnspection	50
410. Modification ofOrdinan.ce Facilities	51
41J. Modification of Ordinance. Provisions ...................................	51
ARTICLE V. IN'SPECTIONS	52
501. Schedule of Inspections	52
ARTICLE VI. FEES AND EXPENSES	53
601. General ............................................................................•.	53
602. Township SWM Site Plan Review Fee	53
603. Expenses Covered by Fees	53
604. Performance Guarantee	53
ARTICLE VII. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES	55
701. Applicability	55
702. Operation & Maintenance (O&M) Responsibilities· ·········	55
South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page I
 
703. Operation & Maintenance (O&M) Agreement	56
704. Maintenance of Existing Facilities I BMPs	57
705. Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners	57
ARTICLE VIII. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES	59
801. Riglit-of-Entry	59
802. Post-Construction SWM BMPs Schedule of Inspections	59
803. Notification	59
804. Enforcement .....................................................................•.	59
805. Public Nuisance	61
806. Penalties	61
807. Appeals	61
ARTICLE IX. PROHIBITIONS	62
901. Prohibited Discharges and Connections	62
902. Roof Drains and Sump Pumps	62
903. Alteration of SWM BMPs	63
ARTICLE X. REFERENCES	64






APPENDIX A- Stormwater Management Site Plan Application ............................................. A-1
APPENDIX B- Stormwater Management Design Charts .......................................................... B-1
APPENDIX C- Stormwater Management Districts & Watershed Maps ...................................C-1
APPENDIX D -South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Facilities
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement ............................................. D-1
APPENDIX E- South Lebanon Township- Standard Stormwater Management Notes ...........E-1
APPENDIX F -Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Guidelines ........................................ F-1
APPENDIX G -Worksheets for Computing Expected Pollutant Loads from Specific
Land Uses.........................................................................................................  F-2






























South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page ii
 

SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP STORMWATE MANAGEMENT  ORDINANCE



ARTICLE I GENERAL  PROVISIONS

Section 101. Statement of Findings

The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors finds that:

A.	Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.

B.	A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of the Township and all the people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.

C.	A stormwater management plan shall be required for any regulated activity as defined by Section 104 at both the preliminary and final submittal stages. As an integral part of the Final Stormwater Management Plan, erosion and sediment pollution control measures shall be included and accompanied by an approval letter from the Lebanon County Conservation District.

D.	Inadequate maintenance of stormwater facilities contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines flood plain management and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases pollution of water resources.

E.	Reasonable regulation of connections and discharges to municipal separate stormsewer systems is fundamental to the public health, safety, and ·welfare and the protection  of people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.

F.	Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface water quality.

G.	Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to obtain a permit for stonnwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). Permittees are required to enact, implement, and enforce a prohibition of non-stonnwater discharges to the permittee's regulated small municipal separate stonnsewer systems (MS4s).






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Pagel
 

·	H. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to. implement a prograpi of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stonnwater discharges from their separate stonn sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).

Section 102. Purpose

The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote health, safety, and welfare within South Lebanon Township by minimizing the damages described in Section 101.A of this Ordinance through provisions designed to:

A.	Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sediment problems at their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.

B.	Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as possible.

C.	Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the Township and the Commonwealth.

D.	Preserve ang restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.

E.	Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater management best management practices (SWM BMPs) that are constructed in the Township.

F.	Provide procedures, performance standards and design criteria for stormwater management and planning.

G.	Provide standards to meet NPDES pennit requirements.

H.	Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this Commonwealth.

I.	Maintain  groundwater  recharge  to  prevent  degradation  of  surface  and  groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.

J.	Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.

K.  Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.

Section 103. Statutory Authority

·South Lebanon Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Stormwater Management Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as amended
32  P.S.  Section  680.1  et  seq.,  and  as  may  be  amended  in  the· future,  of  the  Floodplain
Management Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, as amended 32 P.S. Section 679.101 et seq., and as may be amended in the future and of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance ·                                                 Page2
 

Section 104. Applicability

Any landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land that may affect stonnwater runoff characteristics shall implement such measures consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance.

Areas of South Lebanon Township not delineated in Appendix C (i.e. not located within either the Cocalico Creek or Tulpehocken Creek Watershed) shall still be governed by this Ordinance, except that all regulated activities, as defined below, shall meet the stormwater management regulations mandated for the residual areas.

This Ordinance shall only apply to permanent stormwater management facilities constructed as part of any of the Regulated Activities listed in this Section. Stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution control during construction activities are specifically not regulated by this Ordinance and shall continue to be regulated under existing laws and ordinances.

This Ordinance contains stormwater management performance standards and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a watershed-wide perspective. Local stormwater management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design, et .) have been incorporated into the Ordinance to create a comprehensive guide.

All regulated activities and all activities that may affect  stormwater runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this Ordinance. The following activities are defined as "Regulated Activities" and shall be regulated by this Ordinance:

1.	Land development.

2.	Subdivision.

3.	Construction  of new  or additional  impervious  or semi-pervious  surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).

4.	Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.

5.	Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.

6.	Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances thereto.

All activities related to proper operation and maintenance of approved stormwater management BMPs and all activities that may contribute non-stormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4 are subject to regulation by this Ordinance.

Section 105. General Requirements

For any of the activities regulated by this Ordinance, the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building occupancy permit, or the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until the Property Owner or Developer or his/her agent has received written approval of a Stormwater Management Site Plan from the Township or its designee.                                                                        ·



South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance                                         Page3
 

Section 106. Repealer

Any other ordinance, ordinance provisions, or regulation of the Township inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

Section 107. Severability

Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare any section or provision of this Ordinance invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.

Section 108. Compatibility with Other Ordinance Requirements

Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this Ordinance do not relieve the Applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, law,  rule, act, or ordinance. Whenever there is a  difference  between  the minimal applicable standards specified herein and those included in other applicable regulations the more stringent regulation shall apply.

Section 109. Erroneous Permit

Any permit or authorization issue4 or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Township purporting to validate such a violation.


































South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page4
 

ARTICLED DEFINITIONS



For the purposes of this ordinance, certain tenns and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

A.	Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.

B.	The word "includes" or "including't shall not limit the term to the specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances oflike kind and character.

C.	The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other similar entity and the members of such partnership or association and the officers of such corporation.

D.	The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.

E.	The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained.

Accelerated Erosion - The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.

Act 167 Plan - The Plan for managing stonnwater runoff in the Cocalico and Tulpehocken Creek Watersheds adopted by Lebanon County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), and known as the Cocalico Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan and Tulpehocken Creek Watershed Act 167 Stonnwater Management Plan.

Agricultural Activity - Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas. This inclu es the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pastutjng and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.

Alteration -As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious; land disturbance.

Applicant - A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the Township for approval to engage in any regulated activity, as defined in Section 104 of this Ordinance, at a project site in the Township.

Best Management Practice (BMP) - Activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stonnwater impacts from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge,  and to otherwise meet the purposes of this



South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance                                                 Pages
 

Ordinance.	Stonnwater  BMPs are commonly  grouped into one of two broad  categories  or measures:  "structural" or "nonstructural."  In this Ordinance, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related  practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stonnwater runoff.  Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention  ponds  and  constructed  wetlands,  to  small-scale  underground  treatment  systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian  or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices.  Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.

Bridge- For the purpose of this Ordinance, a bridge is defined as a stormwater conveyance structure with an effective span or diameter exceeding six feet.

Carbonate Geology -Limestone or dolomite bedrock.  Also see Karst.

Chapter 102-Chapter 102 of the regulations ofDEP, 25 Pa. Code Sect. 102.1 et seq.

.Chapter 105- Chapter 105 of the regulations ofDEP, Z5 Pa. Code Sect. 105.1 et.seq.

Chapter 106-Chapter 106 of the regulations ofDEP, 25 Pa. Code Sect. 106.1 et seq.

Conservation District - A conservation district, as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P. S. § 85l(c)) that has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code
102.	The Lebanon County Conservation District is the local delegated Conservation District in
South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County.

Conveyance -The ability of a pipe, culvert, swale or similar facility to carry the peak flow from
the design storm.

Culvert -A structure with appurtenant works which carries a stream or stormwater runoff under or through an embanlonent or fill.

Dam - An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other pwposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.

DEP -The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

Design Storm - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a ·storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a 5-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24-hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see Return Period and Storm Frequency.

Designee. -The agent of the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors and/or agent of the Board of Supervisors involved with the administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this Ordinance by contract or memorandum of understanding.



South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance                                                  Page6
 

Detention Basin - An impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.

Developer - A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes any Regulated Activity of this Ordinance.

Development Site - The specific tract of land for which a Regulated Activity is proposed. Also see Project Site.

Disappearing Stream - A stream in an area underlain by limestone or dolomite which flows underground for a portion of its length.

Disturbed Area - An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.

Downslope Property Line - That portion of the property line of the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.

Drainage Conveyance Facility - A Stormwater Management Facility designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.

Drainage Easement - A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.

Earth Disturbance - Any activity including, but not limited to, construction, mining, timber harvesting and grubbing which alters, disturbs, and exposes the existing land surface.

Earth Disturbance Activity - A construction or other human activity which alters, disturbs, and exposes the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations;	embankments; road maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials. Earth disturbance activity is subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.

Erosion -The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind, ice, chemic action, or other natural forces.

Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Plan -A plan that is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.

Existing Conditions -The initial condition of a project site prior to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover is proven to generate lower curve numbers or Rational "C" value, such as forested lands. For the pwpose of this Ordinance, the existing condition shall ·be considered the dominant land cover during the 5-year period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.                                 ·

FEMA -the Federal Emergency Management Agency.






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance                                         Page7
 
Flood - A general but temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this Commonwealth.

Floodplain - The lands adjoining a river or stream that have been or may be expected to be inundated by flood waters in a 100-year frequency flood.	Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by applicable, FEMA, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary - Mapped as being a special flood hazard area. Also included are areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by DEP).

Floodplain Management Act - Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, as amended 32 P.S. Section 679.101 et seq., and as maybe amended in the future.

Floodway - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area .where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year frequency floodway, it is assumed - absent evidence to the contrary - that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.

Forest Management I Timber Operations -Planning and activities necessary for the management of forest land. These include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvercultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.

Freeboard - A vertical distance between the elevation of the design highwater and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.

Grade -A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. (To) Grade - to finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embanlanent or bottom of excavation.

Grassed Waterway - A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct surface water from cropland.

Groundwater Recharge -Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies.

Hydrograph -A graph showing the rate of flow (discharge) versus time past a specific point in a river, channel or other natural or man-made stormwater conveyance facility. The rate of flow is typically expressed in cubic meters or cubic feet per second (ems or cfs).

Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) - Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained  from local NRCS offices or




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance                                    Pages
 

conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS3,4).


Impervious Surface (Impervious Area) - A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs, driveways, parking lots, additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets or sidewalks.

Impoundment - A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater runoff or detain stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.

Infiltration Structures -A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, and seepage trenches).

Inlet -A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.

Karst -A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage, and  caves.  Karst  is  formed  on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.

Land Development -Any of the following activities:

1.	the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving:

a.	a group of two or more buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential buildings on a lot or lots regardless of occupants or tenure; or

b.	the division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features;

2.	any subdivision of land.

3.	development  in  accordance  with  Section  503(1.l)of  the  PA  Municipalities  Planning Code.

Landowner - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land.

Land Disturbance - Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.

Lineament-A fracture on the order of I O's of kilometers long usually extending to the basement below sedimentary rock.





South Lebanon Township - Stor water Management Ordinance                                     Page9
 

Main Stem (Main Channel) -Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance facility used as a reach in the Tulpehocken and Cocalico Creek hydrologic models.

Manning Equation in (Manning formula) - A method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.

MPC-The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 1, 1967, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended, 53 P.S. Section 10101 et seq., and as maybe amended in the future.

Municipality -South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County, PA.

Natural Drainageway- An existing channel for water runoff that was formed by natural forces.

NPDES-The U.S. EPA's ''National Pollution Discharge Elimination System", which regulates point discharges (discrete conveyances such as pipes or man-made ditches).

NRCS -USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).

Occupancy Permit - A certificate issued by the building code official appointed to issue such certificates after the building code official inspects a building or structure and finds no violation of the provisions of the code or other laws that are enforced by the building code official.

Open Channel - A drainage element in which stonnwater flows with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.

Outfall -Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.

Outlet -Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial drain.

Owner/Landowner - Any party holding legal and/or equitable title to real property being developed and affected by this Ordinance, including that party's successors and assigns.

PaDOT- The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any agency successor thereto.

Parent Tract -All contiguous land held in single and separate ownership, regardless of whether
(i)	such land is divided into one or more lots, parcels, purparts or tracts; (ii) such land was acquired by the landowner at different times or by different deeds, devise, partition or otherwise;
or (iii) such land is bisected by public or private streets or rights-of-way, which was held by the landowner or his predecessor in title on the effective date of this Ordinance.

Peak Discharge -The maximum rate of stonnwater runoff from a specific storm event.

Pervious Area -Any area not defined as impervious.

Pipe - A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.





South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance                                               Page 10
 

Plan - The stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution control plans and narratives.

Planning Commission -The planning commission of South Lebanon Township.

PMF - Probable Maximum Flood - The flood that may be expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorological and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined based on data obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

Project Site - The specific area of land where any Regulated Activities in the Township are planned, conducted, or maintained. Also see Development Site.

Qualified Professional - Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by this Ordinance.

Rational Formula (Rational Method) -A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.

Regulated Activity- Any earth disturbance activity or any activity that involves the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.

Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity- Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.

Regulated Small MS4 - Any small MS4 that is covered by the federal Phase II stormwater program, either through automatic nationwide designation under 40 CFR § 122.32(a)(l) (via the Urbanized Area criteria) or by designation on a case-by-case basis by DEP pursuant to 40 CFR § 122.32.(a)(2). "Regulated small MS4s" are a sub-set of"small MS4s." Also see Small MS4.

Release Rate -The percentage of pre-development peak rate of runoff from a site or subarea to which the post development peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.

Retention Basin - An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.

·	Retention  Volume/Removed Runoff - The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this Commonwealth during or after a storm event.

Return Period -The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur.  For example, the 25-year return period rainfall would be expected to· recur on the average of once every twenty-five years; or stated in another way, the probability of a 25 year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).  Also see Design Storm and Storm Frequency.

Riser -A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.

Runoff- Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.



South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance                                        Page 11
 

SCS -U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (now known as NRCS).

Sediment - Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion.

Sediment Basin -A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported by water.

Sediment Pollution - The placement, discharge or any other introduction of sediment into the waters of the Commonwealth occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.

Sedimentation -The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.

Seepage Pit/Seepage Trench - An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.

Sheet Flow -Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer, not concentrated in a channel.

Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) -All separate storm sewers that are:
(1)	Owned or operated by the United States, a State, city, town, township, borough, county, parish, district, association, or public body (created by or pursuant to State law) having
jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stonnwater, or  other wastes, including special districts under State law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district or similar entity.
(2)	Not defined as "large" or "medium" municipal separate storm sewer systems pursuant to 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(4) and (7), or designated under 40 CFR § 122.26(a)(l)(v).
(3)	This term includes systems similar to separate storm sewer systems in municipalities, such as systems at military bases, large hospitals or prison complexes, and highways and
other thoroughfares.

Soil-Cover Complex Method - A method of runoff computation developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called Curve Number (CN).

Spillway - A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the pond.

State Water Quality Requirements - The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.

Storage Indication Method - A reservoir routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.

Storm Frequency -The number of times that a given storm "event" occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. Also see Design Storm and "Return Period.






South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance                                               Page 12
 

Storm .Sewer - A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey intercepted runoff and stonnwater from other sources, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.

Sto_rmwater - Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.

Stormwater Management Act - Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as amended 32 P.S. Section 680.1 et seq., and as may be amended in the future.

Stormwater Management Best Management Practices - Is abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this Ordinance. Also see Best Management Practice (BMP).

Stormwater Management District - A watershed subarea in which specific stonnwater attenuation rates are required based on Act 167 watershed plan objectives.

Stormwater Management Facility  - Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stonnwater runoff. Typical stonnwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.

Stormwater Management Permit - A permit issued by the To.wnship after the stonnwater management site plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or with the final Township approval.

Stormwater Management Site Plan - The plan prepared by the Developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this Ordinance. Stormwater Management Site Plan will be designated as SWM Site Plan throughout this Ordinance.

Subarea -The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the Stonnwater Management Plan.

Subdivision - The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in .existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempt.

Subdivision - As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.

Swale -A low lying stretch ofland which gathers or carries surface water runoff.

Substantial Completion-The stage in the progress of the project where the project or designated portion is sufficiently complete in accordance with the plans and specifications so that the Owner can occupy or utilize the final work project for its intended use.

Time-of Concentration (Tc) - The time for surface runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.                  ·



South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance                                       Page 13
 

Township -South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania.

USDA -United States Department of Agriculture

Watercourse - A stream of water; river; brook; creek; or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.


Watershed - Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface water of this Commonwealth.

Waters of the Commonwealth - Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.

Wetland -Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including wamps, marshes, bogs, fems, and similar areas.










































South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 14
 
ARTICLE III
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES

ection 301.  General Requirements

A.	For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual)2, No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated.

B.	Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created, increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered  without written notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such stonnwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.

C.	Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to perm.it unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by SWM BMPs or open channels consistent with this Ordinance.

D.	Ifdiffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the Developer must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other hann will result from the concentrated discharge and downstream easements shall be established to provide drainage paths for concentrated discharge. Maximum use shall be made of the existing on-site natural and man-made stonnwater management facilities.

E.	For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Stormwater Management Act.


F.	Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Pennsylvania Stonnwater Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual) 1

G.	For all regulated  activities, unless preparation  of an SWM Site Plan is specifically exempted in Section 402:

1.	Preparation and implementation of an approved Land Development and/or SWM Site Plan is required.

2.	No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues written approval of an  SWM Site Plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requrrements of this Ordinance.

3.	The Township Engineer shall determine if a land development plan or SWM Site Plan is required or if a SWM Site Plan exemption is warranted.



South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 15
 


H.	SWM Site Plans approved by the Township shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.


I.	The Township may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this Ordinance, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.

J.	Impervious areas:

1.	The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total proposed development even if development is to take place in stages.

2.	For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in determining conformance with this Ordinance.

3.	For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this Ordinance; except that the volume controls in Section 304 and the peak rate controls of Section 302 do not need to be applied to existing impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed regulated activity. In all drainage areas where disturbance is taking place and new impervious surface is added, up to 50% of the existing impervious area may be utilized in the pre-development coverage calculation.

K.	All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:

1.	Protect health, safety, and property;

2.	Meet the water quality goals of this Ordinance by implementing measures to:

a.	Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded areas.

b.	Maintain or extend riparian buffers.

c.	Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.

d.	Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this Commonwealth.

e.	Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible.

3.	To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for Low hnpact Development Practices described in the BMP Manual 1






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 16
 

L.	The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects, such as sinkholes and groundwater contamination.

M.	Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this Ordinance.

N.	Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not more than 48 hours from the end of the design storm.

0. Those proposing Regulated Activities which do not fall under the exemption criteria
·	provided at §402 shall submit a Land Development Plan or SWM Site Plan consistent with this Ordinance to the Township for reView. In applying the exemption criteria set forth at §402, the total proposed development is to be calculated, even ifthe develolJlllent is to take place in stages. For the purposes of the exemption, Impervious Surface shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks. Any areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to. be impervious for the purposes of the exemption criteria at §402.

P.	Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Ordinance that would be located in or adjacent to waters of the Commonwealth or wetlands shall be subject to approval by DEP. through the Joint Permit Application process,  or, where deemed appropriate by DEP, the General Permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the Devel per or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands, otherwise approval to work inthe area must be obtained from DEP.

Q.	Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers or roadside ditches to promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of stormwater. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then it shall be permitted on a case by case basis by the Township.

R.	Stonnwater management facilities, which involve a State Highway, shall be subject to the approval of the PaDOT.

S.	Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc. are encouraged, where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention facilities.

T.	Where a development site is traversed by watercourses other than permanent streams, drainage easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the easement shall be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing authority.






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 17
 

U. The PA Code, Title 25, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply to the construction, modification, operation or maintenance of both existing and proposed water obstructions and encroachments throughout the watershed, including work in wetlands. Inquiries on permit requirements or other concerns shall be addressed to DEP's Regional Office. Permit requirements or inquiring on dam safety should be addressed to the DEP, Bureau of Waterways Engineering - Harrisburg. Mailing Address: PA Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Waterways Engineering, PO. Box 8460, Harrisburg, PA 17105-8460. Onsite Address: 400 Market Street, 3rd Floor Rachel Carson State Office Building, Harrisburg, PA 17101.

V.	When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed confonning substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways shall be subject to approval by DEP through the Joint Permit Application process, or, where deemed appropriate by DEP, through the General Permit process.

W.	Stonnwater resulting from regulated activities shall not be discharged into sinkholes.

X.	Match Pre-existing Hydrograph

Developers and/or landowners are encouraged to provide infiltration facilities or utilize other techniques which will allow the post-development hydrograph to match the pre­ existing hydrograph, along all parts of the hydrograph, for the site. This option is most feasible for small subdivisions in areas of non-carbonate geology. "Groundwater Recharge" and "Water Quality" volumes as given in Sections 304 and 305 can be used as part of this option.

Section 302.	Stormwater Management Districts

A.	South Lebanon Township has been divided into stonnwater management districts to facilitate control of stonnwater runoff appropriately for the watershed, instead of individual site-specific design. Therefore, the Township has developed separate standards and design criteria for each studied watershed or subwatershed, as recommended by Act 167, the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act and developed within the individual watershed plans. Stormwater management districts are illustrated within Appendix C and are listed as follows:

1.	Tulpehocken (District A)

2.	Cocalico

3.	South Lebanon Residual










South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 18
 
 	Table 111-1 	













Section 303.		Stormwater Management District Implementation Provisions (Performance Standards)

A.	General - Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated activity shall meet the peak release rates of runoff prior to development for the design storms specified in Table III-1 above.

B.	District Boundaries -The boundaries of the Stonnwater Management Districts are shown on an official map that is available for inspections at the Township office. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in the Ordinance Appendix C. The exact location of the Stormwater Management District boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours (or most accurate data required) provided as part of the SWM Site Plan.

C.	Sites Located in More Than 1 District- For a proposed development site located within two or more stormwater management districts, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be the pre-development peak discharge for that stormwater management district as indicated in Table 111-1. The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak discharge in any direction may be a 100% release rate provided that the overall site discharge meets the weighted average release rate.

D.	Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed to another unless they are sub-watersheds of a common watershed which join together within the perimeter of the Development Site, or the effect of the transfer does not alter the peak discharge (in conformance with the requirements of the Act 167 Plan) onto adjacent lands, or drainage easements from the affected landowners are provided.

E.	Off-Site Areas - Off-site Areas that drain through a proposed development site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.

F.	Site Areas - Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management measures shall be subject to the Management District Criteria.




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page l9
 

In other words, unimpacted areas bypassing the stonnwater management facilities would not be subject to the Management District Criteria.

F.	Stormwater Conveyance Corridor Protection (riparian  Corridor  Preservation  and vegetation) - Runoff from developed  areas of the site, including but not limited to areas of impervious surface, shall be managed through a series of riparian corridor vegetation facilities whenever possible. This will be accomplished in a manner satisfactory to the Township utilizing guidelines presented in the BMP Manual and the priority goal of the riparian vegetation will be the reduction of thermal impacts on stormwater runoff associated with impervious  areas, with a secondary goal being the protection of capacity of existing stormwater conveyance  channels.  These goals will be achieved  through the use of design criteria in Article III of this Ordinance and shall be in addition to any other Township ordinance provisions.                                                   ·

G.	Sub-Regional (Combined Site) Storage

Runoff can be managed regionally by one or more developers, either on-site or off-site. The design and release rate shall be consistent with this Ordinance. "Groundwater Recharge" and ''Water Quality'' volumes as described in Sections 304 and 305 will be a part of this option.

H.	Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels, and at all points of discharge.

Section 304.   Volume Reduction Requirements (Groundwater Recharge)

A.	Provisions  for stormwater  volume  reductions  are required  for  areas being  developed.
Design of the SWM BMP 's shall give consideration to providing ground water recharge to
compensate for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is paved and roofed over. These ground water recharge measures are required wherever feasible. Soils used for the construction of basins shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors).

B.	The low impact development practices provided in the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual 1 shall be utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection
1or the Alternate Method in Subsection 2 below.

1.	The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual 1  is
applicable  to any size of regulated  activity.	See Appendix  G for Design  Storm
Method Worksheets 1-5, which shall be used to perform the required calculations. This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.

a.	Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume to surface waters of the Commonwealth for all storms equal to or less than the 2-year 24-hour duration precipitation.

b.	For modeling purposes:




South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page20
 


1)	Existing  (pre-development)  nonforested  pervious  areas  must  be  considered
meadow in good condition.


2)	20% of existing impervious  area, when present,  shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model for existing conditions.

c.	If site conditions prevent total removal of the 2-year volume increase to surface waters of the Commonwealth after all feasible BMP options  are considered, the Alternate Method shall be applied (see subsection 2 below).

2.	The Alternate Method provided below should only be used where the volume control requirements of the Design Storm Method are not attainable. See Appendix G for Worksheets 7 & 8, which shall be used to perform the required calculations.

a.	Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first 2 inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.

b.	At least the 1-first inch of runoff from new  impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow (i.e. it shall not be released into the surface waters of this Commonwealth). Removal options include  reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration .

c.	Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed  to accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases at least the first one-half (1/2) inch of the permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.

3.	Stormwater Calculation Process (as outlined in the PADEP Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Best management Practices Manual, current version).

a.	Stormwater Calculation Process- Non-structural BMPs.

•	Step 1: Provide General Site information (Worksheet 1).

•	Step 2: Identify sensitive natural resources, and if applicable, identify which areas will be protected (Worksheet 2).

•	Step  3:  Incorporate  Non-structural	BMPs   into  the  stormwater  design.
Quantify the volume benefits of Non-structural  BMPs (Worksheet 3). Proceed  to Design Storm Method.
b.	For Design Storm Method:


•	Step 4: Estimate the increased volume of runoff for the 2-year storm event,
using the Soil Cover Complex Curve Number method.	Combining   Curve



South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 21
 

Numbers for land areas proposed for development with Curve Numbers for areas unaffected by the prop.osed development into a single weighted curve number is NOT acceptable. Runoff volume should be calculated based on land use and soil types (Worksheet 4).


•	Step 5: Design and incorporate Structural  and Non-Structural BMPs that provide volume control for the 2-year volume increase indicated on Worksheet 4. Provide calculations and documentation to support the volume estimate provided by BMPs. For Non-structural BMPs, provide Non­ structural BMP checklists to demonstrate that BN.IPs are appropriate. Indicate
the volume reduction provided by BMPs (Worksheet 5). Note: if the designer is unable to incorporate the 2-year volume increase after all feasible BMP options have been considered,  the design.er proceeds  to the Alternate  Method
described below.


•	Step 6: Provide detailed routing analysis to demonstrate peak rate control for the 1-year through  100-year storm events. This routing should consider the benefits of BMPs. Provide additional detention capacity if needed. Note: there are no exemptions from  the peak  rate analysis except as permitted  under
§402.

Proceed to Water Quality Calculations (Step 7), See Section 305.

c.	For Alternate Method:


•	Step 4: Capture the first 2 inches of runoff from all contributing impervious sunaces. The first 1-inch of runoff should be permanently removed and not be released to the Surface Waters of the Commonwealth. The other linch of runoff should be detained. Compute Runoff Volumes using Worksheet 7.

•	Step 5: Design and incorporate Structural and Non-Structural BMPs that provide permanent removal for the PRV and extended detention. The removal options for PRY  include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration. Infiltration for the first 0.5 inch is encouraged. Documentation to support the computations for volumes can be provided using Worksheet 8. For Non­ structural BMPs, checklists can be used to demonstrate that selected BMPs are appropriate. Indicate the volume reduction provided by BMPs on Worksheet 8.

•	Step 6: Provide detailed routing analysis to demonstrate peak rate control for the 1-year through 100-year storm events. This routing should consider the benefits of BMPs. Note: there are no exemptions from the peak rate analysis except as permitted  under §402.

Proceed to Water Quality Calculations (Step 7), See Section 305.





South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 22
 

4. !o comply wif!1 subsections 1 or 2. above? the land de':'eloper MAY submit origmal and mnovative designs to the Township Engmeer for review and approval. Such designs may achieve the objectives through a combination ofBMPs.

C.	Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:

1.	Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:

a.	A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility  and the seasonal high water table and/or bedrock (limiting zones).

b. An infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater load and drain completely as determined by field tests conducted by the developer's/landowner's professional designer.

2.	The recharge volume provided at the site shall be directed to the most permeable hydrologic soil group (HSG) available.

3.	The recharge facility shall be capable of completely infiltrating the impounded water
within 48 hours subsequent to any storm event.

D.	A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be performed to determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by a qualified professional,	and at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and subgrade  stability. The general process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:

1.	Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well  as natural  and man-made  features within
watershed to determine general areas of suitability for infiltration practices.

2.	Provide field test(s) to determine appropriate percolation rate and/or hydraulic conductivity.	Percolation testing shall be performed at the intended location and elevation of infiltration facility.

3.	Design infiltration structure for required storm volume based on field determined capacity at the level of the proposed infiltration surface.

E.	Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in geologically susceptible areas such as limestone areas. Extreme caution shall also be exercised where salt or chloride would be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this pollutant and it may contaminate the groundwater. It is also extremely important that the design professional evaluate	the possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed infiltration/recharge facility and recommend a hydrogeologic justification study be performed if necessary. Whenever a SWM BMP will be located in an area underlain by limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all SWM BMPs over limestone formations shall include measures to prevent ground water contamination and, where necessary, instability resulting from sinkhole formation. The Township may require the installation of an impermeable liner in SWM basins. A detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the Township.



South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page23
 

. i.  I - • - ,	• ,	rt	St.eckheckEng ineer ir.g	 








1.	The Tcwnship may rr;qt:.ire :he developer to provide sa:'eguards against groundwatel' contamination for uses which may cause gro1.mdwater contei:nination should there be a mishap or spill.                                                                                 '

2.	It shall be the developer s responsibility to verify if the site is 1mderlai11 by limestone.
The following note shall e attached to all SWM Site Plans and signed and seaJed by
the developer' 9 engineer/surveyor/Iand.scape/archi tect/gco logist:

--:--: -----------'• certify that the proposed detention ::,asin (circl.e
one) is/is not underlain by limestone.

F.	If  the  Developer's  professional  consultant  can  prove  tluoi1gh  analysis  that  the development site is located i11 an art:a miderlain by carbonate geology, and such geologic conditions would iikely res'lllt iu sillkhole formations. then the si e may be exempte.C from groundwater i·echa1·ge requirements. However, the develop;nent site shaII be required to meet all other hydrologic and water quality management ste.ndards as mandated l:>y this Ordinance.

0. \\'here pen'ious pavement is proposed for parking lots, rect'eational facilities, non­ dedicated streets:. or ot 1er areas, pavement construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.

H. Recharge/infiltration facilities may be used in conjunction with other innovative or ira.ditional	BMPs, sto1·mwater control facilities, and nonstrucntral stormwater management ·alternatives.

Section 305.	\Vater  Quality  Requirements

A.	Water Q 1nlity Calculations:

•	SteiLZ: Determine if the stormwater marwgement design complies with either the Design Storm lvfethod or the Alternate Me1hod. If volume compliance is achieved Llnder either of the5e methods. ?roceed to Step 8. If compliance is not echieved, proceed to Step 10.
·.
•	Step 8: Detennina if at least 90% of the dismrbed site area is controlled by a BMP
(maximum disru!·bed 1 u11controlled area of I 0%).  To be considered "co11tro1led, by a
BMP: the disturbed area must either drain to a stmctural BMP (or series of BMPs) or be  off-set  by   a  preventive   BMP,  such  as  reduced   imperviousness  or  landscape
restoretion. If at least 90% of the disturbed area is c.ontrolled. prcceed to Step 9 else proceed to Step 11.

•	Step 9: Total S\.1spended So!ids (TSSJ and Tota! Phosphorus (TP) requirements are considel'ed  n:et.   Demonstrate  use  of specific nitrate  preventioll/n:- duction  BMPs
{Worksheet LO in Appendix G). Jfthe i-equired BMPs (2 primary or 4 secondary or 1
primary   and  2  secondary)  are  proposed   within  the  stormwater  manageme1 t   plan,  then the  water  quality   ·eq1.1irement  for  nitrate  is  achieved.    If the  i-equ:red  BMPs  are  i:ot
proposed. proceed to Step l•1



South Leb:llnoo l'ownship - Stormwater M3nagement Ordinance	Page 24
 


•	Step 1O: If volume control i not met using either the Design Storm Method or Alternate Method, demonstrate use of  specific BMPs for pollutant prevention. Worksheet 11 in Appendix G.


•	Step 11: Estimate pollutant load from disturbed areas of the site, excluding preventive measures (if proposed). Worksheet 12 in Appendix G.


•	Step  12: Calculate pollutant  load reductions  with the proposed  structural BMPs.
Worksheet 13 in Appendix G. Iftarget load reductions are achieved for TSS, TP, and nitrate, then the water quality requirements are met.

Section 306. . Retention and Detention Basins

A.	Any stormwater management facility designed to store stonnwater runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embanlanent (i.e., detention or retention basin) shall be designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle the 100-year post-development peak flow rate tributary to the basin.	The use of inlets and pipes are prohibited  for the emergency spillway.  The height of embanlanent must be set as to provide a minimum 1.0-foot of freeboard above the maximum pool elevation computed when the entire 100-year peak flow passes through the spillway.   Rain gardens, with a maximum water depth of 12 inches,  shall  be  exempt  from  this  requirement.	However,  criteria  for design  and construction of stonnwater management facilities are not the same criteria that are used in the permitting of dams under the DEP Dam Safety Program.	Depending upon the physical characteristics of a dam, a dam permit may be required and the design will have to meet the provisions of PA Code, Title 25, Chapter 105.  Depending on the physical characteristics of a dam, the design could require that anywhere. from a 100-year to a Probable Maximum Flood (PMF) storm event be considered.  The following minimums shall be required:

B.	The maximum water depth shall not exceed six (6) feet, unless a modification is approved by Township officials upon recommendation of the Township Engineer. If a modification is granted, it may require provisions for fencing around the basin and a structural design of the basin embanlanent.

C.	The minimum top width of all dams/embanlanents/benns shall be five (5) feet for impoundments draining five (5) acres or less and a minimum of eight (8) feet wide for impoundments with drainage areas exceeding five (5) acres.

D.	Basins shall be designed in accordance with Soil Conservation Practices to accommodate sediment during construction.

E.	The interior side slopes of the impoundment area shall not be greater than· five (5) horizontal to one (1) vertical, unless a perimeter fence is provided.  In no case shall the
·	intenor sid slopes exceed three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical.

F.	Percolation rates may be used in Township approved areas to offset discharge rates as groundwater recharge.  Percolation tests shall be performed  at the site for each soil type.





South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 25
 

G.	All basins shall be structurally sound and shall be constructed of  sound and durable materials.  The completed structure and the foundation of all basins shall be stable under all probable conditions of oper tion.     emergency  spillway shall be provided  for the basm and shall be capable of dischargmg the 100-year peak rate of runoff which enters the.  asin  after. development,  in a manner  which  will  not  damage  the  integrity  of the fa ihty and will not create a. downstream hazard. Where  practical,  the  emergency spill'!'ay shall be c nstructed m undisturbed ground. An  easement  for inspection  and repair shall be provtded when the conveyance structure crosses property boundaries. The Township may also require downstream drainage easements from the basin emergency spillway.

H.	All basins that exclude Groundwater Recharge and/or Water Quality storage shall be designed to drain within twenty-four (24) hours following the end of the design rainfall. All basins that include Groundwater Recharge and/or Water Quality storage shall be designed to drain to the level of the required Groundwater Recharge and/or Water Quality storage volume within twenty-four (24) hours following the end of the design rainfall

I. A cutoff trench of relatively impervious material shall be provided within all basin embankments.

J. All discharge control devices with appurtenances (except discharge pipes) shall be made of reinforced concrete and stainless or hot dip galvanized steel. Bolts/fasteners are to be
·stainless or galvanized steel.	Discharge pipes shall conform to the requirements  of
Section 307.C below.

K. Concrete or welded galvanized steel anti-seep collar shall be placed around all basin discharge pipes to increase the seepage length along the pipe by 15% within the saturated zone of the pipe based on a 4:1 phreatic line. The connection of the anti-seep collar to the discharge pipe shall be completely watertight.

L.	Basin principal spillway outlet structures shall consist of stainless steel orifice plates (and mounting hardware}, galvanized or reinforced concrete riser and discharge pipe, and welded structural steel inlet grates (with a bituminous coating). Smooth lined corrugated polyethylene pipe may be used for discharge piping. The use of PVC pipe is prohibited for basin discharge piping except for small applications. Principle spillways with riser pipes where the designed water depth is deeper than 0.4 times the diameter of the riser, the riser shall have an anti-vortex device to prevent reduced capacity of the riser. (Example, if the top of an 18" riser is 100.00, the riser shall have an anti-vortex device if
the water is higher than 100.00 + [(18" * 0.4)/12] = 100.60).  Materials used for design
shall be specified on the plans.

M.	Low flow channels shall be provided from each water carrying facility to the outlet structure for all basins that do not include Groundwater Recharge and/or Water Quality storage.	Low flow channels shall be one (1) percent minimum slope and shall be designed to enable ease of maintenance. Basins that  include  Groundwater  Recharge and/or Water Quality storage shall not be required to have a low flow channel.

N.	Design storms for the computation of retention basins (where approved) volumes shall be based upon a 24-hour storm with 100 year return period (a storm with a 1% chance of occurrence each year).




South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 26
 

· 0. The effect on downstream areas if the basin embankment fails shall be considered in the design of all basins.  Where possible, the basin shall be designed .to minimize the potential damage caused by such failure of the embankment.                              ·

P. Vertical pipes, inlets and other surface water receiving structures shall be installed with trash racks.

Q.	Stormwater Management basins shall not cross property lines.

R.	Soils used for the construction of basins shall have low erodibility factors where K factor
s0.37.
\

S.	Minimum floor elevations for all structures that would be affected by a basin, other temporary impoundments, or open conveyance system where ponding may occur shall be at least two (2) feet above the one hundred  (100) year water surface elevation.	If basement or underground  facilities are proposed, detailed calculations addressing the effects of stormwater ponding to the structure and water proofing and/or flood proofing design information shall be submitted for approval.

T.	SWM BMPs including basins, channels, pipes, culverts,. etc. not located within a public right-of-way shall be contained in and centered within an easement not less than 20 feet in width. Easements shall follow property boundaries where possible.

U.	Inareas of carbonate geology, retention and detention basins shall:

1.	Be located at least one hundred  (100) feet from the rim of sinkholes or closed depressions, and

2.	Be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from disappearing streams; and

3.	Be located at least fifty (50) feet from lineaments or fracture traces; and

4.	Be  located  no  closer  than twenty-five  (25)  feet  from  any  surface  or  identified subsurface pinnacles; and

5. Not discharge into a sinkhole; and

6.  Be lined with  an impermeable  liner when  deemed  appropriate by the Township Engineer.

Section 307.	Pipes and Conveyance Facilities

A. All storm sewer pipes and culverts (excluding detention and retention basin outfall structures), gutters and swales conveying water originating only from within the boundaries of the Development Site shall be designed for a twenty-five (25) year storm event.	All storm sewer pipes and culverts (excluding detention -and retention basin outfall structures) conveying water originating from offsite shall be designed for a fifty
(50) year storm event.  Drainage easements shall be provided to contain and convey the



South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 27
 

one-hundred ( l 00) year frequency flood throughout the Development Site. Easements shall begin at the furthest upstream property line of the proposed Development Site in a watershed.  Bridges shall be designed to convey the one-hundred (100) year storm event.

B.	All storm sewer pipes and culverts shall be laid to a minimwn depth of six (6) inches from finished subgrade to the crown of pipe in paved areas and one (1) foot from finished grade to the crown of pipe in grassed areas. Pipes shall be bedded and backfilled with fine graded, highly compactible soil or stone.

C.	Storm sewer pipes other than those used as roof drains, detention basin underdrains, and street subbase underdrains, shall have a minimum diameter of fifteen (15) inches and be made of reinforced concrete pipe, corrugated galvanized metal pipe, smooth lined corrugated polyethylene  pipe, or approved equivalent. Where installation conditions merit, structural calculations that address the actual design requirements will be required.

D.	Storm sewer pipes and culverts shall be installed on sufficient slopes to provide a minimum velocity of three (3) feet per second when flowing full.

E.	Headwalls and ·endwalls shall be used where stormwater runoff enters or leaves the storm sewer horizontally from a natural or manmade channel. PaDOT Type "DW" headwalls and endwalls shall be utilized. Galvanized metal flared end sections are also acceptable, but Polyethylene flared end sections are prohibited for Township dedicated facilities only.	All headwalls and endwalls, for pipes larger than 8 inch diameter, shall be protected from child entry by placing removable stainless steel bars (and mounting hardware), spaced eight inches (8") apart, across the openings.

F.	A concentrated discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an existing watercourse or otherwise an easement shall be required. Pipe outlets shall also be provided with erosion resistant material or energy dissipaters to calm the anticipated velocity and discharge of stormwater.

G.	All storm sewer crossings of streets shall be perpendicular to the street centerline or within thirty degrees (30°) of perpendicular. Vertical and horizontal isolation conflicts with other utilities shall  be avoided. Storm sewers within a street shall not cross underneath a curb, especially at curb radii locations.

H.	Manning "n" values used for design of pipes and culverts shall be in accordance with Appendix B7.

Section 308.	Inlets and Manholes

A.	An inlet or manhole is required at every change in horizontal and vertical direction of storm pipe. Tee joints, elbows and wyes are prohibited.

B.	Inlets shall be located along the curb line and  are not permitted along the arc of an intersection.	When possible inlets shall be located away from the side lot property to avoid conflicts with driveways.   Flow depths for twenty-five (25) year storm shall not



South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page28
 

exceed three (3) inches in a roadside swale or gutter-flow condition. All new streets with curbs shall be designed to maintain a maximum flow depth of three (3) inches for slant and vertical curbs, and two (2) inches for rolled curbs; or the maximum allowable spread of water shall be one-half (1/2) of a through travel lane, whichever is less. The efficiency of storm inlets shall be supported with calculations based on the FHWA HEC-22.

C.	Inlets shall be depressed two inches (2") below proposed finished grades.

D.	Manholes may be substituted for inlets at locations where inlets are not necessary.

E.	Inlet capacities shall be per the most restrictive prevailing manufacturer design information. The manufacturer used for design shall be specified on the plans.

F.	All inlets in paved areas shall have bicycle safe grates.

G.	All inlets over four (4) feet in depth shall be provided with steps for accessibility. Inlets shall be placed along the curb line or edge of paving.

H.	Inlets shall be concrete and the inlets and grates shall meet design loads.

Section 309.	Channels

A.	Channels and swales with bare soils are not permissible. All channels and swales shall have a ground cover, or have a paved or concrete surface up to the twenty-five (25) year storm depths. Channels and swales shall be proven to be stable for both the initial and permanent linings.

B.	All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems, wetlands and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in  their condition  unless  the Township and any other necessary approving body approve an alteration.

C.	Energy dissipaters shall be placed at the outlets of all stonn sewer pipes, culverts, and bridges where flow velocities exceed maximum permitted channel velocities as specified below:

I.	Three (3) feet per second where only sparse vegetation can be established and maintained because of shade or soil condition.

2.	Four (4) feet per second where normal growing conditions exist and vegetation is to be established by seeding.

3.	Five (5) feet per second where a dense, vigorous sod can be quickly established or where water can be temporarily diverted during establishment of vegetation. Netting and mulch or the equivalent methods for establishing vegetation shall be used.

4.	Six (6) feet per second where there exists a well-established sod of good quality.




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 29
 

D.	The following conditions shall be met for all swales:


1.	Swales shall be designed using Manning,s equation. Vegetated swales shall be designed based upon accepted "n" factors for the anticipated degree of vegetative retardance.  The maximum allowable velocity for an established grass swale is four
(4) feet per second.


2.	The "n" factors to be used  for paved or rip-rap swales or gutters shall be based upon accepted engineering design practices as approved by the Township, a list of acceptable "n" factors appears in Appendix  B8.

3.	Swales shall be designed with six inches (6") of freeboard above the twenty-five (25) year storm depth.


4.	Swale side slopes shall be 2:I minimum. Side slopes for grass covered swales which will be mowed shall be 3:I minimum.

5.	All swales shall be designed to concentrate low flows to minimize siltation and meandering.


6.	All vegetated swales shall have a minimum slope of one (1) percent unless approved by the Township Engineer.

7.	Swales shall be centered within a minimum twenty-foot (20') wide easement.

Section 310.   Streets

A.	The depths of flow across a street intersection  shall not exceed one and one-half ( 1 Yi)
inches for the twenty-five (25) year stonn.

B.	Stormwater roof drains, sump pumps, and pipes, shall not directly discharge water into a street right-of-way or discharge into a sanitary sewer or storm sewer.

Section 311.  Calculation Methodology

Stonnwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using either the rational method or a soil-cover-complex methodology, or other method acceptable to the Township or its designee.

A. Stormwater runoff calculations shall use a generally accepted calculation methodology that is based on the NRCS Soil-Cover Complex method. However, the Township may allow the use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that contain less than 10 acres, or as approved by the Township Engineer. Table 111-2 summarizes acceptable computation methods. It is assumed that all methods will be selected by the design professional based on the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site.





South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance                                       Page30
 

8.	If the NRCS Soil-Cover-Compl ex Method (i.e. SCS Method) is used, stonnwater runoff shall be based on th e 24-hour rainfall depths sho wn in Tabl e III-3. If the SCS Method is used, Antecedent Moisture Condition 1 may be used in areas of carbonate geology upon approva l by the Township Engineer. Antecedent Moisture Condition 2 shall be u sed for all other areas.

Table III-2
Accepted Runoff Computation Methodologies

Method	Applicability

 
TR-SS,USDA
Soil Conservation Service
 
Acceptable for all watersheds Preferred for wate rsheds> 20 acres
 

Rational Method	Acceptable for small watersheds
and residential underground infiltration systems.  Recommended for watershed s< 10 acres

 
VTPSUHM
Virginia Tech/Penn State
Urban Hydrology Model
 
Acceptable for watersheds within limitations described in VTPSUHM
 

 
TR-20,USDA
Soil Conservation Service
 
Acceptable for all watersheds , especially where full hydrologic computer model is desired
 

 
HEC-1 U.S. A rmy
Corps of Engineers
 
Acceptable for all watersh eds, especia lly whe re full hydrologic computer model is desired

Table III-3
24-	Hour Rainfall Depths wi thin Distri ct (Inches)
 

Design Storm	Tulpehocken	Cocalico	South Lebanon Twp.
Frequency in Year s	Creek	Creek	Residual
1	2.40	2.S	2.5
2	3.00	3.1	3.0
s	3.60	4.1	4.0
10	4.S6	s.o	4 .8
2S	5.S2	5.5	5.3
so	6.48	6.2	6.0
100	7.44	7.0	6.7

C.	If the Rational Method is used, th e PaDOT Storm Intensity- Duration - Frequency Chart (PDT-IDF) , dated May 1986 sh all be u sed to determine the rainfall intensity in inches per hour. See chart in Appendix BI . Region 4 shall appl y to all lands within the Township. Wh ere  stormwater  runoff  hydrograph s  are produced  using  the  Rati on al  Method,  the



South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 31
 

provided storage volume shall be verified with a critical duration analysis that investigates similar storm occurrences with extended durations and applicable intensities to d termine the anticipated maximum elevation to occur in the storage facility for each requrred storm event.

D.	Runoff calculations shall include a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis indicating volume and. velocities of flow and the grades, sizes, and capacities of water carrying structures, sedllllent basins, retention and detention structures and sufficient design information to construct such facilities. Runoff calculations shall also indicate both pre-development and post-development rates  for peak discharge of stonnwater runoff from the Development Site.

E.	For the purpose of calculating pre-development peak discharges, all runoff coefficients, both on-site and off-site, shall be based on actual land use assuming summer or good land conditions. Up to 50% of existing impervious surface area may be used in the calculation of Curve Number or Rational Coefficient. Runoff coefficients for off-site discharges used to design facilities shall be based on actual land use assuming winter or poor land conditions.

F.	Criteria and assumptions to be used in the determination of stormwater runoff and design of management facilities are as follows:

1.	Rational Method Runoff Coefficients and SCS Runoff Curve Numbers shall be based on the information contained in Appendices B2 and B3. If the actual land use is not listed in these Appendices, runoff coefficients and curve numbers shall be chosen from other published documentation, and a copy of said documentation must be submitted with the stonnwater management report.

2.	Times of concentration shall be based on the following design parameters:

a.	Sheet flow: The maximum length for each reach of sheet or overland flow before shallow concentrated or open channel flow develops is one hundred (100) feet and shall be justifiable based on the actual conditions at each site. Sheet flow shall be determined using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of the NRCS Technical Release 55 (TR-55).

b.	Shallow concentrated flow: Travel time shall be determined using TR-55 based calculations.

c.	Open Channel flows: At points where sheet and shallow concentrated flows concentrate in field depressions, swales, gutters, curbs, or pipe collection systems, the travel times shall be based upon Manning's Equation and/or acceptable engineering design standards as determined by the Township Engineer.

3.	Storm sewer pipes, culverts, gutters, inlets, outlets and swales shall conform to the requirements of the PaDOT Design Manual, Part 2, Highway Design, in effect at the time the design is submitted, or as otherwise modified by the Township, including the requirements listed in Table 111-4 below:







South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 32
 



Facility
 

Table 111-4
 


Minimum Post Development Peak Discharge Requirements
 

Pipes, Gutters, Swales, Culverts, and Cross Drains


a.	Conveying water from within the Development Site:	Twenty-five (25) Year Storm


b.	Conveying water originating from offsite:	Fifty (50} Year Storm


c.	Drainage Easements and Bridges:	One hundred (100) Year Storm


Section 312.  Best Management Practices (BMPs)

A.	Goals and Objectives

1.	Preserve  existing natural  features, especially those which store, infiltrate or filter water runoff.

2.	Infiltrate rainfall to recharge the ground water table.

3.	Use physical  (structural) and biological  or vegetative (non-structural) filtration of water runoff to reduce pollutants and remove sediment.

4.   Moderate water runoff velocities to minimize erosion and damage to downstream aquatic habitat.

5.  Maximize  collection  and  treatment  of small  storm  event  (first  flush)  stormwater runoff which contains the highest concentration of pollutants.

B.	Design Criteria

1.	The  following  site  factors  should  be  considered  in  selecting  and  designing  the appropriate BMPs:

a.	Total contributing area.

b.	Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.

c.	Slope and depth to bedrock

d.  Seasonal high water table.

e.  Proximity to building foundations and well heads.

f.	Erodibility of soils.




South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 33
 

g.  Land availability and configuration of the topography.

2.	The following factors should be evaluated when determining the suitability of BMPs for a development site:

a  Peak discharge and required volume control.

b.	Stream bank erosion

c.	Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality problems.

d.	The volume of the pollutant being removed

e.	The nature of the pollutant being removed

f.	Maintenance requirements

g.	Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat

h.	Recreational value

i.	Enhancement of aesthetic and property value

C.	Examples

1.	Ponds (Basins) are enhancements to conventional detention basins, usually containing a pool of water to perform the BMP function of capturing pollutants to improve the water quality of the discharge.  Specific pond types and guidelines are:

a	Wet Retention Pond.

A permanent pool of standing water, normally containing a perimeter aquatic bench of 6" to 18" in depth, where pollutants are removed through sedimentation and plant absorption.

b.	Extended Detention Pond.

A basin to temporarily hold stormwater for an extended period of time to facilitate physical settling of pollutants. These facilities may be normally dry, contain a shallow marsh, have a small wetpool, and often contain a combination of these features. Extended detention ponds usually include a vegetated forebay that is baffled from the main basin with a rip rap mound, a small size outlet for the water quality storm discharge, a primary outlet for large storm events and a benched basin for varying water depths.

c.	Multiple Pond.




South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 34
 

A pond system containing a series of two (2) or more pools or cells to create a longer pollutant removal pathway.



d.  Rain Garden.

An excavated shallow (maximum ponding depth of 12") surface depression planted with specially selected native vegetation to treat and capture runoff.

2.	Wetlands may be constructed to contain an environment of shallow marsh where pollutants can be removed through a combination of settling, absorption, retention, plant uptake and biological decomposition. Wetland designs are best suited for larger watersheds and must be accompanied by a landscaping plan which specifies plan species,	planting arrangement, bed preparation and operation/maintenance requirements. Additionally, wetlands shall be planted with three (3) or more plant species for diversity and survival, plus at least fifty (50) percent of the wetland area must be planted anci maintained in plant cover. Specific wetland types and guidelines are:

a.	Shallow Wetlands

These systems are configured with several varying levels of marsh areas, containing a meandering water pathway from the forebay to a micropool at the outlet. Water depths usually range from 6° to 18".

b.	Pocket Wetlands.

Wetlands for small location where a seasonal high water table is needed to help sustain the water elevations.

3.	Infiltration systems are designed to capture stormwater runoff and infiltrate it into the ground.	These systems are best adapted for small drainage areas and effectively reduce runoff volume, remove many pollutants, recharge the groundwater and contribute to maintaining stream baseflows. Specific infiltration systems types and guidelines are:

a.	Infiltration Trench.

Shallow excavations that are lined with geotextile fabric and filled with stone to create an underground water reservoir which gradually percolates into the surrounding subsoil. Infiltration trenches are especially useful for connection to roof drains. Larger trenches will require an under drain to a stormwater conveyance system.

b.	Infiltration Basin.






South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 35
 

A large, open depression (basin) which collects stonnwater for percolation. The basin surface should be vegetated with deep rooted plants to enhance infiltration. Soils, slope, geology, and hydrogeology may restrict use of these basins.

c.	Porous Pavement.

Low traffic or overflow parking areas may be designed with porous pavement, a porous asphalt layer which pennits runoff to drain into an underground stone area where it can infiltrate into the subsoil.

d.	Depressed Pervious Area.

These facilities are useful for capturing runoff within a parking lot island. They are designed lower than the surrounding areas, contain permeable soils with a filtration system or a beehive drain and often contain an underdrain for excess runoff. Plants, shrubs and trees enhance performance and aesthetics. Contributing parking areas require curb cuts, curbs with weep holes or similar design to facilitate runoff discharge to the pervious area.

4.	Filtering systems are effective for filtering sediment and other pollutants from runoff by passing it through sand, soil, sand/soil mix, vegetation, a structural filter or any combination thereof. Filtered runoff is then infiltrated or drained to other on-site facilities. These systems may be integrated into landscaped areas and parking islands where plantings will add aesthetic enhancements. Specific filtering systems types and guidelines are:

a.	Sand Filter.

An underground chamber or bed with sand designed to filter pollutants as water drains through it, with an underdrain system for discharge of the filtered water to a stormwater conveyance system

b.	Bioretention system

These designs utilize a mixture of sand and permeable soil underneath a planted, landscaped depression to collect and treat surface water runoff. Bioretention areas are especially advantageous for parking lot islands and snow storage location.

c.	Riparian Buffer Strip.

Along streams, wetlands and lakes, an area of land which is vegetated with a combination of trees, shrubs and herbaceous plants. This land strip is designed to protect the water resource by filtering pollutants, improving the habitat and cooling the waterways by shading. The riparian buffer strip shall include 100 year flood plain, or be a minimum of twenty five (25) feet wide from the edge of the nonnal water level, whichever is greater.



South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page36
 


d.	Vegetated Filter Strip.

These BMPs are characterized by grass or low growing vegetation on a uniformly sloped area which is designed to intercept sheet flow water runoff between an impervious surface and the stonnwater conveyance facilities. Vegetated filter strips reduce water velocities and trap sediment and pollutants. They require good vegetation and soil permeability and should be avoided on steep slopes. They are best used along small parking lots, should be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide in the direction of water flow, and normally are designed equal in size to the impervious area draining to the filter strip.


e.	Vegetated Swale.

A broad, shallow,  low gradient swale with a dense stand of medium height vegetation which is designed to trap pollutants and promote infiltration.

f.	Water Quality Inlet.

Underground boxlike structure, such as an oil/grit separator, which is used to remove sediment and hydrocarbons from water runoff originating from parking lots and heavy traffic areas with the potential for petroleum discharges. These facilities are used close to the source of the runoff and currently include other products such as Stormceptor and Vortechnics.

5.	Open channels convey, filter and percolate stonnwater runoff. They are often use as an alternative to, or component of, a storm sewer system. Specific open channel types and guidelines are:

a.	Grass Swale.

Grass swales filter pollutants as stormwater runoff is drained to other areas. These facilities are best combined with other BMPs and may include check dams or minor depressions storage to reduce water velocity and encourage infiltration. An underbedding of mixed sand and soil with a pipe or stone underdrain will improve the use of infiltration and ground water recharge.

b.	Lined Channel.

Rip rap, concrete or other erosions resistant material may be used to line a channel to prevent scouring and degradation of a water carrying channel.

Section 313.	Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control

The following principles shall be applied to the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Plan and construction schedule to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation:






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 37
 

A.	Stripping of vegetation,  grading, or other soil disturbance shall be done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.

B.	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.

C.	The extent of the disturbed  area and the duration of its exposure  shall be kept to a minimum, within practical limits.

D.	Either temporary seeding, mulching, or other suitable stabilization measures shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during construction.

E.	Drainage provisions  shall  accommodate the stormwater  runoff both  during and  after construction.

F.	Erosion and sediment pollution control facilities shall be installed prior to any on-site grading.

Section 314. Floodplain Delineation.

Floodplain areas shall be established and preserved as provided below:

A.	A one hundred (100) year floodplain shall be established for all watercourses and shall be delineated by one of the following methods.

1.	Reference to a FEMA issued Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

2.	Reference to the Township's Official Zoning Map.

3.	Reference to a floodplain delineation report prepared by an agency of the County, State, or U.S. Government.

4.	Reference to a floodplain delineation report prepared by an individual registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such duties.

B.	Whenever a floodplain is located within or along a lot, the Recorded Plan (where a regulated activity constitutes a subdivision or land development) or SWM Site Plan (where a regulated activity does not constitute a subdivision or land development) shall include: the boundary of the 100-year floodplain, along with the 100-year flood elevations and dimensions from the centerline of the watercourse; and a plan note indicating that construction or· development within the floodplain shall be in strict accordance with Township Ordinance No. 331 regulating floodplain development. Floodplains not delineated on a FEMA issued FIRM or the Township's Official Zoning Map shall be described with metes and bounds.

C.	The inclusion of floodplain within lots in order to meet minimum lot area and/or yard requirements is allowed provided each such lot contains sufficient area exclusive of the floodplain  for buildings  and,  when  applicable,  on lot  sewage  disposal  systems  and



South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 38
 

replacement   drain  field   areas  unless   otherwise  specified   in the  Township   Zoning Ordinance.

Section 315. Catch Basin Markings.

All new catch basins located in Township right-of-way must be marked with high performance prefonned thennoplasti.c markings. '!\_Vo layer ombination, with blue/white contrast. ottom thermoplastic is blue with top layer white. Markings to say 'NO DUMPING!" on first lme and "INTO STORM DRAIN" on second line. Specify Pre-mark® PLUS stonn drain marking or equal. Size shall be twenty-nine (29) inches by five (5) inches.                                                 '


South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 39
 

ARTICLE IV
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Section 401. General Requirements

A.	For any of the activities regulated by this Ordinance, the preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until the Property Owner or Developer or his/her agent has received written approval of a SWM Site Plan from the Township.

B.	All Stormwater Management Site Plans shall be designed and certified by individuals registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and qualified to perform such duties based on education and training in hydrology and hydraulics.

Section 402. Exemptions

A.	Any regulated activity that meets the exemption criteria listed herein is exempt from the SWM Site Plan preparation and processing requirements of this Ordinance. These criteria shall apply · to the total parent tract property and development, even if development is to take place in phases. Parent tracts shall be properties as existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, unless specified otherwise, and shall provide the basis· for individual or cumulative impervious area computations. Exemptions relieve the property owner from SWM Site Plan submission, but not from providing adequate stormwater management  to meet the purpose of this Ordinance and protect adjoining properties.

SWM Site Plan exemptions include the following:

1.	Lot additions,  land exchanges, subdivision of existing buildings and  other minor subdivision activity which does not involve any new building lots.

2.	Agricultural activities such as growing crops, plowing fields, gardening, etc. are exempt from the SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this Ordinance provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of PA Code, Title 25, Chapter 102. Construction of new buildings or impervious areas is not considered an agricultural activity.

3.	Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less than 5,000 square feet and impervious area enlargements less than 2,500 square feet are exempt from the requirements in Sections 303, 304, 305, and Article IV of this ordinance.

4.	Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this Ordinance provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code 102.






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page40
 

5. Building expansion, impervious area enlargement, and development of existing lots, provided that no subdivision of new lots or land development for new principal uses is involved, the cumulative earth disturbance is less than one acre and the following criteria are satisfied:

 
Total Parcel Size*
< 1/2 Acre 1/2 -1 Acre
1.01 - 2 Acres
2.01 - 5 Acres
> 5 Acres
 
Minimum Distance** 10 Feet
20 Feet
40 Feet
50 Feet
100 Feet
 
Impervious Exemption*** 2,500 Sq. Ft.
5,000 Sq. Ft.
10,000 Sq. Ft.
15,000 Sq. Ft.
20,000 Sq. Ft.
 

*	Parent tract or original parcel size, prior to any subdivision, as of this Ordinance date.

** Minimum  distance  between  proposed  impervious  areas  and  the  downslope property line(s).

***Individual or cumulative total impervious area, after the effective date of this Ordinance.

6.	Single family residential lots may be exempted from the mandatory design and installation of certain stonnwater management facilities when the lot improvements (house, driveway, regrading, etc.) on the proposed subdivision plan document to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer that the lot improvements will not result in detrimental stonnwater discharges within the lot(s) or upon adjoining lands, roads, waterways or other areas. Exemption may be granted by the Board of Supervisors provided all of the following criteria are satisfied:

a.	The subdivision plan meets all of the criteria for a minor subdivision; and

b.	The minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres; and

c.	The slope of the lot shall not exceed 4% in the lot improvement area and slopes in
excess of 8% shall not exist within fifty (50) feet of the lot improvement area; and

d.	Streams, waterways and ecologically sensitive areas shall not exist within one hundred feet (100') of the lot improvement area; and

e.	The proposed lot improvements shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the side and rear lot lines, unless site conditions or other requirements necessitate greater setback; and

f.	The maximum impervious coverage shall not exceed 15,000 square feet; and





South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page41
 

g.	Plan notes shall document that the soils within the lot improvement area in the hydrologic soil group A, B or C, as published in the current edition of TR-55,
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and listed within the Appendix; and

h.	Stormwater discharges shall not endanger or potentially damage the lot improvements, adjoining lands, roads or otherwise pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public; and

. i.   No  unique  or  adverse  lot  conditions  shall  exist  which  warrant  refusal  of  the exemption request;  and

j.	The exemption request shall be submitted in writing with the subdivision application and shall address all the criteria cited herein; and

k.	Subdivision plans shall be accompanied by standard application and inspection fees to assure evaluation of lot(s) for compliance with the exemption criteria at the design, construction and inspection stages; and

I.	Subdivision plans containing any lots which have received stormwater management design and installation exemptions in accordance with these provisions shall contain a prominent plan note explaining the exemption and the lot development restrictions applications thereto; and

7.	Any lot receiving a SWM Site Plan exemption and subsequently found to be developed, or under no development, contrary to these exemption provisions or otherwise evidencing a stormwater runoff problem shall forthwith be subject to the following:

a.	Corrective actions shall be taken in the lot development to eliminate the noncompliance.

b.	Submission of a revised subdivision, SWM Site Plan, or land development plan shall be required, depicting necessary stormwater management facilities, in accordance with standard plan processing procedures.

8.	Exemptions from any provisions of this Ordinance shall not relieve the applicant from the requirements in Sections 301.A, 301.B, 301.C, 301.D, 301.J, 301.L, 301.0, 301.Q, 301.U and 301.V.

9.	The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this Section at any time for any project that the Township believes may pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.










South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 42
 

Section 403. SWM Site Plan Contents

All activities regulated by Section 104 of this ordinance and governed by the Act 167 Plan shall require a SWM Site Plan. The SWM Site Plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the plans shall refer to the associated computations and Erosion and Sediment Control Pollution Control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and erosion and sediment pollution control plan shall refer to the associated plans by title and date. All SWM Site Plan materials shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well organized. Incomplete submissions shall be returned to the Applicant within 7 days, along with a statement that the submission is incomplete, and stating the deficiencies found. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed accepted for filling as of the date of submission. Acceptance shall not, however, constitute a waiver of any deficiencies or irregularities.

The following items shall be addressed by or included with the SWM Site Plan:

A.	General

1.	General description of project.

2.	General description of permanent stonnwater management techniques, including construction specifications of the materials to be used for stonnwater management facilities.

3.	Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and  structural design computations and documentation for all stonnwater management facilities as specified in this Ordinance, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, including the recommendations and general requirements in Section 301.

4.	Plans shall be legible in every detail.

5.	Appropriate sections from the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM Site Plans.

6.	The Township shall not approve any SWM Site Plan that is deficient in meeting the requirements of this Ordinance. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this Article, when a SWM Site Plan is found to be deficient, the Township may either disapprove the submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the Township may accept submission of modifications.

7.	Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to implement the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan.

 
8.	A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP Manual 1
 

A detailed
 
site evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology
or karst topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas, such as brownfields.




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page43
 

B.	Drawings or map(s) of the project area shall be drawn at a scale no larger than 1" = 50'.
General site layout plans which will not be used for construction detail may be drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (100').  The Plan shall be submitted on 24-inch x 36-inch sheets and shall be prepared in a fonn that meets the requirements for recording at the Offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Lebanon County. These drawings shall be in confonnance with the applicable Subdivision and Land Development regulations. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but not be limited to:

1.	Project location map at a minimum of 1" = 2,000' showing the project site property line, limits of development, streets, street names, and bodies of water within 1,000' of the project boundary.

2.	Existing and proposed property boundaries. The total Development Site boundary and size with distances marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree. In the case of a Land Development on a large tract, the property does not need to be shown in entirely at the full drawing scale. The entire tract is required to be shown in the site location map.

3.	Clearly demonstrate existing and proposed drainage patterns by showing existing and proposed elevation contours at maximum intervals of two feet within the project limits and a minimum of 50 feet beyond the project limits, or as may be required by the Township Engineer.  In areas of steep slopes (greater than 20 percent), five-foot
·	contour intervals may be used. Show spot elevations at high and low points and critical areas which can not be interpolated between contours. Indicate the location and elevation of the benchmark.  Provide the date existing topography was surveyed
and the method of survey (aerial or field).

4.	Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the project area as well as existing and proposed one hundred (100) year flood elevations and finished floor elevations for all proposed buildings.  Show FEMA infonnation where applicable.

5.	Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, sinkholes, rock outcroppings, streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.

6.	Outlines of existing and proposed drainage areas and subareas and the paths for calculating the times of concentration (alternate is to show this infonnation in the Design Narrative).

7.	The locations of all-existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.

8.	An overlay showing soil names and boundaries as shown in the Soil Survey of Lebanon County. Provide a table listing the following information for the applicable on-site soil types.

a.	Soil map symbol (Soil name abbreviation)

b.	Soil name, applicable building site restrictions (Soil Survey Table 7)

c.	Applicable sanitary facilities restrictions (Soil Survey Table 8)



South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 44
 


d.	Applicable construction materials restrictions (Soil Survey Table 9)

e.	Applicable water management restrictions (Soil Survey Table 1O)

f.	Hydrologic group, flooding and high water information (Soil Survey Table 15)

9.	Proposed improvements and existing features including all structures, storm drainage facilities, roads, paved areas, and buildings. Provide a drawing legend of the existing and proposed features as well as the type and the amount of impervious area that is to be added.

10. The name of the development, sheet titles, drawing numbers, index, the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property, and the name, address and telephone number of the individual(s) or firm preparing the plan.

11.	The date of the plan submission and date of latest plan revision.

12.	A North arrow, graphic scale, and a written scale.

13.	Names of the landowners adjacent to the property.

14.	Existing and proposed land use(s).

15.	Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including hydraulic capacity.
Profiles of stormwater piP,ing systems using a horizontal scale the same as the plan
and a vertical scale 1/10th of the horizontal  scale.	Identify pipe materials,  sizes,
lengths, slopes, and inverts.  Identify pertinent elevations for inlets, manholes, and all
other profiled facilities.

16.	A note on the Plan indicating the location and responsibility for maintenance of stonnwater management facilities that would be located off-site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance standards and design criteria specified in the Ordinance.

17.	A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the stonnwater management system to be a permanent fixture that can be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by the Township.

18.	Construction details, sections, and specifications of facilities with sufficient information and dimensions for construction interpretation, which will provide the constructor enough information to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.  Provide a note which states the materials and details specified  shall not be altered during construction without written approval by the Township.

19.	A minimum 20 foot wide stormwater easement around all stormwater management facilities to reserve the easement area for drainage purposes and to provide ingress and egress from a public right-of-way. Identify stormwater easements and facilities to be dedicated to the Township.  Describe maintenance responsibilities and the responsible  party(ies).     Provide  a  note  prohibiting  easement  areas  from  being




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page45
 

obstructed with trees, shrubbery, and structures. Provide a plan note allowing County and Township Officials access to easement areas for inspection, installation, or correction of stormwater facilities.

20.	Limits of phases and a narrative of the construction sequence.

21.	The following signature block for the South Lebanon Township Engineer:

{Township Engineer), on this date (date of signature), has reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM Site Plan meets all desien st.ancfarcl!'; and criteria of South Lebanon Township Ordinance No. 332

22.	The location of all erosion and sediment pollution control facilities required by DEP Chapter 102.

23.	Expected project time schedule.

24.	Locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells.

25.	An O&M Plan for all existing and proposed  physical  stonnwater  management facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for O&M as well as schedules and costs for O&M activities.

26.	Construction inspection schedule.

27.	The Standard Stonnwater Notes from Appendix E and E&SPC Guidelines from Appendix F shall be shown on the SWM Site Plan.

C.	Supplemental Information

1.	A written description of the following information shall be submitted.

a.	The overall stormwater management concept for the project.

b.	Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this Ordinance.

c.	Stormwater management techniques and best management practices to be applied both during and after development.

2.	An erosion and sediment pollution control plan, including all reviews and approvals by the Lebanon County Conservation District and/or DEP.

3.	In areas of carbonate geology, a geologic assessment prepared by a qualified professional with recommendations to mitigate the effects of stormwater runoff and infiltration on sinkholes as specified in this Ordinance.






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater .Management Ordinance	Page46
 

4. The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows) on adjacent properties, aquatic features, and on any existing Township stormwater collection system that may receive runoff from the Development Site shall be evaluated.

5. Drainage area maps with outlines of existing and proposed drainage areas and subareas and the paths for calculating the times of concentration (alternate is to show this information in the Plan). Off-site drainage areas may be shown on USGS maps at a scale of 1"= 2000' or less.

6.	For development areas subject to flooding, a flood study shall be provided that addresses the requirements of Section 314 of this Ordinance as well as the Floodplain Management Sections of the Township's Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

7.	A Declaration of  Adequacy and Highway Occupancy Permit from the PaDOT District Office when utilization of a PaDOT storm drainage system is proposed.

8.	The Design Narrative shall be signed and sealed by a Registered Professional qualified to perform such duties.

9.	Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.

D.	Stormwater Management Facilities

1.	All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and described in detail. The volumes of stormwater detention required shall be noted on the plan, as well as approximate dimensions of the proposed facility.

2.	Plans for Groundwater recharge facilities must show the locations of existing septic tank infiltration areas and wells. A minimum fifty (50) foot separation from On Lot Disposal System (OLDS) infiltration areas is required. Infiltration rates shall be based upon percolation and probe tests conducted at the site of the proposed facility.

3.	All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the stormwater management facilities must be shown. If multiple facilities are used in conjunction with each other, such as infiltration BMPs with vegetation based management practices, a summary narrative shall be included describing any sequencing and how the facilities are meant to function with each other to manage stormwater runoff.

4.	A plan note shall be added to grant County and Township officials and employees thereof the right of access to the property for inspection of a stormwater BMP and, .in the event of default by the developer, installation of the stormwater management facilities.

5.  Maintenance & ownership provisions.

Section 404. SWM Site Plan Submission

For the purpose of complying with this Ordinance, the steps listed below shall be followed for SWM Site Plan submission. For any activities that require a DEP Joint Permit Application and



South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page47
 

regulated under Chapter 105 or Chapter 106 of DEP's Rules and Regulations, require a PaDOT Highway Occupancy Pennit, or require any other pennit under applicable state or federal regulations, permit approval shall be a condition of the SWM Site Plan approval.

A.	Any Developer proposing to engage in a Regulated Activity, as  defined  by  this Ordinance, shall submit four (4) copies of the SWM Site Plan to the Township.

B.	Distribution of the SWM Site Plan will be as follows:

1.	Two (2) copies to South Lebanon Township accompanied by the requisite Township Review Fee, as specified in this Ordinance.

2.	One (1) copy to the Township Engineer(s).

3.	One (1) copy to the Lebanon County Planning Department.

4.	One (1) copy to the Lebanon County Conservation District


Section 405. SWM Site Plan Review

A.	The Township Engineer shall  review the SWM Site Plan for consistency with this Ordinance. The Township shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified in this Ordinance.

B.	The Township Engineer shall review the SWM Site Plan or land development for any submission against the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for all provisions not superseded by this Ordinance.

C.	For activities regulated by this Ordinance, the Township Engineer shall notify the Township in writing whether the SWM Site Plan is consistent with the Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan and this Ordinance. Should the SWM Site Plan be determined to be consistent with the Act 167 Stonnwater Management Plan and this Ordinance, the Township Engineer will forward a letter recommending approval to the Township and copy the developer or the developer's consultant.

D.	Should the SWM Site Plan be detennined to be inconsistent with the Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan and this Ordinance, the Township Engineer will  forward a review letter recommending revisions to or disapproval of the plan to the Township with a copy to the developer or developer's consultant citing the inconsistencies. Any disapproved SWM Site Plans may be revised by the Developer and resubmitted consistent With this Orditiance.

E.	For Regulated Activities requiring a DEP Joint Pennit Application, the Township Engineer (upon request of the applicant or applicant's agent) shall notify DEP whether the SWM Site Plan is consistent with the Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan and this Ordinance and forward a copy of the review letter to the Township and the developer or the developer's  consultant. DEP may consider the Township Engineer's review comments in detennining whether to issue a permit.

F.	For Regulated Activities requiring a DEP  National  Pollutant  Discharge  Elimination System Permit Application,  the Township Engineer  (upon request  of the applicant or


South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page48
 

applicant's agent) shall notify DEP whether the SWM Site Plan is consistent with the Act 167 Stonnwater Management Plan and this Ordinance and forward a copy of the review letter to the Township and the developer or the developer's consultant.

G.	The Township shall not approve any subdivision, land development, or SWM Site Plan for Regulated Activities specified in Section 104 of this Ordinance if the SWM Site Plan has been found to be inconsistent with this Ordinance· or the Act 167 Stonnwater Management Plan, as determined by the Township Engineer. All required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to approval of any subdivision or land development.

H.	The Township shall not issue a building permit for any Regulated Activity specified in Section 104 of this Ordinance if the SWM Site Plan has been found to be inconsistent with the Act 167 Stonnwater Management Plan or this Ordinance, as detennined by the Township Engineer, or without considering the comments of the Township Engineer. All required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.

I.	The Developer shall maintain a copy of the SWM Site Plan at the project site during construction, as record drawings. Any discrepancies with the original design that warrants changes to the SWM Site Plan shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for review.

J. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days of submission whether the SWM Site Plan is approved, disapproved, or inconsistent with this Ordinance. If the SWM Site Plan involves a Subdivision and Land Development Plan, the notification shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the Township.

K. If the Township disapproves the SWM Site Plan, the Township will state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The Township also may approve the SWM Site Plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.

Section 406. Modification of Approved SWM Site Plans

A modification to  an approved SWM Site Plan that involves a change in SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM Site Plan as determined by the Township Engineer shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM Site Plan in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

A modification to an already approved SWM Site Plan shall be submitted to the Township, accompanied by the applicable review fee.

Section 407. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans

A disapproved SWM Site Plan may be resubmitted, with the reVIs1ons addressing the Township's concerns, to the Township in accordance with this Article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM Site Plan.






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance                                       Page49
 

Section 408. Authorization to Construct and Validity

The Township's approval of an SWM Site Plan authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM Site Plan for a maximum term of validity of 5 years following the date of approval. The Township may specify a tenn of validity shorter than 5 years in the approval for any specific SWM Site Plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the subdivision and/or land development plan is recorded or the date when the Township Supervisors approve and sign the SWM Site Plan if no subdivision or land development plan applies. If an approved SWM Site Plan is not completed according to Article IV of this Ordinance within the term of validity, then the Township may consider the SWM Site Plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM Site Plans that are considered disapproved by the Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with Article IV of this Ordinance.

Section 409. As-Builts, Completion Certificate, and Final Inspection

A.	The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all SWM BMPs included in the approved subdivision, land development, or SWM Site Plan. The as-built plans and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted to the Township.

B.	The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and specifications. If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the completion certificate.

C.	After receipt of the completion certification from the applicant's qualified professional, the Township may conduct a final inspection.

D.	Projects which disturb less than one acre shall be exempt from requirement for submission of an as-built plan unless, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, as-built conditions vary from the approved plan such that an as-built plan is warranted.

E.	An as-built plan shall contain the following stormwater related information:

1.	Actual location of floodplain by elevation and dimension from property line.

2.	Actual location and cross section of swales and accompanying easements.

3.	Actual horizontal and vertical location of SWM BMPs, including type and size of storm drainage pipes.

4.	For all storage SWM BMPs (e.g. stonnwater basins, rain gardens and infiltration facilities), the following information shall be provided:






South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page SO
 

a.	As-built elevation contours of the SWM BMP as applicable, or the horizontal and vertical dimensions of underground facilities to include depth from ground surface to top of facility.

b.	Verification of materials used in construction (e.g. geotextile materials).

c.	As-built outlet structure details, including type, size, and inverts of discharge pipes.

d.	As-built elevations for embankments and emergency spillways.

e.	A table showing the stage/storage/discharge information for the constructed conditions.

f.		A table providing a comparison of the approved design versus the as-built discharge rates.

Section 410. Modification of Ordinance Facilities

A modification which involves a change in stormwater management methods, facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or re-design of stormwater management facilities, or which is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the approved plan, shall requiie a resubmission in accordance with the plan requirements as set forth in Section 404 of this Ordinance.

Section 411. Modification of Ordinance Provisions

A.	The provisions of this Ordinance are intended as minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. The Township reserves the right to modify or to extend them conditionally in individual cases as may be necessary in the public interest; provided, however, that such variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, and that the applicant shows that to the satisfaction of the Township that the applicable regulation is unreasonable, or will cause undue hardship, or that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results. The list of such modifications shall be listed on the plan.

B.	In granting waivers/modifications, the Township may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards and requirements of this Ordinance.













South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page51
 

ARTICLEV INSPECTIONS

Section 501. Schedule of Inspections

A.	The Township Engineer or a designated inspector under the Township Engineer's direct supervision, in conformance with Section 801, shall inspect all phases of the installation of the SWM BMPs as deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer.

B.	During any stage of the work, if the Township Engineer determines that the SWM BMPs are not being installed in accordance with the approved SWM Site Plan, the Towriship shall provide written notification to the owner(s)/developer(s) and the contractor(s) indicating the deficiencies and require that the deficiencies be corrected within 30 days (or longer as may be required). If the deficiencies are not correct within the specified period of time, the Township may:

1.	Revoke any existing permits until a revised SWM Site  Plan is submitted and approved, as specified in this Ordinance.

2.	Utilize financial security posted by the owner(s)/developer(s) as part of the developer's agreement to install any unfinished facilities or remedy any improperly constructed faculties.

3.	Pursue other legal remedies pursuant to Article VIII of this Ordinance.



































South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page52
 

ARTICLE VI FEES AND EXPENSES

Section 601. General

A Township review fee shall be established by resolution of the Township to defray review costs incurred by the Township and the Township Engineer. All fees including engineering and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred relative to the review, approval and administration of stonnwater management plans and related improvements shall be paid by the Applicant.

Section 602. Township SWM Site Plan Review Fee

The Township shall establish a Review Fee Schedule by resolution of the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors based on the size of the Regulated Activity and based on the Township's costs for reviewing SWM Site Plans. The Township shall periodically update the Review Fee Schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed.

Section 603. Expenses Covered by Fee

The Township may include all costs incurred in the review fee charged to an applicant. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the following:

A.	Administrative/clerical   processing.

B.	The review of the SWM Site Plan by the Township and the Township Engineer. The following items may incur additional fees beyond the initial Township Review Fees:
C.	Attendance at meetings.

D.. The inspection of SWM BMPs and related improvements during construction.

E.	The final inspection upon completion of the SWM BMPs and related improvements presented in the subdivision, land development, or SWM Site Plan.

F.	Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this Ordinance, correct violations, and assure proper completion  of  stipulated  remedial actions.

Section 604. Performance Guarantee

A.	A performance guarantee (e.g. bond, letter  of credit,  or restrictive  escrow  account)  for site related improvements, including SWM BMPs, shall be supplied by the Developer in conjunction with the subdivision/land development approval, or in conjunction with the SWM Site Plan approval. The applicant shall provide the performance guarantee to the Township to ensure the timely installation and proper construction of all stonnwater management facilities and/or stonnwater BMPs as required  by the  approved  SWM  Site Plan and this Ordinance in accordance with provisions of sections 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania  Municipalities  Planning Code.

B.	SWM  Site Plans  not  requiring  subdivision  or  land  development  plan  approval  and




South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page53
 

disturbing ess than one acre shall be exempt from the requirement to provide a performance guarantee. However, neither a building permit nor an occupancy permit will be issued until the site is inspected and certified as complete by the Township Engineer

C.	At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the final release of the performance guarantee, the·owner/developer or his representatives shall:

1.	Provide a certificate of final completion letter from an engineer, landscape architect, surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent facilities have been constructed according to the plans and specifications and approved revisions thereto.

2.	Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.

D.	After receipt of the certification by the Township, a final inspection shall be conducted by the Township Engineer or designated inspector under the Township Engineer's direct supervision to certify compliance with this Ordinance.















































South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 54
 

ARTICLE VII
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES

Section 701. Applicability

For the purpose of this section, drainage courses, swales, stonnwater inlets, pipes, conduits, detention and retention basins, subsurface storage structures, and other stonnwater management facilities shall be included under the term "SWM BMPs."

Section 702. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Responsibilities

A. The  Final  Plan  shall  reflect  and/or  be  accompanied  by  supporting  documentation
· identifying  the  ownership  and method  of  administering  and  maintaining  all permanent
SWMBMPs.

B..The SWM Site Plan for the development site shall contain an operation and maintenance plan for n view by the Township Engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to insure proper operation of the facility(ies).

C.	The SWM Site Plan for the development site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all proposed SWM BMPs, consistent with the following principals:

1.	If a development consists of structures such as streets, sewers and other public improvements which are to be dedicated to the Township, SWM BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the Township. However, if the Township accepts dedication of streets, the Township is under no obligation to accept dedication of SWM BMPs located outside of the public right-of-way.

2.	Ifa development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of SWM BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, or private management entity (e.g. homeowners association or other parties of interest). Facilities owned and maintained by a private entity shall be in accordance with the terms	of an agreement, declaration of easement or other legally binding documentation approved in form by the Township. The agreement, declaration of easement or other legally binding documentation shall provide that the Township has the right to:

a.	Inspect the facilities at any time.

b.	Require the private entity to take corrective measures and assign the private entity reasonable time periods for any necessary action.

c.	Authorize  maintenance  to be done and  lien  all  cost  of the work  against the properties of the private entity responsible for maintenance.

D.	The Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior  to  final approval of the SWM Site Plan.  The Board of Supervisors reserves the right to accept




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 55
 

the ownership and operating responsibility for any or all of the stonnwater management controls.

E.	Maintenance of SWM BMPs shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.	Liming and fertilizing vegetated channels and other areas in accordance with soil test recommendations.

2.	Reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and mulching or sodding of scoured areas or areas where vegetation has not been successfully established.

3.	Mowing as necessary to maintain adequate strands of grass and to control weeds.
Chemical. weed control may be used if federal, state, and local laws and regulations
are met.

4.	Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt and sediment in order to keep the material from building up in grassed waterways, pipes, detention basins, infiltration structures, or other SWM BMP's, and thus reducing their capacity to convey or store water.

5. Regular inspection of the areas in question to assure proper implementation of SWM BMP's, maintenance and care.

6.	All pipes, swales and detention facilities shall be kept free of any debris or other obstructions and original design condition.

7.	Replacement or repair of damaged structural SWM BMPs or components of such SWMBMPs.

Section 703.  Operation & Maintenance Agreement

A.	Prior to final approval of the site's SWM Site Plan, subdivision plan, or land development plan, the property owner shall sign and record the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement contained in Appendix D which is attached and made part hereof, covering all stonnwater control facilities that are to be privately owned.

1.	The  owner,  successor  and  assigns  shall  operate  and  maintain  all  facilities  in
accordance with the approved schedule(s) in the O&M Plan.

2.	The owner ·shall convey to the Township easements to assure access for periodic inspections by the Township and maintenance, as necessary.

3.	The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address, and telephone number of the person or company responsible for operation and maintenance activities. In the event of a change, new information shall be submitted by the owner to the Township within ten (10) working days of the change.

4.	The O&M Agreement shall be recorded in the Land Records of the County and be deemed a covenant running with the land and binding on all successors and assigns of the landowner.




South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 56
 


B.	Other items may be included in the agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities. The O&M agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors.

C.	The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O M Agreement, the Township may perform the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.

Section 704.	Maintenance of Existing Facilities I BMPs

A.	SWM BMPs existing on the effective date of this ordinance on individual lots which have not been accepted by the Township or for which maintenance responsibility has not been assumed by a private entity such as a homeowners' association shall be maintained by the individual property owners. Such maintenance shall include at a minimum those items set forth in Section 702 above. If the Township determines at any time that any permanent stormwater management facility has been eliminated, altered, blocked through the erection of structures or the deposit of material, or improperly maintained, the condition constitutes a nuisance and shall notify the property owner of corrective measures which are required, and provide for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days, within which the property owner shall take such corrective action. If the property owner does not take the required corrective action, the Township may either perform the work, or contract for the performance of the work and bill the property owner for the cost of the work plus a penalty of 10% of the cost of the work. If the property owner does not pay such bill within 30 days, the Township may file a municipal claim against the  property upon which the work was performed in accordance with the applicable laws.

B.	No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter stormwater management facilities which have been installed on a property unless a SWM Site Plan has been approved to pennit such modification, removal, filling, landscaping or alteration. No person shall place any structure, fill landscaping or vegetation into a stonnwater management facility or within a drainage easement, which will limit or alter the functioning of the facility or easement in any manner.

Section 705. Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners

A.	The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM Site Plan.  The Township may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM Site Plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the facilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the stonnwater management controls.

B.	Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.





South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 57
 

C.	The O&M Plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.

D. The To ship may take enforcement  action against the landowner or his or her successors and assigns for any failure to satisfy the provisions of this Ordinance.






























































South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 58
 

ARTICLE VIII ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.


Section 801. Right-of-Entry

Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Township to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by this Ordinance.

Section 802. Post-Construction SWM BMPs Schedule of Inspections

SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee (including the Township for dedicated and owned facilities), according to the following list of minimum frequencies:

A.	Annually for the first 5 years following construction.

B.	Once every 3 years thereafter.

C.	During or immediately after the cessation of a 10-year or greater storm. Section 803. Notification
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued hereunder, the Township shall provide written notification of the violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions of this Ordinance. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not preclude by the Township from pursuing any and all remedies.

Section 804. Enforcement

The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Ordinance. All inspections regarding compliance with the Stormwater Management Site Plan shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or other qualified persons designated by the Township.

A.	A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file at the site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic inspections may be made by the Township or designee during construction.

B.	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to undertake any regulated activity under Section 104 on any property except as provided for in the approved SWM Site Plan and pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove  any  control  structure  required  by  the  SWM  Site  Plan  pursuant  to  this




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance                                       Page59
 

Ordinance or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to the approved SWM Site Plan.

C.	Occupancy Permit

A building occupancy permit shall not be issued by the Township unless  the landowner/developer or his representative provides a certificate of substantial completion letter from a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM BMP facilities associated with such building have been substantially completed according to the plans and specifications and approved revisions thereto. The Township Engineer shall also verify substantial completion in writing prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. The building occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or developer for all subdiVisions and land development in the Township that involve the construction of a new structure intended for human occupation.

D.	Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, the  Board  of  Supervisors  will  schedule  a hearing to discuss the non-compliance if there is no immediate  danger  to  life,  public hea11:}1 or property.

E.	Suspension and revocation of Permits

1.	Any permit issued under this ordinance may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Supervisors for:

a.	Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of an approved SWM Site Plan or O&M Agreement.

b.	A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the project.

c.	The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of others.

2.	A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the Board of Supervisors when:

a.	The Township Engineer or his designee has inspected and approved the corrections to the stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution control measure(s) that caused the suspension, or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance, and/or;

b.	The Board of Supervisors is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.

3.	If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or property, at its sole discretion, the Township may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation.   If the owner does not correct the violation





South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 60
 

within the allowed time period, the Township may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this Ordinance.

4.	A permit that has been revoked by the Board of Supervisors cannot be reinstated.
The applicant may apply for a new permit under the procedures  outlined  in this Ordinance.

F.	It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity except as provided in an approved SWM Site Plan, unless specifically exempted in Section 402.

G.	Inspections regarding  compliance with the SWM Site Plan are a responsibility of the Township.

Section 805. Public Nuisance

A.	The violation of any provision of this ordinance is hereby deemed a Public Nuisance.

B.	Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Section 806. Penalties
A.	Anyone violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a civil offense, and
upon conviction before a magisterial judge shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be cumulative.

B.	In addition, the Township, through its solicitor may institute injunctive, mandamus or any. other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this Ordinance.  Any court of competent jurisdiction  shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus  or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.

C.	Any person found liable in a civil proceeding or subject to equitable relief or mandamus shall also be liable in addition to any fines, penalties and costs for the reasonable legal fees and other expenses incurred by the Township in prosecution of the proceeding to its completion including any appellate proceeding.

Section  07. Appeals

A.	Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee, relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the Board of Supervisors within thirty (30) days of that action.

B.	Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Supervisors, relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the Lebanon County Court of Common Pleas within thirty (30) days of the Township decision.





South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 61
 

ARTICLE IX PROHIBITIONS

Section 901. Prohibited Discharges and Connections

A.	Any drain or conveyance, whether  on the surface or subsurface, that allows any non­ stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the regulated municipal separate storm sewer (MS4) or to enter the waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.

B.	No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the regulated MS4, or discharges into waters of this Commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except (1) as provided in Subsection C below and (2) discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.

C.	The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant contributors to pollution to the regulated MS4 or to the waters of this Commonwealth:

)>	Discharges from firefighting activities	)>		Flows fr<:>m riparian habitats and wetlands
)>		Potable water sources including water line flushing	)>		Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains
)>	Irrigation drainage	)>	Lawn watering
)>   Air conditioning condensate	)>		Dechlorinated swimming  pool discharges
)>    Springs	)>	Uncontaminated  groundwater
)>   Water from crawl space pumps
)>  Basement sump pumps, pumping groundwater only	)>   Water from individual residential car washing
)>	Pavement wash waters where spills or
leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used	)>		Routine external building wash down (which does not use detergents or other compounds}
)>	Diverted stream flows	

D.	In the event that the Township or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified in Subsection C above significantly contribute pollutants to the regulated MS4 or to the waters of this Commonwealth, the Township or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.

Section 902. Roof Drains and Sump Pumps

Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs.







South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page62
 

Section 903. Alteration of SWM BMPs

No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of the Township, the Lebanon County Conservation District, and DEP (if DEP permit(s) applies).





























































South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 63
 

ARTICLEX REFERENCES

·	1. ·Pennsylvania Department  of  Environmental  Protection.  No.  363-0300-002  (December 2006), as amended and updated. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best  Management  Practices Manual.  Harrisburg, PA.

2.	Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.

3.	U.S.   Department	of  Agriculture,   National   Resources   Conservation	Service   (NRCS).
National Engineering Handbook.   Part 630: Hydrology,  1969-2001.  Originally published as
the National Engineering Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology.  Available from the NRCS online at: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.

4.	U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.

5. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic ·and Atmospheric Aclminjstration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation­ Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.  Internet address:  http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.




































South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 64
 

This Ordinance repeals Ordinance Number 269 in its entirety.

This Ordinance shall become effective in five (5) days of its enactment. Adopted this 22nd day of January, 2013.
ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

SecretarY	 






































65
 

APPENDIX A

STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN APPLICATION

(To be attached to the "land subdivision plan, land development plan, stonnwater management site plan, or minor land subdivision plan submission")

Application is hereby made for review of the Stonnwater Management Site Plan and related data as submitted herewith in accordance with the South Lebanon Township  Stonnwater Management Ordinance.

 	_.;Final Plan	Preliminary Plan	SWM Site Plan (Check One)

 
Date of Submission -----------Submission No.
 
-----------
 
1.  Name of subdivision or development.	_

 
2.	Name of applicant  	
 
Telephone No.	_
 

(if corporation, list the corporation's name and the names of two officers of the corporation)


-------------------------------------Ofticerl

------------------------------------Ofticer2
Address 	




Applicants interest in subdivision or development.
(if other than property owner, give owners name and address)

3.	Name of property owner	Telephone No.	_ Address-------------------------------------
4.	Name of engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect	_

Telephone No.	_

Address------------------------------------



D e ilie	tionbyManDe per






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	PageA-1
 

5.  Type of subdivision or development proposed:

 

Single-Family Lots Two Family Lots Multi-Family Lots Cluster Type Lots Planned Residential
 
Townhouses
Garden Apartments Mobile-Home Park Campground Institutional
 
Commercial (Multi-Lot) Commercial (One-Lot) Industrial (Multi-Lot) Industrial (One-Lot) Other
 

6.	Lineal feet of new road proposed?	L.F.

7.	Area of proposed and existing impervious surfaces on entire tract.

a.	Existing (to remain)	S.F.	%of Property

 

b.	Proposed

8.	Stormwater
 
 	S.F.  	%of Property
 

a.	Does the peak rate of runoff from proposed conditions exceed that flow which occurred for pre-development conditions for the designated design storm? 	

b.	Design storm utilized (on-site conveyance systems) (24 hr.}	_

No.         ofSubarea----------------------------------------------------
Watershed            Name------------------------------------------------
Explain:	_




c.	Does the design achieve the release rate criteria for the applicable subarea?	_

d.	Number of subarea(s) from Ordinance Appendix C situated in the Tulpehocken Creek and Cocalico      Creek     Watersheds.---------------------------------------
e.	Type of proposed runoff control	_

f.	Does the plan meet all the requirements of the Stormwater Ordinance?	_

Ifnot, what waivers are requested? --------------------------------------



Reasons\Vhy	_




g.	Was TR-55, June 1986 utilized in determining the time of concentration?	_




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	PageA-2
 

h.	What hyclrologic method was used in the stonnwater computations?	_

1.	Is a hydraulic routing through the stormwater control structure submitted?	_

j.	Is a construction schedule or staging attached?	_

k.	Is an operation and maintenance (O&M) plan attached?	_

I.	Who will have uitimate maintenance responsibility of the Stormwater Control Facilities?



9.	Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control (E&S):

a.	Has the stormwater management and E&S plan, supporting documentation and narrative been submitted to the Lebanon County Conservation District?	_

b.	Total area of earth disturbance	.S.F.

10.	Wetlands

a.	Have the wetlands been delineated by someone trained in wetland delineation?	_

b.	Have the wetland lines been verified by a state or federal permitting authority?	_

c.	Have the wetland lines been surveyed?	_

d.	Total acreage of wetland within the property	_

e.	Total acreage of wetland disturbed	_

f.	Supporting documentation	_

11.	Filing

a.	Has the required fee been submitted?	_

Amount-------------------------------------
b.	Has the proposed schedule of construction inspection to be performed by the applicant s engineer been submitted?	_

c.	Name of individual who will be making the inspections	_

12.	General comments about stormwater management at development:











South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	PageA-3
 

APPENDIX B-1
PENNDOT REGION 4 -STORM INTENSITY-DURATION-FREQUENCY  CHART

Storm Event	1-Yr	2-Yr	5-Yr	10-Yr	25-Yr	50-Yr	100-Yr
Tlmoor
Concentration	R&lar.£1 labmll)'
(Mlnutus)	ncheantou!}	 	
5.21	6.80	8.39	6.90	7.60	8.20	9.00
2	4.66	5.27	5.92	6.43	7.10	7.81	8.61
 
.3.
 
4.24	4.83	5.52	8.04	6.68	7.37	8.15
3.91	4.48	5.18	5.70	6.31	6.97	7.71
4.89	5.41	5.99	6.61	7.32
 
IS	3.65	4.19
8	3.42	3.94	4.83	IS.15	5.71	B.29	6.97
7	3.23	3.73	4'.40	4.92	5.46	8.00	6.66
B	3.06	3.55	4.19	4.72	15.23	5.75	6.38
9	2.92	3.38	4.01	4.53	5.02	5.52	8.13
10	2:79	3.24	3.11-4	4.38	4.84	15.31	5.90
11	2.87	3.11	3.69	4.21	4.87	5.12	5.69
12	2.56	2.99	3.!8	4.07	4.51	4.95	5.50
13	2.47	2.89	3.43	3.94	4.38	4.79	5.33
1.C		2.38	2.79	3.32	3.81	4.23	4.84        5.18
15	2.30	2.70	3.21	3.70	4.10	4.51	5.01
18	2.23	2.62	3.11	3.80	3.99	4.38	.C.87
17	2.16	2.54	3.02	3.50	3.88	4.26	4.74
18	2.09	2.47	2.94	3.41	3.77	4.15	4.62
 	19	2.03	2.<CO	2.88'	3.32	3.68	4.0S         ...50



 	24	1.79	2.12	2.53	2.95	3.27	3.81	4.02 	
25	1.74	2.08	2.47	2.89	3.20	3.53	3.93
28	1.71	2.03	2.42	2.83	3.13	3.46	3.85
27	1.87	1.89	2.37	2.77	3.07	3.40	3.78
2B	1.83	1.85	2.32	2.71	3.01	3.33	3.71
29		1.80	1.91	2.28	2.88	2.95	3.27	3.84 	
30	1.57	1.87	2.24	2.81	2.90	3.21	3.58
31	1.54	1.84	2.20	2.58	2.sa	3.18	3.51
32	1.!51	1.80	2.18	2.52	2.80	3.10	3.45
33	1.48	1.77	2.12	2.47	2.75	3.05	3.40
 	34	1.45	1.74	2.08	2.43	2.70	3.00        3.34
35	1.43	1.71	2.05	2.39	2.88	2.95	3.29
38	1.40	1.88	2.02	2.35	2.81	2.91	3.24
37	1.38	1.ee	1.98	2.31	57	2.68	3.19
38	1.38	1.83	1.95	2.27	2.53	2.82	3.14
 		39	1.33	1.80	1.92	2.24	2.49 	2.78	3.10 40	1.31	1.58	1.90	2.20	2.45	2.74	3.05
41	1.29	1.58	1.17	2.17	2.42	2.70	3.01
42	1.27	1.53	1.84	2.14	2.38	2.68	2.97
43	1.25	1.51	1.82	2.11	2.35	2.63	2.93
44		1..23	1.49	1.79	2.08	2.32	2.59	2.89 	
45	1.22	1.47	1.77	2.05	2.29	2.58	2.85
46	1.20	1.4!	1.74	2.02	2.25	2.53	2.82
47	1.18	1.43	1.72	1.99	2.23	2.50	2.78
48	1.17	1.41	1.70	us	2.20	2.48	2.75
       49	1.15	1.39	1.68	1.94	2.17	2.44	2.72 	
50	1.14	1.37	1.66	1.91	2.14	2.41	2.69
51	1.12	1.38	1.84	1.89	2.12	2.38	2.65
52	1.11	1.34	1.82	1.88	2.09	2.35	2.82
!53	1.09	1.32	1.80	1.84	2.06	2.32	2.60
54	1.08	1.31	1.58	1.82	2.04	.!-	2.57
55	1.07	1.29	1.58	1.80	2.o2	2.27	2.54
58	1.05	1.28	1.55	1.78	1.89	2.25	2.51
57	1.04	1.26	1.53	1.75	1.97	2.23	2.49
68	1.03	1.25	1.51	1.73	1.95	2.20	2.46
69	1.02	1.23	1.50	1.72	1.93	2.18	2.44
60	1.01	1.22	1.48	1.70	1.91	2.18	2.41
75	0.88	1.05	1..28	1.48	1.85	1.88	2.11
90	0.78	0.92	1.12	1.30	1.48	1.68	1.89
120	0.62	0.75	0.92	1.07	1.23	1.40	1.59
180	0.46	0.57	0.70	0.81	0.94	1.08	1.23
240	0.38	0.48	0.57	0.87	0.78	0.90	1.03
380	0..28	0.34	0.42	0.51	0.60	0.69	0.79
480	0.23	0.28	0.34	0.42	0.50	0.57	0.65
720	0.17	0.21	0.25	0.32	0.38	0.43	o.so
1080	0.12	0.15	0.19	0.24	0.29	0.33	0.38
 	1440	0.10	0.12	0.15	0.19	0.24	0.27	0.31 	



South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page 8-1
 

APPENDIX B-2


RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS  "C" FOR RATIONAL FORMULA


Soll Group		
A			
B			c			
D	
Slope	0-2%	2-6%	6%+	0-2%	2-6%	6%+	0-2%	2-6%	6%+	0-2%	2-6%	6%+
Land Use												
Cultivated												
Winter Conditions	0.14	0.23	0.34	0.21	0.32	0.41	0.27	0.37	0.48	0.34	0.45	0.56
Summer Conditions	0.10	0.16	0.22	0.14	0.20	0.28	0.19	0.26	0.33	0.23	0.29	.   0.38
Fallowed Fields												
Poor Conditions	0.12	0.19	0.28	0.17	0.25	0.34	0.23	0.33	0.40	0.27	0.35	0.45
Good Conditions	0.08	0.13	0.16	0.11	0.15	0.21	0.14	0.19	0.26	0.18	0.23	0.31
Forest/Woodland	0.08	0.11	0.14	0.10	0.14	0.18	0.12	0.16	0.20	0.15	0.20	0.25
Grass Areas												
Good Conditions	0.10	0.16	0.20	0.14	0.19	0.26	0.18	0.22	0.30	0.21	0.25	0.35
Average Conditions	0.12	0.18	0.22	0.16	0.21	0.28	0.20	0.25	0.34	0.24	0.29	0.41
Poor Conditions	0.14	0.21	0.30	0.18	0.28	0.37	0.25	0.35	0.44	0.30	0.40	0.50
Impervious Areas	0.90	0.91	0.92	0.91	0.92	0.93	0.92	0.93	0.94	0.93	0.94	0.95
Weighted												
Resfdentlal												
Lot Size 1/8acre	0.29	0.33	0.36	0.31	0.35	0.40	0.34	0.38	0.44	0.36	0.41	0.48
Lot Size 1/4 acre	0.26	0.30	0.34	0.29	0.33	0.38	0.32	0.36	0.42	0.34	0.38	0.46
Lot Size 1/3acre	0.24	0.28	0.31	0.26	0.32	0.35	0.29	0.35	0.40	0.32	0.36	0.45
Lot Size 1}2 acre	0.21	0.25	0.28	0.24	0.27	0.32	0.27	0.31	0.37	0.30	0.34	0.43
Lot Size 1acre	0.18 		0.23	0.26	0.21	0.24	0.30	0.24	0.29	0.36	0.28	0.32	0.41



































South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page B-2
 
APPENDIX B-3


RUNOFF CURVE NUMBERS "CN" FOR SCSMETHOD

Soll Group	A	I	B	c	D
Slope	0-2% I 2-6%	6%+ I 0-2% I 2-6% I 6%+	0-2% I 2-6%	6%+	0-2%	2-6%	6%+
Land Use
Cultlvated
Winter Conditions
Summer Conditions	
48
35	
60
51	
6S
61	
62
48	
73
SS	
73
70	
68
57	
78
6S	
79
77	
77
64	
81
69	
88
so
Fallowed Flelds Poor Conditions Good Conditions	
4S
30	
54
44	
76
74	
56
43	
63
48	
SS
83	
64
48	
74
54	
90
88	
69
56	
77
60	
93
90
Forest/Woodland	30	30	40	42	46	SS	45	so	70	so	S6	77
Grass Areas
Good Conditions
Average Conditions
Poor Conditions	
35
45
48	
39
49
55	
51
S3 68	
48
S2
56	
54
SS
67	
61
69
79	
S6 60
66	
59
63
74	
74
79
86	
62
65
73	
63
69
81	
so
84
89
Impervious Areas	96	97	98	96	97	98	96	97	98	96	97	98
Weighted Resldential Lot Size 1/8acre Lot Size1/4acre
Lot Size 1/3 acre Lot Size 1/2acre Lot Size 1acre	
71
61
57
54
51	
75
62
59
57
SS	
77
67
65
63
62	
74
66
64
62
61	
76
69
66
64
63	
85
75
72
70
68	
78
67
65
63
61	
80
69
66
65
64	
90
83
81
80
79	
81
75
74
72
71	
83
78
77
76
75	
92
87
86
85
84






































South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page B-3
 

APPENDIX B-4









MANNING'S "n" VALUES FOR PIPES

PIPE  MATERIAL	MANNING'S "n"
Helical corrugated steel I aluminum	



0.014
2 2'3X 1/i corrugations	
Diameter (inches)	
15	
18	0.015
21	0.018
24	0.017
27	0.018
30	0.019
36	0.020
42	0.021
48	0.021
Reinforced Concrete	0.013
Smooth Li	ned Corrugated Polyethylene All Diameters	0.012
































South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page B-4
 
APPENDIX B-5

MANNING ROUGHNESS  COEFFICIENTS


Roughness Coefficients (Manning's "n") For Overland I Sheet Flow (From U.S. Army Coips of Engineers & NRCS TR-55)

Surface Description

Dense Growth	


0.4	
!!	


0.5
Pasture	0.3		0.4
Lawns	0.2		0.3
Bluegrass Sod	0.2		0.5
Short Grass Prairie		0.1	-0.2
Sparse Vegetation	0.05		0.13
Bare Clay-Loam Soil (eroded)	0.01		0.03
Concrete/Asphalt -very shallow depths			
(less than 1/4 inch)	0.10	0.15
-	small depths
(114 inch to several inches)	0.05	0.10
Fallow (no residue)	0.05
Cultivated Soils
Residue Cover Less Than or= 20%	0.06
Residue Cover Greater Than 20%	0.17
Grass












Roughness Coefficients (Manning's "n") For Channel Flow Reach Description	!!
 
Natural stream, clean, straight, no rifts or pools
Natural stream, clean, winding, some pools or shoals
Natural stream, winding, pools, shoals, stony with some weeds Natural stream, sluggish deep pools and weeds
Natural stream or swale, very weedy or with timber underbrush
Concrete pipe, culvert or channel Corrugated metal pipe
 
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.07
0.10
0.012
0.012-0.027*
 

*depending upon type, coating and diameter






South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page B-5
 

APPENDIXC





LEBANON COUNTY WATERSHEDS


 


+





South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page C-1
 







 
LEBANON COUNTY
Storm Water Management Districts


Tulpehocken A Tulpehocken 8-1
Tulpehocken 8-2
Cocalico
Lebanon ·county Residual
 







·a•
D



































+
 







South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page C-2
 







LEBANO"' COUNTY
Exceptional Value & High Quality Watersheds




•	Exceptional Value
•	High Quality


.••.  · ·. ,... ·•..-: · r .	..

































+







South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page C-3
 




APPENDIXD
 
UPI No. -----
 

SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP)
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE  (O&M) AGREEMENT



THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this                   day of                   20_, by and between   [name of owner/equitable owner]    , (hereinafter the "Landowner''), and South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County; Pennsylvania, (hereinafter "Township");




WITNESSETH

WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by deed in the land records of Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book	at Page	_. (hereinafter "Property'').
WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and WHEREAS, the Subdivision/Land Development/Stonnwater Management (SWM) Site
Plan (hereinafter "Plan") for	[name of owner/equitable owner]	which is expressly made a part hereof, as approved or to be approved by the Township, provides for management of stormwater within the confines of the Property; and

WHEREAS, the SWM BMP Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan approved  by the Township (hereinafter referred to as the "O&M Plan") for the property identified herein, which is attached hereto as· Exhibit A and made part hereof, as approved by the Township, provides for management  of stormwater within the confines of the Property through the use of BMPs; and

WHEREAS, the Township and the Landowner, his successors and assigns agree that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Township and the protection and maintenance of water quality require that on-site SWM Best Management Practices (BMPs) be constructed and maintained on the Property: and

WHEREAS, the Township requires, that stormwater management facilities as shown on the Plan be constructed and adequately maintained by the Landowner, his successors and assigns; and

WHEREAS, the Township requires, through the implementation of the SWM Site Plan, that SWM BMPs as required by said SWM Site Plan and the Township Stormwater Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and maintained by the Landowner, his successors, and assigns.







South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance                                            Page D-1
 

.  NOW, .THEREFORE,  in consideration  of the foregoing premises,  the mutual  covenants contained herem, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows:

1.	The stormwater management BMPs shall be constructed by the Landowner, his successors and assigns, in accordance with the terms, conditions and specifications identified in the subdivision/land development/SWM Site Plan.

2.	The Landowner, his successors and assigns, shall operate and maintain the stonnwater management BMPs as shown on the subdivision/land development/SWM Site Plan in good working condition in accordance with the specific operation and maintenance requirements noted in the approved O&M Plan.,

3.	The Landowner, his successors and assigns, hereby grants permission to the Township, his authorized agents and employees, upon presentation of proper identification, to enter upon the Property at reasonable times, and to inspect the SWM BMPs whenever the Township deems necessary. Whenever possible, the Township shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the Property. The purpose of the inspection is to assure safe and proper functioning of the SWM BMPs. The inspection shall cover the entire facilities, pipes, berms, outlet structures, pond areas, access roads, etc. When inspections are conducted, the Township shall give the Landowner, his successors and assigns, copies of the inspection report with findings and evaluations. At a minimum, this agreement grants the Township the right to perform inspections in accordance with the following schedule:

•	Annually for the first 5 years after the construction of the stonnwater facilities,
•	Once every 3 years thereafter, or
•	During or immediately upon the .cessation of a 10 year or greater precipitation event.

4.	All reasonable costs for said inspections shall be born by the Landowner and payable to the Township.

5.	The owner shall convey to the Township easements and/or rights-of-way to assure access for periodic inspections by the Township and maintenance, if required.

6.	In the event the Landowner, his successors and assigns, fails to maintain the SWM BMPs in good working condition acceptable to the Township, the Township or it's representatives may enter upon the Property and take such necessary and prudent action to maintain said SWM BMPs and to charge the costs of the maintenance and/or repairs to the Landowner, bis successors and assigns.  This provision shall not be construed as to allow the Township to erect any structure of a permanent nature on the land of the Landowner, outside of any easement  belonging  to the Township.	It is  expressly  understood  and  agreed  that  the Township is under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the Township.

7.	The Landowner, bis successors and assigns, will perform maintenance in accordance with the maintenance schedule for the SWM BMPs including sediment removal as outlined on the approved schedule and/or Subdivision/Land Development/SWM Site Plan.






South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page D-2
 

8: In the event the Township, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any nature, or expen.ds any fund in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, matenals, and the hke on account of the Landowner's or his successors' and assigns' failure to perform such work, the Landowner, his successors and assigns, shall reimburse the Township upon demand, within 10 days of receipt of invoice thereof, for all costs incurred by the Township hereunder. If not paid within said 10-day period, the Township may enter a lien against the property in the amount of such costs, or may proceed to recover his costs through proceedings in equity or at law as authorized under the provisions of the Second Class Township Code.

9.	The Landowner, his successors and assigns, shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township and its agents and employees against any and all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences or claims which might arise or be asserted against the Township for the construction, presence, existence or maintenance of the stormwater management facilities by the Landowner, his successors and assigns.

10.	In the event a claim or action is asserted against the Township, its agents or employees, the Township shall promptly notify the Landowner, his successors and assigns, and they shall defend, at their own expense, any suit based on such claim or action. If any judgment, decree or claim against the Township, its agents or employees shall be granted, the Landowner, his successors and assigns shall pay all costs and expenses in connection with said judgment, decree or claim including any attorney fees, costs and expenses incurred in the defense of the Township.

11.	In the advent of an emergency or the occurrence of special or unusual circumstances or situations, the Township may enter the ProperfY, if the Landowner is not immediately available, without notification or  identification,  to  inspect  and  perform  necessary maintenance and repairs, if needed, when the health, safety or welfare of the citizens is at jeopardy.  However, the Township shall notify the landowner of any inspection, maintenance, or repair undertaken within 5 days of the activity. The Landowner shall reimburse  the Township for any associated  costs.



12.	The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance of the onsite
·BMPs by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be deemed to create or affect any additional liability of any party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.

13.	The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other successors in interests, shall release and hold harmless the Township from all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences, or claims which might arise or be asserted against said Township employees and representatives from the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) by the Landowner or Township.

14.	The Landowner shall reimburse the Township for any expense in the review, preparation, revision and recording of this Agreement.




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page D-3
 

This Agreement shall be recorded among the land records of Lebanon County, Pennsylvania and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property and/or equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner, his administrators, executors, assigns, heirs and any other successors
ininterests, inperpetuity.

ATIEST:

WITNESS the following signatures and seals:

(SEAL)                                                                                   For the Township:






(SEAL)                                                                                  For the Landowner:






AITEST:

South Lebanon Township, County of Lebanon, Pennsylvania







I	a Notary Public in and for the County and
State aforesaid, whose commission expires on the	day of	_
20    , do hereby certify that	whose name(s)
is/are signed to the foregoing Agreement bearing date of the	day of
 	    .. 20_, has acknowledged the same before me in my said County and
State.




GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS	day of	,,
20_.








NOTARY PUBLIC (SEAL)


South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page D-4
 

APPENDIXE

SOUTH LEBANON  TOWNSHIP STANDARD STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  NOTES


Use all applicable notes and supplement or revise where necessary for clarification:

1.	All  stonnwater  management  facilities  shown on this plan  shall be  constructed  by the developer  in accordance  with the  design,  conditions,  and  specifications  identified  on this plan.    Ownership  and maintenance   shall  be  the  responsibility   of  the  landowner,   his  successors   and  assigns,  unless specifically identified otherwise herein.

2.	Stormwater management facilities shall be maintained in good working condition so that they are performing their design function, in a manner acceptable to the Township, as required by the South Lebanon Township Stormwater Management Ordinance. Maintenance shall include performing routine maintenance and repair or ,replacement of damaged facilities, vegetation or stormwater area8 to conditions as shown on the approved plan and in accordance with the South Lebanon Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.

3.	Any drainage and utility easements shown on the plan shall be constructed, owned and maintained in accordance with the approved plan and shall be referenced within the property deed.

4.	Runoff  from  the  lot  improvements  shall be  direc ed  to the  stormwater  management  facilities.
Stormwater runoff from existing natural swales and/or other existing drainage conveyors shall not be directed towards or intercepted by the stormwater management facilities.

5. Township and County Officials and their agents or employees have the right of access for inspection and, incases of construction default, construction of the stonnwater management facilities.

6. After stormwater management facilities installation is completed, contact South Lebanon Township at (717) 274-0481 for inspection by the Township Engineer. No occupancy permitted until stormwater management facilities have been installed and approved through inspection by the Township Engineer.

If facilities such as new streets with storm sewers and related structures are intended for ownership and maintenance by the Township, a Homeowner 's Association, or similar ownership enti'ty, additional notes are required to document ownership and maintenance responsibilities.

STORMWATER  EXEMPTIONS

Use the following note instead of the six (6) standard stormwater notes provided above:

Lot(s) # has (have) been exempted from the mandatory design and installation of stonnwater management facilities, based upon satisfaction of the exemption criteria provided in Section 402 of the South Lebanon Township Stonnwater Management Ordinance. No occupancy is permitted until lot(s) # has (have) been inspected and approved by the Township Engineer to verify that construction and development has been completed in accordance with this plan and the Section 402 exemption criteria.




South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page E-1
 

APPENDIXF

EROSION  AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION  CONTROL  GUIDLEINES INTRODUCTION

Pennsyl ania law requires an Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control (E&SPC) plan be developed and nnplemented for all earthmoving activities. The following guidelines are to be incorporated into an E&SPC plan for projects that do not have an existing plan. The guidelines alone do not constitute a complete plan. The E&SPC plan must be fully developed and site specific in accordance with Pennsylvania Deparbnent of Environmental Protection Chapter I 02 rules and regulations. Additional information regarding E&SPC development and Chapter 102 regulations may be obtained from the County Conservation District.
carriage
PROCEDURE

The following list of E&SPC guidelines shall be used as standard subdiVision and land development plan notes on all plans. Major subdivision and land development plans also require site specific E&SPC design sheets and details

GUIDELINES

1.	A logical construction sequence shall be developed that includes the installation of E&SPC facilities, and Best Management Practices (BMP's), before earthmoving may commence.

2.	E&SPC facilities  and BMP's shall be correctly installed and maintained. Maintenance information and construction details may be obtained from the County Conservation District.

3.	Earth disturbance shall take place within a defined limit of disturbance and immediately prior to construction.

4.	Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, minimize land cuts and fills and conform to the general topography. Plans shall be designed and implemented so as to create the least potential for erosion and to adequately contain the volume and reduce the velocity of the surface water runoff.

5. Natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented prior to and during construction.

6.	Topsoil shall be removed from construction areas and stockpiled for final grading and seedbed preparation. Downslope areas of any stockpiles, construction of borrow areas shall be protected with correctly installed and maintained silt fence, straw bales or sediment traps prior to any earth disturbance in order to minimize sediment laden runoff.

7.	All cuts and fills shall be brought to final grade early in the construction sequence, and stabilized immediately with seed and mulch.



South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page F-1
 


8.	Only driveway excavations that can be stabilized with a crushed stone base that same day shall be completed.


9.	Current regulations state: (a) Upon completion of an earth disturbance activity or any stage ofphase of any activity, the site shall be immediately seeded, mulched or otherwise protected from accelerated erosion and sedimentation. (b) Erosion and sediment control BMP's shall be implemented and maintained until the permanent stabilization is completed. (c) For an earth disturbance activity or any stage or phase of an activity to be considered permanently stabilized, the disturbed areas shall be covered with one of the following: (1) A minimum uniform 70% perennial vegetative cover, with a density capable of resisting accelerated erosion and sedimentation. (2) An acceptable BMP which permanently minimizes accelerated erosion and sedimentation.

10.	The Penn State Erosion Control &  Conservation Planting on Noncropland guide or Agronomy guide shall be consulted for pennanent and temporary seeding and mulching types and rates. Straw mulch shall be applied at a rate of at least 3 tons per acre or 5 bales per 1000 square feet. Slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be correctly lined with appropriate turf reinforcement matting. Other helpful publications include Turfgrass Establishment (special circular 163), Turfgrass Seed and Seed Mixtures (extension circular 391), and Principles of Turfgrass Irrigation (special circular 158). The publications referenced are available from the Penn State Extension Office.

11.	All recycling and disposal of construction waste shall be in accordance with local and state rules and regulations for waste management. Construction waste includes but is not limited to: Excess soil and rock, building materials, concrete and concrete wash water, sanitary waste and any other materials that could adversely impact surface or ground water quality.






























South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page F-2
 

APPENDIXG

WORKSHEETS FOR COMPUTING EXPECTED POLLUTANT LOADS FROM SPECIFIC LAND USES







Proje(:t Name: Uun leipal ity: County:
Total Area (acres):

Major Rh.tor Basin:

htto:/iwww.oawatern!an.deo.state   .pausJStateWaterPlari/docrool/default.asox

Watershed: Sub-Basin:
Nearest Surface Water{s) to Receive Runotr:

Chapter 93 -Designated Water Use:

http:J/www.oacode.com/secure/datal0251chaoter93/chap93toc .htrnl

Impaired according to Category 4 or 5 of the Integrated Water Quality Monitoring and	Yes D No D
Assessment Report?
http:J/www. oortalstate. oa. us/oortaVserver. p!/communltvf..vater quality standards/10556/lntegrated water quality report
- 2010J682582

 
Ust Causes of Impairment
Istheta an established TMDL that appUes:
Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMJLS) http://www.dep.state.oa.usJwatermanaaement     aooskndl/. http://www.epaoov/reg3wa cxMml l/oa lmdlll ndex.htm Isproject :subject to.or part of:
 


YesD NoO
 
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Requirements?	YesO   NoO

htto:J/www.oortal.state .oa.us/oortaVserver.oUcommunlty/stormwater    manaoemenl/10628/npdes    ms4%C2%AOlnfonnatb
nJ669119
 
Existing or planned drinking water supply?
If ye.s, distance from proposed discharge (miles): Approved kt 1f;1 Plan?
http:J/www.oortalstate.oa.us/oortaVserver.ot?ooe S14&obilCF554325&mode=2

Existing River Conservation Plan?
htto://www  .denr.slate.pa.us/brc/rlw  rs/ri...ersconservationfreqistry/
 
YesD NoO



YesO NoO


YesD NoD
 





South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-1
 



INSTRUCTIONS

1.	PrcMde Sensitive Resources Map accoldlng to non-structural BMP 5.4.1 Jn Chapter 5. This map should Identify weUands, woodlands, nab.Jral drainage ways, steep slopes, and other sensitive natural areas.




2.	Summarize the existing eJClent of each sensitive resource In the Existing Sensitive Resources Table
 	bebw.	Acres   If none JJ"BSent. ilsert O.




I3. ·  Summarize Total Protected Area as defned under BMPs In Chapter 5. 	



4.	Do not co&.nt any area twice.  For example, an area that Is both a floodplain and a wetland  may
 	m be considered once. 	



EXISTING NATURAL SENSITIVE  RESOURCE	MAPPED?
Yes/no/n/a	TOTAL AREA
(Ac.)	PROTECTED AREAIAc.1
Watabodes			
.	ns
RfMrian Areas			
Wetlands			
Woodlands			
Na1Wal Drainage WtMJ			
Stem> Slaoes, 15% •25%			
Staeo stooes. C"'8r 25%			
Other:			
Other:			
TOTAL EXISTING:			


























South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-2
 





 

1.1	Area of Protected Sensitive/Special Value Features (see WS 2)

1.2	Area of Riparian Forest Bu r Protection

3.1 Area of Minimum Disturbance/Reduced Grading
 
 	Ac.

Ac. Ac
 
--Sita Area
 
-,Minus	A-re-a  -
 
TOTAL	Ac


=		Stormwatar Management Area 	
 
Protected
_,	=

This is Iha -that niquras /
Etarmwater rnana	t



3.1 Minlrn1B11 Soil Compaction (See C ter 8, pige 22 - SW BMP Manual)
 




Meadow
 
 	ft2


----ft2
 

x 1/4" x 1/12	=


x 1x 1/12	=
 

----ft.3

----ft.3
 
3.3 Prot t Existing Trees (See Chapter 8, page 23- SW BMP Manual)

For Trees wMlin 100 feet dimpetYioos area:
Tree Canopy		ft2	x 1/2"x 1/12	=	 	


5.1	Disconnect Roof Leaders to Vegetated Areas (See Chapter a page 25-SW BMP Manual)

Farurcff directed to areas praected under 5.8.1 and 5.8.2
2
 
Roof  Area		ft.

Faall ciher cisconnected roof arees
 
x 1x 1/12	=
 
----ft3
 
Roof Area		ft2
 
x 1/4" x 1/12	=	ff
 
5.2	Disconnect Non-Roof Impervious to Vegeta.,d Areas (See Clla;tar 8, page 26-SW BMP Manual)
For Runoff cfrected to areas protected under 5.8.1and 5.8.2
 
lmpervbus Area		ft2	x 1x 1/12	=
Faall ciher cfsconnected roof areas
 
----ff
 
lmpervbus   Area		ft2	x 1/4" x 1/12
 
=	ftl
 
TOTAL NON-STRUCTURAL VOLUME CREDtr L.:I      =======-ft:....._-1
*For USB on WarlcsheeI 5















South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-3
 

 
 

PROJECT:
Drainage Area:
2-Year Rainfall:
 


 	in
 

 

Total Site Area: Protected Site Area: Managed Area:
 
 	acres
 	acres
 	acres
 

Exlstino Conditlons:


°'






Devel1ooedC0ndltJons


°'








I2-Year Volwne Increase (ft3): 	


2-Year Volwne Increase• Developed Conditions Runoff Volume- Existing Concfitions Runoff Volume

1. Runoff (n) = Q = (P 2S)2I (P+0..85) where
P = 2-Year Rainfall (in)
S = (1000/ CN)-10
2.	Runoff Volume (CF)= Q x Area x 1/12
Q =Runoff (in)
Area"' Land use a-ea (sq.ft)


Note:Runoff Volurne must be calculated for EACH land use type/conclitlon and HSGL
The use of a weighted CNvalue for volume calculations is not acceptable.













South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-4
 

 

PROJECT: SUB-BAS1N :

Requlred Control Volume (tt3) -from Worlrshoet 4:

Non-structural Volume Credit (tt1- 4-om Worksheet 3:
{maxi1T1Jm Is 25% of required voli.me)
StruchlralVolume Reqmt {tt1
(Required Control Volume minus Non-5trvctura/ Credit)


		Vok.lme Reduction
Pemenentiy
	
Prq>osed BMP	Removed
Ctt1
6.4.1	Porous Pa-..ement	
6.4.2	lnfitration Basin	
6.4.3	ln61tratlon Bed	
6.4.4	lnfitratioo Trench	
6.4.5	Rain Gardel'VBloretentlon	
6.4.6	Ory Wei I Seeoaae Pit	
6.4.7	Constructed Filer	
6.4.8	VAtJP.tafed SNale	
6.4.9	Veaeta1ed Filer Strio	
6.4.10	Berm	
6.5.1	Veoetated Roof	
6.5.2	Canture and Re-use	
6.6.1	Constructed  Wetlands	
6.6.2	Wet Pend I Retenlioo Basin	
6.7.1	Rlaarian Buffer/Rlnarian Forest Buffer Restcration	
6.7.2	Landscaoe Restaa!loo I Reforestation	
6.7.3
s.a1	Sol Amendment
Lewi Soteader	
s.a2	Saecial Stera,.,.. Areas	
Other		
	Total Structural Volume (ft3 :     	
)	
Structural Volume Requirement (ft3):    	
DIFFERENCE     	






















South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-5
 

 

PROJECT: DRAINAGE AREA:


 
Total Site Area:
 
 	 acres
 
Protected Site Area:	 	
 
acres
 
Managed Area:
Total Impervious Area
 
 	 acres
acres
 
2Inch Runoff - Multiolv Total lmoer'\lfous Area bv 2 Inch









lr


1InchRainfall -














1.	Total Runoff Capture Vdume {tr) =Total  Impervious Area (tr) x 2Inchx1/12 2.PRV (tt1) =Total Impervious Area (ft2) x 1Inch x 1/12
3.EDV (tr)= Total Impervious Area (ff) x 1Inch x 1/12

Water qua6ty volume requirements fer land areas with existing COJer consisting of meadow, bn.Jsh, wood-grass romblnatlon, or woods prqlOSed for conversion to any other non-equivalent type of pervlous cover shall be sized for one-half {1/2) the volume required for Impervious surfaces as ment!ooed In this worksheet and calculated In llems 1through 3 above










South Lebanon Township -Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-6
 


 


PROJECT: SUB·BASIN:

Required Control Volume (ft')·from Worbheet 7:
Non-structural Volume Credlt(ft1 ·from Worksheet 3:


Structural Volume Roqmt (ft
(Required Control Volume minus Non-structural Credit)


Proposed BMP•	
Alea	•norage Volume
	{ff)	(ff)
6.4.1	Porous Pawiment	
6.4.2	lnfltratlon Basin	
6A.3	Infitratlon Bed	
6.4.4	Infiltration Trench	
6.4.5	Rain Gardon/Bloretonlion	
6.4.6	Orv Well/ Seeoaae Pit	
6.4.7	Constructed Flter	
6A.8	VonAtatod Swalo	
6.4.9	VenAtatod Fiter Strlo	
6.4.10	Berm	
6.5.1	Vooetated Roof	
6.5.2	Caoture and Ra-use	
6.6.1	Constructed Wetlands		
6.6.2	Wet Pond I Rotontlon Basil		
6.6.3	Orv Extended Dctontlon Basin		
6.6.4	Water OualJtv Fite rs		
6.7.1	Rl rlan Buffor Restoratlon		
6.7.2	landsnoRestorationIReforestation		
6.7.3	Sol Amendment		
6.8.1	Lewi Soreader		
6.8.2	Soeclal Storann Areas		
Other		

Total Structural Volume (ft'):
Structural Volume Requirement  (tt3):

DWFERENCE	_


















South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-7
 





Does the $lte design lneotp01;1te the foDowlng SMPs to addrea nitratepollution? A summary-yes• rating Is achievedII atleast 2 Primary BJIPs for nitrate anprovided across the site or 4 IS8condary BllP$ lornltrafo areprovided across th• aim (or the

fflllfARY  BMP,FOB NITRATE:
 


NS BMP 5.4.2 •Prctec:t I Conserve I Enhance Riparian Buffcn NS BMP5.5A-Clustor Uses at Each Site
NS BMP 5.6.1 ·Minimize Total DlstUlbod Area

NS BMP 5.1.3 • Re-Vegetate I Re-F019St Dlsiwt>ed Areas (Native Species)

NSBMP 5.9.1 •Straet Sweeping I Vacuuming Structural BMP ••7.1•RiparianBuffer Rostoratlcn
Structural BMP 8.7.2-1.andsc:apo Restoration

SECOIDARYBft FOB NITRATE:

NSBMP 5.4.1 •Prcleet Sensitive ISpacial Valuo Featuret NS BMP5A.3 •Protect I utDlze Natural Drainage Featurvs NS BMP 5.1.2·Minimize Soll Con.,actlon
 
YES NO
 
Structural 8MP IA.5 ·Rain Garden I Bloretenlon
 	 	. I	 	

Sbuctural BMP 8.A..9 ·Vegetated Fiiter Strip structural BMP 6.6.1 ·Constructed Wetland Structural BMP 8.7.1 • Rlpallan ButrerRestDratcn structural BMP 6.7.2 • Landscape Restoration Structural BMP 6.7.3- Solis AmendmedRestcratJon










South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-8
 




Does the sitedesign ilcorpaate the follONing BMPs to address nitrate polutbn? A sunmary tryes• rating Is achieved Ifat least 2 Primary BMPs are provkfed acrass the site. •Provided across the site• Is taken to mean that the specfficatlons for that BMP set forward InChapters 5and 6 are satisfied.
		Yes	No
BMPafor PoDutlon Prevention:
NS BMP 5.4.1 -Protect Sensitive/Special Value Features

NSBMP 5.4.2- Profect/CaasetveJEhance	Buffers

NS BMP 5.4.3 - Protect/UtiBze Natural Fbw Pathways i1Overall Stonnwater Plamlng and
Design

NSBMP 5.5.1 -Ouster Uses at Each Site; Bult! on the Smalest Area Possble NSBMP5.8.1-MntmlzeTdalDisturbedArea·Grading
NSBMP 5.6.2 - Mnlmlze SoU Compaclbn hDistl6bed Areas

NSBMP 5.8.3 - Re-Vegetate/Re-Forest  Disturbed Areas (Native Speces) NSBMP 5.7.1 - Reduce Street Imperviousness
NS BMP 5.7.2-Reduce Parkilg Imperviousness NSBMP 5.8.1 -Roc:Jftq)  Dlscomectbn
NSBMP 5.8.2 -DSCC11neclJon from Storm Sewers NS BMP 5.9.15 - S1reet Sweeping
Structural BMP 6.7.1 -Riparian Buffer Restoration

Strudural BMP 6.7.2 -Landscape Resb'aflon

Structural BMP 6.7.3 - Soils Amendment and ResfDratlon	


























D	D	D
		D	D
		D	D
		D	D
		
D	
D
		D	D
		D	D
		D	D
		D	D
		D	D
		D	D
		D	D
		D	D
		D	D
		D	D
			D






























South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-9
 

ITotal Siie Alea 14CI 	


Total Dlstw'bed Areas:

 







l1s1
 
Polbtalt	Pollutant Load
TSS	TP	NJtrata.	Runoff
EMC	EMC	Nltrlta EMC	Cower	Volume	Tss-	1P**	NOJ
Land Cowr Claaafflcatlon	lmdD    tmam	lmallasNl    (Acrnl	(AA	A.BS\	CLBSl  ft.BS\
Forest	39	0.15	0.17
Meadow	47	0.19	0.3
Ferflmd Plan1ftg Area	55	1.34	0.73
Natlw Ptantng tvea	55	0.40	0.33
Lav.n. Low-Input	180	0.40	OA4
 
lJNn.
 
HlgtMnput
 
180	2.22	1.Aa
 
Golf Couma Fahay/Gmen	305	1.07	1..84
Gras$8d Athlotlc Field	200	1.07	1D1
Rooftop	21	0.13	0.32
Hgh Tra!Jc Sb'edlHJghway	261	0.40	0.83
Medium natlc Stred	113	0.33	0.58
LowTtaftlclRDsldentlal Street	88	0.38	0.47
Res. Qiveway, Play Cmrts, etc.	60	0.48	0.47
Parkhg Lot	120	0.39	0.80
 
HghTraflc
LowTraffic Pad<hg Lot	58	0.15	0.3)
 



TGrALLOAD
 
REQIJRED REUC'llON (%)   85%	85%	50%
REQUIRED REDUC110N (LBS)

•poflutant Load = [EMC. rngg X (Vofume, AF] X [2.7, Unit Conversion)
"TSS and TP calculatims only required for projects not meeting CG1/CG2 anot conlrollJng less than 90% of the dsturbed area


























South Lebanon Township - Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-10
 

 

•fill this worksheet out for each BMP type with different pollutant removal effidendes. Sum pollutant redudfon achieved for all BMP types on final sheet.

BMPType:	 	
I Disturbed Area Controled by this BY's (AC) 	
 

Dlstulbed Area Controlled by this BMPs:
 



Pollltmt
TSS	TP	Nitrate-	R
 



Pollu1ant Load..
 
EMC	EMC	Nltrita EMC	Cover	Volwne    TSS-	tp•	NOJ
Land Cowr Classification	fmnll\    Imam	lmallas Nl	(Acres)	tAA	A.BS\	ft.BS)    fl.llSl
Forest	39	Q.15	0.17
Maidow	47	Q.19	0.3
Fertilzed Plantlng Alea	55	1.34	0.73
JJ Natlw Planting Area	55	0.40	0.33
f i Uwn, tow.Input	180	0.40	OA4
lawn, High-Input	180	2.22	1A6
Gor Course Fakway/Green	305	1.07	UM
Grassed Ath1edc Fleld	200	1.07	1D1
ADoftop	21	0.13	0.32
HghTratllc Strod/H)ghway	261	0.40	0.83
 
si•i
 
Medium Traftc S1re8	113	0.33	0.58
l.GwTrafflclRas1dentlal Street	88	o.36	0.47
Res. . PlayCams, etc.	60	Q.48	0.47
Traflc Partmg Lot	120	0.39	0.60
 
Hgh
LowTmfllc Pad<hg Lot	58	Q.15	0..39
TOTAL LOADTO THISBIFTYPE
Pa.WTANT REMOVAL EFFCENCES FROM APPENDIX A. STORMWATERllANUAI.(%)	85%	85%	5)%
POUUTANT REOUCITCN ACHIE'JED BYTHIS 8MP TYPE (LBS»
 	POLWl'ANT REDUCTION ACHIEllED BY AU.-l'YPIS CUllJ I 	
REQUIRED REDUCtlON from WS12 (LBS)


*Pdlutant Load ={EMC, mgJJ X l\lolume, AF] X [2.7. Unit Conversion)
urss and TP calculatkl'ls only required for projects not meeting CG1/CG2 tt not controDing less than 90% of the
disturbed area



















South Lebanon Township- Stormwater Management Ordinance	Page G-11
 

SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 340

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NUMBER 164 (SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP SUBDMSION LAND USE ORDINANCE) BY AMENDING CHAPTER FIVE (REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS), SECTION 5.09 (STREETS), BY ADDING A NEW SUBSECTION H PROVIDING FOR STANDARDS FOR AND CLASSIFYING OF PRINCIPAL ARTERIALS, MINOR ARTERIALS, AND MAJOR COLLECTOR ROADS; PROVIDING FOR DEFINITIONS ; NUMBER OF DRIVEWAYS; ACCESS TO ROADWAYS; DRIVEWAY RADIUS, DRIVEWAY THROAT WIDTH, PROFILE, CHANNELIZING ISLANDS, AND LOCATION; SAFE SIGHT DISTANCE, DRIVEWAY SPACING, CORNER CLEARANCE, JOINT AND CROSS ACCESS, EXTENSION OF SERVICE ROADS, INTERNAL ACCESS TO OUTPARCELS, PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIONS, TEMPORARY DRIVEWAY, RIGHT TURN/DECELERATION LANE, AND LEFT TURN LANE, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAYS ONTO ARTERIAL AND MAJOR COLLECTOR ROADS, AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE ROADS, DECELERATION LANES, AND INTERSECTION LEFT TURN LANES.

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:

SECTION ONE. Chapter Five (Required Improvements and Design Standards) Section 5.09 (Streets) is hereby amended to add a new Subsection
(H) establishing standards for the design and construction of driveways onto arterial and major collector roads, and requirements for service roads, deceleration lanes, intersection left turn lanes, right turn lanes to read as follows:

H.	Standards for the D esign and Construction of Driveways  onto Arterial and Maior Collector Roads, and Requirements for Service Roads, Deceleration Lanes, Intersection Left Turn Lanes, and Right Turn/Deceleration Lane.

These regulations, rules and standards for the proper design and construction of driveways onto arterial and major collector roads as well as requirements for service roads, deceleration lanes, intersection left turn lanes, in South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania  shall be known , sited and referred to as the





1
 
ACCESS    MANAGEMENT    ORDINANCE    for    South    Lebanon
Township.


This access management ordinance. is intended to promote safe and efficient traffic flow on higher order roadways within  the Township of South Lebanon, while protecting the rights of abutting landowner s to reasonable street access. By reducing the potential for crashes at access points along the corridor and avoiding future degradation of roadway capacity, these regulations serve to promote the  public health, safety and welfa1·e of the people of the Township of South Lebanon.

It is not intended by these access management regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere with any existing ordinances or enactments, or with any rule, regulation 01' permit adopted or issued thereunder, except  insofar as the same may be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, provided that where this ordinance imp.oses greater restrictions that are required by the provisions of other such ordinance, enactment,  rule, regulation or permit, then the provisions of this ordinance shall control. Furthermore, if a discrepancy exists between any regulations contained within this ordinance, the regulation which imposes the greater restriction shall apply.

These regulations shall pertain to all applications for subdivision and land development approval, or building permit, for lots with frontage along roadways classified as arterials or major collectors within South Lebanon Township. For the purpo ses of this ordinance,  the following roadways are classified as follow:


Principal Arterials
US Route 422, including East Walnut Street from PA Route 897 to
East Cumberland Street
US Route 322

Minor Arterials PA Route 419
PA Route 897
State Drive (SR 2003)

Major Collectors
King Street (SR 2008)
East Evergreen Road and Rocherty Road (SR 2002) South Lincoln Avenue from the Lebanon City line to Evergreen Road
Prescott Road (SR 2005)
Birch Road from East Walnut Street to South 14th
Avenue
Fonderwhite Road from PA Route 897 to East
Evergreen Road



2
 

Klein Avenue from PA Route 897 to State Drive Wilhelm Avenue from Lincoln Avenue to Cornwall Road Poplar Street from State Drive to Broad Street
South 14th Avenue from King Street to PA Route 897

The Township may grant a modiilcation of the  requirements of this ordinance if the Township concludes that the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modifications will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this ordinance is observed.

Except for those criteria found within this ordinance, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) criteria as found in Pennsylvania Code 441 shall govern the design of intersections of arterial and major collector roadways with private driveways and with other public roadways.


Definitions:
Access  point  -  the  location  of  the  intersection  of  a  highway,  street  or
driveway with another highway or street.

ADT Volume - Average Daily Traffic volume, or the number of vehicles passing a single point on a roadway in a 24-hour period adjusted by day of the week and monthly factors.

Band width - the time elapsed between the passing of the first and last possible vehicles moving at the design speed through a coordinated traffic signal system. Band width is expressed as a percentage of the signal cycle inwhich vehicles on the major street receive a green indication.


Cross access chi.veway - a service driveway providing vehicular access between two or more contiguous sites so that the driver need not re-enter the public  street  system_

Curbline opening -- the overall opening dimension at the curbline measur ed between the points of tangency of the driveway radius curbing exists or the maximum width of opening at the curbline/edge of the roadway ifcurbing does not exist.

Driveway - every entrance or exit used by vehicular traffic to or from properties abutting a public street or road. This term does not include proposed streets.

Drivew ay radius - the radius of the curb or pavement at the intersection of the public roadway and the driveway.

Driveway throat - the section of a driveway between the highway right of way and the first internal intersecting driveway within the site.



3
 


High volume driveway - a driveway used or expected to be used by more than 1,500 vehicles per day.

Joint access driveway - a driveway connecting two or more contiguous sites to the public street system.

Low volume driveway - a driveway used or expected to be used by more than 25 but less than 750 vehicles per day.

Medium volume driveway - a driveway used or expected to be used by more than 750 but less than  1,500 vehicles per  day.

Minimum use driveway - a residential, or other driveway which is used or expected to be used by not more than 25 vehicles per day.

Peak hour volume - the numbers of vehicles passing a single point during one hour during a defined peak period of a day, usually the morning or evening commuter peak or the Saturday shopping peak.

PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit (HOP) - the permit issued by PennDOT to approv e any construction, including driveways, within all PennDOT rights of way.


Service road - a road that runs parallel to a higher-speed road, and which provides access to all abutting land uses.  The service road feeds the higher speed road at appropriate points of access.


Non-Conforming Driveways
Driveways that do not conform to the regulations in this ordinance, and were constructed before the adoption of this ordinance, shall be considered legal nonconforming driveways. However, nonconforming driveway(s) shall be reconstructed to comply with this ordinance if there is a change in use or intensity of the land use, such that the use of the access increases peak hour or ADT volume by 10 percent or more and by 100 daily trips, based on the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers or upon other data approved by the Township.

Relationship to PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit
Issuance  of  a  PennDOT  Highway  Occupancy  Permit  (HOP)  does  not
guarantee site plan approval by the Township nor does it deem the plan in
conformance with this ordinance. The HOP submittal to PennDOT should not occur before approval to do so by the Township. However, upon request of the applicant or request of the Township, PennDOT may be brought into the Township review process to reconcile site design and access rnsues.


Number of Driveways



4
 

1.	One driveway shall be permitted per property. Additional driveways
shall be permitted ifthe applicant demonstrates that:
a)	The design is in the best interest of efficient traffic operations on the site, including but not limited to reducing delays at a single access point that would otherwise operate at worse than a Level of Service 'C' in rural areas and Level of Service 'D' in urban areas., and can improve safety;
b)	The frontage of the property is sufficient to permit multiple
driveways inaccordance with the below spacing requirements.
c)	All driveways on the property will be interconnected with an
internal circulation network.

Access to Roadways
For properties that abut two or more roadways, the Township may restrict access to only one roadway, if all movements can be efficiently and safely accommodated on that roadway and if doing so serves the goal of managing the number of access points and thus better maintains mobility on the restricted roadway. For properties fronting a state roadway and local roadway, access can be restricted to the local roadway notwithstanding the ability to receive a Highway Occupancy Permit (HOP) from PennDOT for access to the state roadway.


Driveway radius
1.	Following are the minimum and maximum driveway radii (in feet), as  related  to  the  posted  speeds  on  the  accessed  street.  Table  1
pertains to land uses with. infrequent service by buses and combination trucks. Table 2 pertains to land uses which are regularly serviced by buses and combination trucks.


Table 1










Table 2
	Posted soeed limit of street beine- accessed
	Less than 45 mnh	45 mnh and o-reater
	Min.	Max.	Minn.	Max.
Minimum Use	35	50	40	55
Low Volume	f)	I;()	4f\	f) f)
MP.dium Volum e	45	5f\	f\()	55
Hie-h Volume	45	 	55 		50 		55 	


2.	In areas with regular pedestrian activity, landowners should use the minimum driveway radius provid ed.



5
 


3.	Not withstanding any of the above, the applicant shall prepare a truck circulation plan to document that the largest truck that will regularly service the site can be accommodated by the site circulation design and the access design.



Driveway throat width
1.	Minimum and maximum dimensions for the width of driveways in the throat are provided below. Driveways shall be designed such that the opening at the curbline is no larger than necessary. The maximum desirable curbline opening is 50 feet.

2.	The dimensions in the table assume one lane in each direction; engineering judgm ent should b e used to determine appropriate dimensions for multi-lane driveways.

	One-wav	Two-wav
Min.	10 feet	20 feet
Max.	24 feet	28 feet


Driveway throat length
Following is the minimum length of driveways from the public street
to an internal driveway or intersection:

Medium volu	 
An illustration of driveway radius, width and length is provided inthe
Appendix, Figure 1.


Driveway profile
Driveway grade requirem ents where curb is not present on the intersecting
street:
1.	The change in grade between the cross-slope of the connecting roadway
or shoulder and the driveway shall not exceed 8%.
2.	The driveway grade shall not exceed 8% within 10 ft. of the travel lane for minimum use driveways and within 40 ft. for low, medium and high volume driveways.
3.	A 40-foot minimum vertical curve shall be used for a high  volume
driveway.

Driveway grade requirements where curbs and sidewalks are present:
1.	The difference between the cross slope of the roadway and the grade of
the driveway apron may not exceed 8%.
2.	The driveway grade shall not exceed 8% within 10feet of the travel lane
for minimum  use driveways and within 40 feet for low, medium  and


6
 

high volume driveways.
3.	If the driveway grade would exceed 8% in the area between the curb
and sidewalk, the street side of the sidewalk may be depressed to enable
the driveway grade to stay within 8%.
4.	The sidewalk cross slope shall be no greater than 114 inch per foot. If
the sidewalk cross slope exceeds 114 inch per foot, the entire sidewalk
may  be  depressed.  The longitudinal  grade  of the  sidewalk  may  not
exceed 2 inches per foot.

An illustration of driveway profile is provided inthe Appendix, Figure 2.



Driveway Channelizing Islands
1.	Where it is found necessary to restrict particulaT turning movements at a
driveway due to the potential disruption to the orderly flow of traffic or
as a result of sight distance constraints, the Township may require a
raised charmelization island.


2.	Raised channelization islands shall be designed with criteria consistent with the latest edition of the AASHTO (American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials) publication, A PoHcy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets.



Driveway Location
Driveways shall be located directly across from a public roadway or private driveway on the opposite side of an undivided roadw ay where feasible . If it is not possible to align driveways on opposite sides, the centerlines of access points should be offset by at least 150 feet. In no case shall left turns into the driveway be made across a left turn lane serving another driveway or street on the opposite side of the roadway.

Safe Sight Distance
L	Safe sight distance shall be available for all permitted turning movements at all driveways onto Township roads, and shall be documented on the site plans.
2.	Pennsylvania Code Chapter 441, "Access to and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads," and PennDOT Pub. 70, "Guidelines for the Design of Local Roads and Streets," shall be referenced	to determine minimum driveway and roadway intersection safe sight distance requirem ents.
3.	All driveways and intersecting roadways shall be designed and located so that the sight distance is optimized to the degree possible	without jeopardizing other requirements such as intersection spacing.
4.	No waiver shall be permitted for this requirement.


An illustration of sight distance is provided in the Appendix, Figure



7
 

3.



Driveway  Spacing
1.  Driveway spacing is measured from the center of one driveway to
the center of the next driveway, along the same side of the
roadway.
2.	The following driveway spacing standards are to be followed for
arterial roadways and major collector roads:

Posted Speed

(mph)		
Minimum
		
		
40		
	
50	425
55	490



3.	Ifthese driveway spacing standards cannot be met, a system of joint or cross access driveways, frontage roads or service roads may be required.
4.	When possible , all driveways shall be located outside the limits of deceleration and acceleration lanes serving the adjacent driveway or intersection. The Township or PennDOT may require acceleration and deceleration lanes of adjacent driveways to be connected to form an auxiliary lane.
5.	Pre-existing  lots in  residential  zoning  districts,  which  do  not  have
sufficient lot frontage to meet the above driveway spacing standards, are
permitted to install one driveway to serve single-family homes approved
for construction.


Corner Clearance
1.	Driveways on arterial and collector roadways shall meet the following
spacing standards from intersecting roadways:

Posted Speed (mph)	
Minllnum
Spacing (feet)
n	200
35	250
40	()()
4fi	360
50	425
55	490

2.	If minimum corner clearance standards cannot be achieved due to



8
 

constraints, the following shall apply in all cases:
a.	The driveway shall be sited as far from the corner as possible .
. b.	The Township may requiTe turn restrictions at the d.11.veway ifit is
determined that the location of the driveway and particular ingress or egress moveme nts will create safety or operational problems.
c.		The Township may require installation of joint  or cross access driveways, or frontage or service roads.


Joint and Cross Access
1.	The Township may require a joint or cross access driveway in order to achieve the above driveway spacing standards and the corner clearance standards, or on any property when possible in order to maintain efficient traffic flow on the abutting public roadway.
a.	The Township shall waive this requirement if installing a joint or cross access driveway is not possible. In such cases, the property owner shall sign an agreement to close the permitted driveway and to seek to establish a joint or cross access driveway, ifpossible, when an adjoining property is developed or redeveloped.

2.	Documentation that a joint or cross access driveway is not possib le may include, but is not limited to:
a.	Documentation that a good faith offer to develop a joint or cross access driveway was presented to adjacent property owners, but was declined;
b.	Topographical conditions or other natural features, or insufficient front yard, that make it impracticable to develop joint or cross access.
3.	If a joint or cross access is developed, the property owners shall:
a.	Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to
and from other properties served by the driveway.
b.	Record a joint agreement with the deed defining maintenance
responsibilities of the property owners along the driveway.
c.	Record  an  agreement  with  the  municipality  so  that  future access rights along the driveway are granted at the discretion of the municipality.



Extension of Service Road
The Township may require developers to extend a service roadway through the subject property when doing so will result in fewer trips directly accessing the higher order roadway.



Internal Access to Outparcels
For commercial and office developments comprised of more than one
building site and under the same ownership at the time of application
and consolidated for the purposes of development, the Township shall
require that the development, including all outparcels, be served by
an  internal  drive  that  is  separated  from  the  main  roadway.



9
 


Outparcel access shall demonstrate safe, efficient ingress and egress and avoid queuing across other driveways and parking aisles.


Pedestrian Connections
Land  uses  generating  more  than  750  trips per  day  shall provide
pedestrian connections from their side or rear yards to adjoining land
uses when possible. The intent of this section is to shorten pedestrian
trips  between   abutting  major  pedestrian   generators,  such  as
shopping  centers  and  multi-family  residential  developments . This
requirement may be waived for connections between major pedestrian generators and properties with single-family and two­ family  residences.  These  direct  pedestrian  connections  shall  be
provided in addition to the installation of sidewalks along the front of the property.



Temporary Driveway
A land owner shall request a permit from the Township for establishing a temporary driveway onto any public roadway in order to engage in farming activities, sales of produce, or any other permitted activity. The land owner shall erect a pull-away sign or other temporary sign to mark the location of the driveway.   ·



Right Turn I Deceleration Lane
1.	Development projects shall require a right turn deceleration lane on
the major road at an unsignalized intersection under all of the following conditions:
a.	When the posted speed on the road is greater than 40 mph;
b.	The road has average daily traffic volumes of 5,000 or more; and
c.	There are 40 or more right turns in the peak hour.
2.	Following are _ the minimum deceleration lengths on roadways with a grade of 2% or less. These lengths include both the taper and the full. width deceleration lane:


Sneed (mnh)	Deceleration  Leneth  <feet)	
35	220	
40	275	
45	360
50	425
55	510

a.	For roads with grades greater than 2%, the deceleration lengths
shall be m1:Jltiplied by the following factors:

Slone	Uoirrade	Downirrade
3%to 4%0	.9	1.2
5% to 6%	.8	1.35


10
 


3.	Deceleration lanes are not required on roadways with a posted speed of 40 mph or less; however, where deceleration lanes are installed on such roadways, they should be at least the length indicated in the table.
4.	Where the width of the roadway right-of-way is insufficient to permit construction of the right turn/ deceleration lane, the property owner shall provide any necessary right-of-way. Where the lot frontage is insufficient to  permit installation of a deceleration lane of the recommended length, the property owner may be requested to set back the front curb for the length of the property if development on the adjacent property is eventually anticipated.

An illustration of a deceleration lane is provided in the Appendix, Figure 4.



Left Turn Lane
Signalized intersections shall require the installation of a left-turn lane when a capacity analysis indicates that the operation of an intersection , approach, or movement will operate at Levels of Service 'E' or 'F' and the operation of the intersection, approach or movement can be improved with the installation of one or more left turn lanes.



 


days.
 
SECTION TWO. This Ordinance shall becom e effective in five (5)
 

Adopted this 28th day of January, 2014.

 
ATTEST:
 
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP

B/}	.J/d
Chairmal0"

 


 








11
 





APPENDIX




 


-
E<il
Sida	Enoy
Side
 
 	--
"'
 


Th.oat
Wl:tth
g>
Stn.(1S0mm)	!I
Cauble Yellow
PainlUnes
or Raised
OMder

on -- ---
 	:	\._
Curt> R•tum
so..reum..:l'

PUBLIC ROADWAY

Driveway elements

Figure 1.




Driveway Profile

BEGIN    IVEMYA1 ri-'J: !:DGEOf PAVEMENT

PAVEMENT





 


Figure 2.
 
)..	40· MIN (LOW,l1IEOIUM.HIGH)
 














12
 





Object 6 Inches High

C:-eral<lng oi.tance _,... _ _Olslarlce Tra\/eled_Quring



Stopping sight distance.








Driveway
< Safe Intersection Sight Distance ISale lnlct-seciion Siglll Disiance  >
to lho Left	to tile Right

Intersection sight dis1ance to enter or cross a roac!Way from a drlVeway.




Line of Sl!Jht
t:L:lEf	SighlTriangle
- f=F'<=''---'==--===--=Si gh-t .s= n-ce-==--==--==:.........:=;;:r	==i>
1 r
Intersection sight distance to make a left tum from a roadway
Into an access connection.

Figure 3.




TotalDeceleration Length

Deceleration	Lane
La_n_eT""	Taper
 

m.:D



Figure 4.
 
-t..	1
 













13
 
-	-
 


SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER  355 NUISANCE  ORDINANCE



AN ORDINANCE OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSNHIP , LEBANON COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA , PROHIBITING NUISANCES , STORING OR ACCUMULATING ABANDONED   OR    JUNKED    MOTOR    VEHICLES ,   AND    UNLICENSED    AND/OR U NINSPECTED VEHICLES , INCLUDING INOPERABLE ANTIQUE AND/OR CLASSIC CARS, JUNK MATERIAL , ABANDONED OR UNOCCUPIED BUILDINGS OR PARTS OF BUILDING IN A STATE OF DILAPIDATION OR DISREPAIR ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY OR STREETS WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP ; PROVIDING FOR THE REMOVAL THEREOF ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE GROUNDS OR STREETS AFTER NOTICE TO THE OWNERS TO DO SO, AND IN DEFAULT THEREOF , TO COLLECT  THE  COSTS  OF SUCH REMOVAL BY THE TOWNSHIP , AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.

WHEREAS , South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County , Pennsylvania deem it to be in the best interests and general welfare of the citizens and the residents of this Township to pr ohibit the unr easonable, unwarrantabl e or unlawful use of privat e or publi c property which causes injury, damage, hurt , inconvenience, annoyance or discomfort to others in the legitimate enjoyment of their rights of person or property; and

WHEREAS, the Town ship Code authorizes Tow nships to prohibit nuisances, to remove same and to impose penalties therefore.

NOW , THEREFORE , BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED , and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania,   as  follows:

SECTION ONE. DEFINITION: For the purpose of this ordinance the following terms, phr ases, word s and their derivation s shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, word s used in the present tense include the future, word s in the plural number include the singular number, and word s in the singular numb er include the plural number, and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.

1.	"Township" is South Lebanon Township, which is located within the confines of Lebanon County, Pennsylvania.

2.	"Board of Supervisors" is the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania .


3.	"Ow ner" is a person owning, leasing, occupying or having  charge of any


1
 
premises within the Township.


4.	"Person" is any natural person , firm, partnership , association, corporation, company, club, co-partnership, society, or any organization of any kind.

5.	"Vegetation"  is  any  grass,  weed  or  vegetation  whatsoever ,  which  is not
edible or planted for some useful or legal purpose.


6.	''Nuisance" is the unreasonable, unwarrantable , or unlawful use of public or private property which causes or is likely to cause injury,  damage , hurt, inconvenience, annoyance or discomfort to any person or resident in the legitimate enjoyment of his reasonable rights of a person or property .

7.	"Abandoned or Junked Motor Vehicles" including classic or antique licensed vehicles is any vehicle in non-serviceable condition or without having a current  inspection sticker and/or current registration  plate.



SECTION TWO.  NUISANCES  DECLARED  ILLEGAL:  Nuisances , including , but
not limited to the following , are hereby declared to be illegal:


1.	Storing or Accumulating the following:


(a)	Garbage, ashes, refuse or rubbish.


1)	Garbage: Wastes resulting from the handling,  preparation , cooking and consumption of food; wastes from the handling , storage and sale of produce. It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the Township any garbage  or other material  subject to decay other than leaves or grass, excepting in a tightly  covered  container;  excepting  that  a mulch heap is permitted , which is properly maintained for gardening purposes and does not materially disturb or annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities in the neighborhood. It shall be unlawful to any individual, firm or corporation to store more than 14 days of garbage as defined by this ordinance which may pose a potential health and safety problems to the community.

2)	Refuse/rubbish: Combustible trash, including pap er, cartons, boxes, barrels , wood , excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings , leaves, wood furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including metals, tin cans, metal furniture , dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces  of  concrete ,  glass, crockery, other mineral waste; street rubbish , including street sweeping; dirt, catch-basin dirt, contents of letter receptacles. Provided , refuse shall not include earth and wastes from building operations,  nor  shall  it  include leaves,   cornstalks,   stubble  or   other  vegetable   material   generated  in  the



2
 
course of harvesting agricultural crops. It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes or trash of such a material that it can be blown away by the wind anywhere in the Township excepting in a covered container.

3)	Ashes:  Residue  from  fire  used  for  cooking  and  for  heating buildings.

(b)	Junk Material, including , but not limited to, unused or abandoned machinery , equipment or appliances, and all forms of waste and refuse of any typ e of materials, including scrap metal, glass, industrial waste and other salvageable materials, including scrap building materials, that can be seen  from  any  public highw ay, road , street, avenue, lane or alley which is mainta ined by the Township , or by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

2.	Storing or accumulating abandoned or junked motor vehicles that  can  be seen from any public highway, road , street, avenue, lane or alley which is maintain ed by the Township , or by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All such vehicles must be moved in 15 days.

3.	Storage and  accumulation  shall include  any  non-serviceable  vehicles  with or without a current inspection sticker or current registration plate, including inoperable classic or antique licensed vehicles.

4.	Large  vehicle  components  include,  but	are  not  limited  to,   engmes,
transmissions , actual housing, frames or bodies.

5.	This  Section  shall  not  apply  with  regard  to  any  vehicle   or   vehicle comp onent completely contained within an enclosed building. For purposes  of  this Section, the term "enclosed building " shall mean a roofed and walled  structure buildin g,
N	with operable doors for ingress and egress, for p ermanent use.
\0
6.	Storing or  accumulating  more  than  one  (1)  antique  or  collector motor
vehicles for restoration which are neither sheltered by an enclosed building; or storing or
I-	accumulating in a non-ord erly fashion one (1) or less antique or collector motor vehicles for registration.

7.	Draining or flowing, or allowing to drain or flow, by pipe or other channel, whether natural or artificial, any foul or  offensive  water  or  drainage  from  sinks, bathtubs , washstands, lavatories, water closets, swimming pools, privies, or cesspools of any kind or nature whatsoever , or any foul or offensive water or foul or offensive drainage of any kind , from property along any public highway, road , street, avenue, lane or alley: or from any property into or upon any adjoining property.





3
 
8.	Draining or flowing, or allowing to drain or flow, any water or drainage from within dwelling situate upon property along public highway , road, street, avenue, lane, or alley in the Township into or upon the cart way or traveled portion for said drainage by means of a drainage ditch or otherwise.

9.	Burning of vegetation, tires, tar products or garbage.


10.	Maintaining or causing to be maintained , any dangerous structure, including but not limited to, abandoned or unoccupied buildings or parts of buildings in a state of dilapidation or disrepair.


11.	Permitting the growth of any grass, weeds,  noxious  weeds,  or  any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or legal purpose, to conceal any rubbish , garbage, trash or any other violation of this ordinance.


12.	Permitting or allowing any well or cistern to be, or remain, uncovered.

13.	Pushing , shoveling or otherwise depositing snow, ice, slush, or the like, upon any sidewalk and/or the cart way or traveled portion of any public highway, road, alley or street which is maintained by the Township or by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania , and allowing same to remain thereon.

14.	Parking or permitting the parking of any vehicle upon any public highway, road, street, or alley which is maintained by the Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania so as to prevent the proper removal of snow by a snow plow.

15. To build or cause to be built any bonfire or fire upon the cart way or traveled portion of any public highway , road, street or alley which is maintained by the Township or by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania .

N		16.	To drive or cause to be driven, parked, or store any cart, wagon, truck  or other vehicle containing garbage, earth, dung, filth or rubbish of any kind , unless  such
"-	vehicle has a good and sufficient tail board and body, tight and closed and bottom, so as to
prevent the contents from dropping from the vehicle or to park such vehicle in or upon any I-	cart  way  or  traveled  portion   of  any  public  highway ,  road,  street  or  alley  which  is maintained by the Township or by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or upon any private
property which odors from the same are offensive to nearby residents.

17.     Allowing or permitting any excavation, material excavated or obstruction on or adjoining any highway , street, or road, to remain opened or exposed without the same being secured by a barricade, temporary fence, or other protective materials.

18.	Interfering with the flow of a stream, creek or other waterway, by means
of dam  construction  or otherwise,  or removing the embankment  of a stream so as to




4
 
alter the natural flow of the stream.

19.	Defacing Public and Priva te Property:


(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership , corporation or agent acting independently or under the direction of the principal to deface any private or public buildings, structures, signs, banners, or vehicles  within  the  Township. Example s of Defacing shall include but not be limited to the following examples; application of paint , inks and dyes; affixing of any printed materials such as signs or posters ; destruction or removal; defacing in any manner.

20.	Spotlighting - prohibiting certain uses of spotlights from roads in the Township . No person shall shine any spotlight from any place on public roads in the Township, into any fields, woodlands, forests, waters, or other lands outside the main traveled portion s of the roads, at any time between the hours of sunset and 7:00 o'clock a.m., preva iling time, on any day.

(a)	Person  - any human being, group  of hum an beings, or other legal
entity or group of legal entities;

(b)	Shine - the throwing or casting of the rays of a spotlight .

(c)	Spotlight - any lamp, light, or other artificial device designed to direct a beam of light, regardless of the size of such beam or the intensity thereof and regardl ess of the area of actual illumination thereby . Spotlights shall includ e, but not be limited to, all vehicle headlamps, flashlights, arc lights, and any other devices which direct an intense beam of light on a small area.

(d)	Exceptions - none of the following acts shall be deemed prohibited by this ordinance:

1)	Use of a spotlight by any policeman, other law enforcement officer , game protection, fireman, or other emergency officer or government official, in the performance of his or her official duties;

2)	Use of a spotlight by any person engaged in and for the purpose of assisting in, any rescue operation, any search for or apprehension of any criminal or fugitive from justic e, any search for any lost or abducted person, or the lighting of any way or direction of travel for purposes of  lawful travel, whether on or off such public road;

3)	Use of a spotlight by any person engaged in and for the purpose of assisting in, illuminating the scene of any crime, disaster , public disturban ce, or other public event, but  the  intentional  shining of spotlights at or for the



5
 
purpose  of  discovering  any  deer,  or  other  game  or  domestic  animals  not deemed excused by this exception;

4)	Any  incidental  and  peripheral  or  accidental  illumination  by  any
spotlight otherwise in lawful use.

21.	A holding or partially manmade pool, pond, or other body of water which tends to produce disease vectors, biting insects and/or pests is prohibited. In the case of swimming pools, water quality and clarity may be declared a threat to or endangerment of public health and safety when the clarity of the pool water is such that the main drain grate is not completely visible to a person standing on the pool deck, or the recirculation system or disinfection feeding equipment is missing or not functioning.



SECTION THREE. WRITTEN NOTICE TO VIOLATORS REQUIRED: Whenever a
condition constituting a nuisance is permitted or maintained the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner in one of the following manners:

1.	By making personal delivery of the notice to the owners; or


2.	By handing a copy of the notice at the residence  of the owner to an adult member of the family with which he or she resides, but if no adult member of the family is found, then to an adult person in charge of such residence; or

3.	By fixing a copy of the notice to the door at the entrance of the premises in violation; or

4.	By mailing a copy of the notice to the last known address of the owner by certified mail ; or

5.	By publishing a copy of the notice in a local newspaper of general circulation within Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, once a week for three (3) successive weeks. Such notice shall set forth in what respect such condition constitutes a nuisance, whether removal is necessary and required by the Township, or whether the situation can be corrected by repairs, alterations or by fencing or boarding, or in some way confining and limiting the nuisance . Such notice shall require the owner to commence action in accordance with the terms thereof within twenty (20) days and thereafter , to comply fully with its terms with reasonable dispatch, with  all material to be  supplied and work to be  done at the owner's expense; provid ed, however , if any of the provisions  of Section Two (F),(I), (J), or (K) is violated, and if the circumstances require immediate corrective measures, such notice shall require the owner to immediately comply with the terms thereof.






6
 
SECTION FOUR. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION: Any person, firm, or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, as a summary offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars per violation, and the cost of prosecution, plus restitution .  Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall constitute a separate  event.


1.	Enforcement thereof shall be by an action before a District Magistrate in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses. The Township  Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution. The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors hereby sets a fine in the amount of not less than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars nor more than One Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars per violation, the costs of prosecution , plus restitution. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall constitute a separate event.

2.	The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may direct the removal, repair, or alterations, as the case may be, to be done by the Township and to certify the costs, including, but not limited to, of the abatement , including, but not limited to, administrative costs and attorney's fees, the cost of such removal, repairs or alterations shall be a lien upon such premises from the time of such removal, cutting, repairs and  alterations which date shall be determined by the certificate of the person doing such work , and filed with the Township Secretary.

3.	The Township, by means of a complaint in equity, may compel the owner of the premises to comply with the terms of any notice of violation, or seek any such other relief as any such court of competent jurisdiction is empowered to afford.



SECTION FIVE. SEVERABILITY: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase , or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason , held to be invalid or unconstitutional
N	by any court of competent jurisdiction , such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
"	portions hereof.
:::.::::
I-
SECTION SIX. EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall become effective five (5)
days after the adoption hereof.














7
 
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this /..Jd	day oL -/k .er, 2016.

ATTEST:		BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP

                                        	_	(SEAL)
Chairman



-(SEAL)


 




















 
















8
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 




SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 178

AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A PROGRAM FOR THE COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIAL FROM PROPERTIES WITHIN SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP FOR RECYCLING PURPOSES; TO PROHIBIT THE DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIA LS INTO THE CONVENTIONAL MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; TO EMPOWER THE TOWNSHIP TO ADOPT AND PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS THEREFORE; AND TO FIX PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF.

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the·authority of the same as follows:
SECTION ONE:	PURPOSE:

A.	Act 100 of 1988, an Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, entitled THE MUNICIPAL WASTE PLANNING, RECYCLING AND WASTE REDUCTION ACT, States Municipalities which meet the size requirements for mandatory recycling must enter into recycling, solid waste management and reduction programs.
B.	It is the desire of South Lebanon Township to

establish, a substantial solid waste recycling and solid waste management and reduction program within the Township to better util ize existing and future solid waste disposal facilities and to work toward a more productive and environmentally sound method of solid waste management.
SECTION TWO:	TITLE:	The short title of this ordinance

shall be the South Lebanon Township Recycling Ordinance, and the

same may be cited in that manner.
 
, -.







SECTION THREE: ; DEFINITIONS:	The following words, when used in this Ordinance, shall have the follo ing definitions:
A.	Aluminum Cans - empty, all aluminum beverage and

food containers.

B.	Bi-Metal Containers - empty food or beverage containers consisting of a combination of ferrous metals and aluminum; ie: ferrous sides and aluminum top and/or bottom.
c.	Commercial Establishment - properties used

primarily for commercial and/or industrial purposes.

D.	Ferrous Containers - empty steel or tin food or beverage containers.
E.	Glass Containers - bottles and jars made of clear,

green or brown glass . Expressly excluded are non-container glass, plate glass, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
F.	Institutional Establishments - facilities that

house or serve groups of people, ie: hospitals, schools, nursing homes, etc.
G.	. Magazines and Periodicals - printed matter

containing miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.	Bxpressly excluded, however, are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever .
H.	Newspapers - paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint.		Expressly excluded are newspapers that have been soiled.
I.	Person(s) - owners, lessees and occupants of residents, commercial or institutional establishments.
 


J.	Plastic Containers - empty plastic food and beverage containers.
K.	Recyclable Materials - materials specified from

time to time in the rules and regulations for recycling.

L.	Residence - any occupied single  family or multi­

family dwelling.

M.	Solid Waste - all refuse (garbage and rubbish) and other discarded solid material normally collected by municipal or private haulers.
N.	Yard Waste - pruning, grass  clippings, weeds,

leaves and garden wastes.

SECTION FOUR:	ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM:	There is hereby

established a progra for the mandatory recycling of certain specified solid waste by all persons within South Lebanon Township, hereinafter referred to as the Township.	Said recyclable materials shall be set forth in rules and regulations to be promulgated, and amended, from time to time by Resolution of the Township.
SECTION FIVE:	COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:	It shall

be a violation c	this Ordinance for any person(s) unauthorized

by the Township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclables.	Each such collection in
violation hereby shall constitute a separate and distinct offense

punishable as hereinafter provided.

SECTION SIX:	ADMINISTRATION:	The Township shall establish

and promulgate reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and
 


times for the collection of recyclable materials in accordance with the terms hereof, and any other matters required to implement thi ordinance.	The Township may change, modify, repeal or amend any portion of said rules and regulations at any time.
SECTION SEVEN:	ENFORCEMENT:	South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors are hereby charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance and the rules and regulations promulgated from time to time.
SECTION EIGHT:	FRANCHISE OR LICENSE:	The Township may

enter into agreements with public or private agencies or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable materials from the Township.
SECTION NINE:	ALTERNATIVE COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE

MATERIAL:	Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or organizations authorized by the Township in its recycling regulations.	These materials must be delivered to the individual's or organization's site.
SECTION TEN:	It is prohibited and will be deemed a violation hereof for any owner, lessee or occupant of any residential, commercial, or institutional property in the Township to put into or cause to be put into the solid waste collection system of the Township any leaves or grass or other yard waste.
SECTION ELEVEN.	Recyclable materials removed from the

Township must be processed in an approved processing facility and
 


may not be discarded in the Greater Lebanon Refuse Authority Landfill unless authorized by the Greater Lebanon Refuse Authority in writing to South Lebanon Township.
SECTION TWELVE:	SEVERABILITY:	If any section, sentence or other part of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not cause or affect or impair any remaining section, sentence or other part of this Ordinance, it being the intent of this Township that such remainder shall be and remain in full force and effect.
SECTION THIRTEEN:	REPEALER:	All other Ordinances or

Resolutions or parts thereof which are inconsistent herewith shall be and the same are expressly repealed.
SECTION FOURTEEN:	EFFECTIVE DATE	This Ordinance shall be

effective on the date of enactment of the Resolution establishing rules and regulations authorized hereunder, but in no case less than five days from the date of enactment of this Ordinance.
SECTION FIFTEEN:	VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:	Any person,

firrn, corporation or other entity who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.00) and costs of prosecution.	Each day's continuance of a violation or failure to comply with any provision of this Ordinance or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall constitute a separate offense.
 


ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 1st day  of October, 1991.



-	ATTEST: .		SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 



 

VICE-C
 
{SEAL)
 


 
 
'  .
SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. 304

AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP, LEBANON COUNTY, TO REPEAL ORDINANCE #6 IN ITS ENTIRETY; TO ESTABLISH REGULATIONS FOR THE STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE; AND TO FIX AND PROVIDE PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.

WHEREAS, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors have determined it is in the best interest of the health and safety of its citizens to regulate the storage, collection and disposal of garbage and refuse,

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED , and it is enacted and ordained by the Board of
Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, as follows:

SECTION 1 - Definitions:
A.	:Municipal Waste  -  Garbage, refuse,  industrial  lunchroom  or office waste  and other  material,
including solid,  liquid semisolid or contained  gaseous  material resulting from the operation of
residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities.

B.	Person - An individual, corporation, partnership or other group acting as a unit.

C.	Owner - Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in real estate in South Lebanon Township or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian or an estate of such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person.
D.	Licensed Hauler - Any owner of a waste transportation vehicle licensed under Pennsylvania Act 90. SECTION 2 - Storage Practices:
A.	Garbage & Refuse Containers
1.	General Rules:
a.	Garbage and refuse containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleansed and/ or disinfected by the user periodically or upon written notice from the Township.

b.	Garbage and refuse may be commingled in the same container.

c.	Containers,  in which garbage or wet refuse is stored, shall be leak proof, with water
tight, securely fitting cover or lid.

d.	Garbage and refuse containers shall be maintained in good and safe condition. Any container, which is cracked, leaking, bent, broken, incomplete or with sharp edges, shall be promptly replaced by the user or upon written notice from the Township.

2.	For single family residences,  the garbage and refuse containers shall be supplied by the owner, occupant, tenant or collector, with a capacity not to exceed forty-four (44) gallons each, or as may be required or agreed upon with the collector, with as many containers as may be necessary, without overfilling, to properly meet the collector's pick up schedule.

3.	Multi-Family Dwelling Applications:
a.	In cases of two (2) or more dwelling units in a single building or complex of buildings, including but not limited to apartments, condominiums, rooming houses and dormitories, garbage and refuse containers shall be supplied by the owner or manager of the building or complex.

b.	The capacity of garbage and/or refuse collection shall be a minimum of 1/ 6 cubic yard per person occupant per week. Containers shall be sized accordingly and emptied to at least meet that minimum.
 
'    .
c.	Where the capacity of containers is insufficient to contain the amount of garbage/refuse generated, it shall be the duty of the owner or manager to provide a larger container and/or arrange more frequent disposal, in order to prevent overfilling, having material placed on or around the container or preventing lids from being securely closed.

d.	All containers shall have suitable  lids  or  covers,  properly  secured,  to  prevent  the contents from blowing out of the container during a windstorm event, and to prevent nuisance due to flied, insects, rodents or noxious odors.

e.	In case of property absentee ownership, the person in charge, property manager or agent
shall be responsible for implementing the provisions of this Ordinance.

4.	Other Commercial and Industrial Applications
a.	The capacity of garbage and/or refuse containers shall be sized and emptied on a schedule which will prevent overfilling, having disposed material  outside  of  the container or having to store disposed material elsewhere awaiting collection.

b.	All containers shall have suitable lids or covers, properly secured, to prevent the contents from blowing out of the container during a windstorm event, and to prevent nuisance due to flies, insects, rodents or noxious odors.

5.	Restaurants  and  Food  Preparation Entities
a.	The  capacity  of  garbage  and/or  refuse containers  shall  be sized  and emptied  on  a
schedule  which  will  prevent  overfilling,  having  disposed  material  outside  of  the
container or having to store disposed material elsewhere awaiting collection.

b.	All containers shall have suitable lids or covers, properly secured, to prevent the contents from blowing out of the container during a windstorm event, and to prevent nuisance due to flies, insects, rodents or noxious odors.


c.	Garbage and refuse containers shall be located in an area away from entrances to the building, preferably at the rear, and completely enclosed on four (4) sides with a secure fence material which will keep the container(s) out of view and prevent the container contents from blowing out of the enclosure during a windstorm event.

6.	Containers Used for Specific Items
a.	Containers used specifically for animal fats or butchering trimmings, frying grease or oil or any similar waste held for special disposal or rendering, shall be securely closed at all
times, completely enclosed on four (4) sides with a secure fence.

b.	Grease or oil accumulations on the outside of the container or in the enclosure in which it is kept, shall be removed and prevented at all times to prevent nuisance due to insects, rodents and noxious odors.

c.		Where grease and oil accumulations are present and have not been prevented, the Township may direct the user to remediate the problem, within ten (10) days, by steam or other professional cleaning and the use of appropriate disinfectants and/or odor control.

B.	Storing of Garbage and Refuse
No person shall place any garbage or refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property either owned by such person or not, within the Township limits except if same is placed in a proper receptacle for collection or under an expressed approval granted by the Township.
 
'  ,

Section 3 - Collection Practices:
A.	Place of Collection
Garbage and refuse receptacles, for collection purposes, shall be placed at ground level on the property, not within the cartway of a street or alley from which collection is made, except where an agreement exists with the collector to collect from a driveway, porch or elsewhere.

B.	Removal By Licensed Haulers
Every owner in South Lebanon Township shall contract with an individual, entity or firm which is a licensed hauler by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to have all the municipal waste generated
by any of the occupants of the premises removed on a weekly basis or more often if necessary. Whenever requested by the Township, the owner shall present proof that a current contract is in effect with a licensed hauler to dispose of municipal waste generated on the premises.

C.	Compost Piles
Notwithstanding the terms of this Ordinance, compost piles kept by occupants or tenants of a structure shall not violate the terms and conditions of this article, provided the material in the compost pile does not generate any offensive odors and provided further the compost pile is secure so that animals do not spread the materials from the pile around the premises.

Section 4 - Place and Method of Disposal:
A.	No person shall hereafter dispose of any garbage or refuse  from any premises  in the Township except by conveyance of the same to a sanitary landfill designated in the  Lebanon County Solid Waste Management Plan.

B.	No person shall hereafter dispose of or abandon  in or near any garbage or refuse container, materials which are not accepted for ordinary collection by the sanitary landfill designated in the Lebanon County Solid Waste Management Plan, including but not limited to tires, batteries, oil or oil based paints or similar material, hazardous or medical waste, explosives or incendiary materials, appliances containing refrigerant gasses and scrap metals.

C.	No person shall hereafter dispose of or abandon in or near any garbage or refuse bulk container (dumpster), materials too large to fit into the container or materials not suitable for ordinary collection methods unless prior arrangements have been made with the collector. Such materials include but are not limited to household furniture and bedding, carpet rolls, appliances, outdoor equipment and construction or demolition waste.

D.	In cases where unknown persons have disposed or abandoned materials that the collector has opted not to collect, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner or manager to properly remove and dispose of such items Within ten (10) days of their rejection by the collector.

Section 5 - Duties of Haulers:
A.	Any hauler picking up municipal waste in South Lebanon Township shall be required to advise the Township, in writing within 72 hours after request, as to whether an owner has a current contract for municipal waste disposal from his premises. Furthermore, all licensed haulers shall cooperate with the Township designee in providing information in the event an action is instituted to enforce the terms and conditions of this Ordinance.

B.	Any municipal waste collected in South Lebanon Township shall be deposited in a sanitary landfill designated in the Lebanon County Solid Waste Management Plan.

Section 6 - Penalties:
A.	Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or any
resolutions promulgated pursuant hereto, shall upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.00) together with the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, said person or establishment will be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, provided that each day's continuance of a violation or failure to comply with any provisions of this Ordinance or any resolutions promulgated pursuant hereto, shall constitute a separate offense.
 
' J

Section 7 - Repeal of Inconsistent Ordinances:
A.	In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any  remaining  provision,  section,  sentence, clause or part of this Ordinance, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect. All Ordinances of parts of Ordinances, resolutions or parts of resolutions, which shall be inconsistent herewith expressly shall be and are hereby repealed.

B.	Ordinance #6 is hereby repealed.

Section 8 - Effective Date:

Adopted this 26th day of February 2008.

 


ATIEST:
 
SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP BOARDOFSUPERVISORS
 








 



Stephen T. Krause, Supervisor
 
.;"	·.



SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION NO. 1056



WHEREAS, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors last adopted a fee schedule for review of Subdivision and/or Land Development plans on June 5, 1990; and,

WHEREAS, South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors finds that the rules and regulations which govern Subdivision and Land Development have changed, therefore giving rise to the need to amend the fee schedule,

NOW, THEREFORE , BE IT RESOLVED, that the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors hereby fixes the cost of filing fees for review and processing of all Subdivision or Land Development Plans within the Township in accordance with the following Schedule:

 
A.	Minor Subdivision, Not Involving New Lots
(Add-on, annexation, land exchange, etc.)
 
$100
 

B.	Minor and Major Subdivisions or Land Developments with New Lots/Units

 
# of Lots/ Units 1-5
6-10
11 - 20
21 - 50
51 -100
101 - 200
201 +
 
Preliminary Plan Fee
$ 200 + $ 100/Lot
$ 300 + $ 100/Lot
$ 400 + $  90/Lot
$ 500 + $ 80/Lot
$ 600 + $ 70/Lot
$ 700 + $ 60/Lot
$ 800 + $ 50/Lot
 
Final Plan Fee
$ 100 + $ 30/Lot
$ 200 + $ 30/Lot
$ 300 + $ 30/Lot
$ 400 + $ 30/Lot
$ 500 + $ 30/Lot
$ 600 + $ 30/Lot
$ 700 + $ 30/Lot
 

C.	Land Development Plans
(Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, etc.)

Acres* 0 - 2	Plan Review Fee
$   800
2.01 - 5	$ 1,200
5.01 -10	$ 2,000
10.01 - 15	$ 2,400
15.01 -25	$ 2,800
25.01 -50	$ 3,500
50-100
100 +	$ 4,000
$ 5,000 + $ 1O per acre for each acre over 100 acres

•	Acreage of tract to be based upon lot size of tract undergoing land development or acreage of disturbed land area stipulated in the erosion & sediment control permit application, whichever is larger.


D.	Engineer Review Fees - All applications involving storm water management or engineering review shall be accompanied by fees, payable to South Lebanon Township for the Township Engineer, in accordance with the following . Plan reviews or inspections requiring more than fees charged, shall be subject to an additional fee based upon the hourly rate established in
#2b.
 
1.	For review of subdivision and land development plans and requests for inspections:

 


Preliminary Plans Final Plans Inspection
 
1-5 Lots/Units
$ 60 per lot/unit
$ 50 per lot/unit
$ 40 per lot/unit
 
6-19 Lots/Units
$ 40 per lot/unit
$ 30 per lot/unit
· $ 30 per lot/unit
 
20 or More Lots/Units
$ 30 per lot/unit
$ 20 per lot/unit
$ 20 per lot/unit
 

2.	For review of commercial, industrial, or institutional land development, resubmitted
plans, inspections, or other plans which do not qualify for the per lot/unit rate:

a.	A base fee of $500 for review or inspection. Plan reviews or inspections requiring more than 5 hours of Township Engineer time shall be subject to an additional fee based upon the hourly rate established in #2 b.
b.	An hourly rate of $ 100 per hour for Township Engineer review or inspection time.

3.	All fees payable at the time of application, except that:

a.	Inspection fees based upon the per lot/unit or base fee rates shall be paid by
separate checks with the final plan, prior to recording the final plan; and
b.	The hourly rate specified in #2 b. for review of supplemental review fees shall be
payable after review, but before plan approval; and
c.	The hourly rate specified in #2 b. for inspection or supplemental inspection fees shall be payable after inspection but before final approval of release of applicable financial guarantees.

4.	Review Special Reports (traffic, environmental, etc.)	Hourly Rates

 
NOTE:
 


1.	County Fees are not included in the above schedule. Applicant shall pay County fees
directly to the County Planning Department.
2.	For projects which have a combined Preliminary/Final Plan, fees shall be paid in
cumulative.
 

Any Resolution, or part of Resolution, conflicting with this Resolution shall be hereby repeale·d insofar
as the same affects this resolution.

ADOPTED THIS 23Ro DAY of MARCH, 2004.


 










Sup rvi$6r
 










SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP






SUBDIVISION LAND USE ORDINANCE






ORDINANCE NO. 164
 









SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP

SUBDIVISION  LAND  USE  ORDINANCE






TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAPTER	TITLE	PAGE


l	PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY		1
2	DEFINITIONS		3
3	PROCEDURES		7

4	
PLANS  AND  PLATS:  REQUIRED	
INFORMATION	
18

5	
REQUIRED  IMPROVEMENTS  AND	
DE;SIGN  STANDARDS	
25
6	FLOOD  PLAIN  MANAGEMENT		
49

7	• ADMINISTRATION,	FEES   AND   PENALTIES    ·	·   55

Appendix


 
 



 




1.01
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER ONE: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY	PAGE
Title ••••••••••	•••1
 
1.02
 
Purpose
 
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
 
••••••••••.. 1
 
1.03

1.05
 
Objectives ••••••••••••••••••••••••

Jurisdiction ••••••••••••••••••••••
 
• ••••• 1
............• •• 2
 
1.04
 
Application of Regulations •••••••••••••••••••
 
• •• 2
 


2.01
 

CHAPTER TWO: DEFINITIONS
General Terms ••••••••••••	•  •• 4
 
2.02
 
Specific Terms ••••••••••• ............	..

CHAPTER THREE: PROCEDURES
 
• •• 4
 
3.01
3.02
3.03
3.04

3.05
 
Intent••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 9
Pre-Application.	9
Minor Subdivision or Land Development •••••••••••••10 Major Subdivision or Lande Development -
Preliminary Plan•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 12
Major.Subdivision or Land Developement -
Final Plan•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 14

CHAPTER FOUR: PLANS AND PLATS:REQUIRED INFORMATION
 
4.01
 
Intent•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
 
•••••••••18
 

4.02

4.04
 
Minor Subdivisions ••••••••••••••••••••••• ..
Major Subdivision - Final Plan••••••••••• ......
 

.18

.23
 
4.03
 
Major Subdivision	Preliminary Plan•••• • • • • • • • • • • 22
 



5.01
 

CHAPTER FIVE: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
Intent•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••	••••••	••••25
 
5.02
5.03
 
General Standards •••••••••••••••••• Energey Conservation Standards.
 
••••••••••·•26
•••••	•••••28
 
5.04
 
Topography •••••••••••.••••••••••• •••••••••••	••29
 
5.05
5.06
5.07
5.08
5.09
 
Grading ••••••••••••••••••••••
Lot Sizes and Standards •••••••••••••••••••• Sewage Disposal.	••••••••••	••
Water Supply. •• ••••••	••••••••••••••••••• Streets. •••••••••••••	•••	••••••	••••••
 
••30
•••••31
•••••31
•••••33
•••••34
 
5.10
5.11
5.12
5.13
5.14
 
Curbs and Gutters....   ••••••••••••••••••• ••••40
Sidewalks. •••••••••••    ••••••    ••  •••••4O Street Lights. ••••• ••••••••••••••••• •• •••••41 Postal Address •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 41
Driveways ••••••••••••••••                         .41
 
5.15
 
Monuments •••••••••••••••• ............	......
 
.41
 
5.16
 
Utilities and Other Improvements •••
 
.............42
 
5.17
5.18
 
Required Improvements •••••••••••••••••••••••••••• •42 Completion of Improvements or Guarantee
 

5.19
 
Thereof Prerequisite to Final Plan Approval . Insurance ...•............••••...•....
 
•••44
.48
 
5.20
 
Building Construction and Occupancy •••••••••••••••48
 




 


6.01
6.02
6.03
6.04
6.05
6.06
 
CHAPTER SIX: FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Intent •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 49 Definitions of Terms Utilized in This Chapter •••49 Applications Procedures and Plat Requirements •••50 Design Standards and Improvements •••••••••••••••51 Performance Guarantee..............	•••••••••••54 Municipal Liability ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 54

CHAPTER SEVEN: ADMINISTRATION, FEES AND PENALTIES
 

7.02
 

Administration and Enforcement ••••••
 
.........55
 
7.01
 
Intent•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 55
 
7.03
 
Modifications •••••••••••••••••••••••
 
••••••••56
 
7.04
7.05
7.06
7.07
7.08
7.09
 
Appeals. •••••••••••••••••••••••••••• ••••••••56 Schedule of Fees•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 57 Penalties•••••••••••••••••••••••••• p •••••••••••• 59 Amendments •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 6o Validity •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 60
Effective Date•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 60
 




CHAPTER 1 - PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY

An   ordinance providing for the control of the subdivision and development of land and the approval of plats and replats of land within the jurisdiction of South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, as a part of the master plan for South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania.

Now, therefore, be it ordained by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, under authority of Article V and VII of the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code", of the Act of the 1968 General Assembly No. 247;
as amended.

SECTION 1.01 TITLE

These regulations, rules and standards for planning, subdividing, and developing land within South Lebanon Township, including procedures for the application and administration, and penalties for the violation thereof, shall be known, cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION LAND USE ORDINANCE for South Lebanon Township.

SECTION 1.02 PURPOSE

The general purpose of this ordinance shall be to guide and regulate the planning, subdividing, and development of land in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the residents of South Lebanon Township.

SECTION 1.03 OBJECTIVES

It is intended that the provisions of these regulations shall be applied to achieve the following objectives:

a)	Orderly development of the land to obtain harmonious and stable neighborhoods; and
b)	Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation; and
c)	Adequate and economical provisions for utilities and
public services to conserve the public funds; and
d)	Ample public open spaces for schools, recreational
and other public purpose; and
e)	Accurate surveying of land, preparing and recording
of plats; and
f)	Discouraging of premature, uneconomical, or scattered
subdivision; and
-1-
 




g)	Maximize conservation of all forms of energy; and
h)	Storm water management, by reducing stream erosion and maintaining natural storm water runoff characteristics; and
i)	Coordination of land development in accordance with the Zoning Code, Comprehensive Plan, and other plans of the Municipality and County.

SECTION 1.04 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS

No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land located within South Lebanon Township shall be effected; no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, storm water control facilities, or other facilities in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for travel or public use, until a subdivision or land development plan has been approved in the manner prescribed herein, and recorded.	Furthermore, no property shall be developed, no building shall be erected and no site improvements shall be
completed except in strict accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.

No lot in a subdivision may be sold or transferred; no permit to erect or alter any building upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued; and no buildings may be erected in a subdivision or land development, unless and until a final subdivision or land development plat has been approved and recorded, and until construction of any required site improvements in connection therewith has been completed or guaranteed in the manner prescribed herein.

SECTION 1.05 JURISDICTION

The following shall have jurisdiction regarding all subdivision plans within the Township.

A.	Lebanon County Planning Department.		All proposed subdivision plans shall be submitted first for review and comment to the Lebanon County Planning Department.	If a review report on such a plan is not received by the Township within 30 days after submission to the County Planning Department, or within such further time as may have been agreed upon, the Township may proceed without the report.

B.	Planning Commission:	After review and comment by the Lebanon County Planning Department, all subdivision plans, both Preliminary and Final shall be submitted to the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission for review and approval.

-2-
 





c. Governing Body:	After the review and approval of all Subdivision Plans, by the Planning Commission, both Preliminary and Final, the Plans shall be submitted to the Governing Body for final approval.	Where the Plans as set forth herein have not
been approved by the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission,
the plans may be submitted to the Governing Body within 30 days after the rejection by the Planning Commission for their decision as set forth herein.


















































-3-
 




CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS SECTION 2.01 GENERAL TERMS
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this Ordinance, have the meaning herein indicated.

Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include the singular.

Words in the present tense include the future tense.

The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; and the word "should" means a suggested or preferred action.

The words "person" or "subdivider" or "developer" or "owner" include a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual.

SECTION 2.02 SPECIFIC TERMS

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this Ordinance, have the meaning herein indicated.	Undefined terms or words used herein shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such meanings as the context of this Ordinance may imply.

ACCELERATED EROSION - the removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of man's activities and the natural processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.

APPLICANT - a land owner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
ACT 247 - see "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code". BUILDING (SETBACK) LINE - a line established by municipal zoning
codes or the subdivision regulations which defines the required
minimum distance between any building and the adjacent public right-of-way.

CARTWAY - the portion of the street right-of-way, paved or unpaved, intended for vehicular use.	The shoulder is not considered part of the cartway.


-4-
 




CO:MMON OPEN SPACE - a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and the water within a development site, designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the development, not including streets,
off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public facilities.

COUNTY - Lebanon County, Pennsylvania

DETENTION STRUCTURE - a vegetated pond, swale, or other structure designed to drain completely after storing runoff only for a given storm event and release it at a predetermined rate.	Also known as a dry pond.

DEVELOPER - any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development.

EASEMENT - a right-of-way granted for limited use of land for public or quasi-public purpose.

ENERGY DISSIPATOR - a device used to slow the velocity of storm water particularly at points of concentrated discharge such as pipe outlets.

ENGINEER. TOWNSHIP - a Registered Engineer designated by  the Supervisors to perform duties as required by this Ordinance on behalf of the Township.

ENGINEER. REGISTERED - an individual licensed and registered as a Professional Engineer by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

FREEBOARD - the difference between the design flow elevation in the emergency spillway and the top of the settled embankment.
GOVERNING BODY - South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors. GRASSED WATERWAY - a natural or man-made drainageway of parabolic
or trapezoidal cross-section shaped to required dimensions and
vegetated for safe disposal of runoff.	(Also known as a swale).

HOLDING POND - a retention or detention pond.

IMPROVEMENTS - physical additions and changes to the land, necessary to produce usable and desirable lots.

LAND DEVELOPMENT - (i) the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving (a) a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or (b) the
-5-
 





division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features; (ii) a subdivision of land.

LANDOWNER - the legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land.

LOT - a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit.

LOT AREA - the area contained within the property line of a lot or the allocation of land, excluding space within any street right-of-way.

MOBILEHOME - a transportable, single family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.

MOBILEHOME LOT - a parcel of land in a mobilehome park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobilehome.

MOBILEHOME PARK - a parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobilehome lots for the placement thereon of mobilehomes.

MUNICIPALITY - South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County, PA.

ON-SITE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT - the control or runoff to allow water falling on a given site to be absorbed or retained on site to the extent that after development the peak rate of discharge leaving the site does not exceed the rate prior to development.

PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE - adopted as Act 247 of
1968, this act enables municipalities to plan for, and regulate,
community· development with subdivision and land development
ordinances.	The code also contains guidelines for subdivision and land development ordinance content.	For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Code is referred to as "Act 247" and is intended to include the current code and any further amendments thereto.
-6-
 





PLAN. FINAL - a complete and exact subdivision or land development plan prepared for recording as required by statute, to define property rights, proposed streets and other improvements; a final plat.

PLAN. PRELIMINARY - a tentative subdivision or land development plan showing proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plat.

PLAN, SKETCH - an informal plan, indicating existing features of a tract and the surrounding area and outlining the general layout of a proposed subdivision or land development.

PLANNING COMMISSION - the Planning Commission created by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township.
PLANNING DEPARTMENT - the Lebanon County Planning Department. PLAT - the map or plan of a subdivision or land development,
whether preliminary or final.

RETENTION STRUCTURE - a pond, swale, or other structure
containing a permanent pool of water designed to store runoff for a given storm event.

RIGHT-OF-WAY - the total width of any land reserved or dedicated for use as street, alley, or for any public purpose.

SEDIMENT BASIN - a temporary dam or barrier constructed across a waterway or at other suitable locations to intercept the runoff and to trap and retain the sediment.

SITE IMPROVEMENTS - physical additions or changes to the land that may be necessary to provide usable and desirable lots, including but not limited to, utilities, streets, curbing, sidewalks, street lights and storm water facilities.

STORAGE STRUCTURE - a retention or detention structure.

STORM WATER MANAGEMENT - the control of runoff to allow water falling on a given site to be absorbed or retained on site to the extent that after development the peak rate of discharge leaving the site does not exceed the rate prior to development.

STREET - a strip of land including the entire right-of-way used or intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, whether public or private.	The word "street" includes street, thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, expressway, highway, road, lane, and alley.
-7-
 





STREET. PRIVATE - a strip of private land providing access to abutting properties and not offered for dedication or accepted for municipal ownership and maintenance.

SUBDIVIDER - any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or land development.

SUBDIVISION - the division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing
lot liens for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUPERVISORS - The governing body of South Lebanon Township. SURVEYOR. REGISTERED - an individual licensed and registered as a
Professional Land surveyor by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

SWALE - see GRASSED WATERWAY.

TOWNSHIP - South Lebanon Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania.


























-a-
 




CHAPTER 3 - PROCEDURES SECTION 3.01 INTENT
The procedures established in this Chapter are intended to define the steps by which a developer shall design, make an application, record plats, and construct improvements, and by which South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may review, make recommendations, approve plans and otherwise administer these regulations and this Ordinance.

For those subdivisions hereinafter classified as minor subdivisions, a sketch plan and abbreviated final plan procedure is established.	For all others, which are classified as major subdivisions or land developments, a preliminary plan and final plat procedure is established.

SECTION 3.02 PRE-APPLICATION

South Lebanon Township shall make available to developers copies of this subdivision land use ordinance, the zoning code, and other adopted plans, street maps, and other information which may affect the development of the property under consideration. Applications for approval of a subdivision or land development shall be in accord with these regulations, other codes and plans as adopted and information furnished.

Prior to the formal submission of a subdivision or land development plan for review and approval, the subdivider is urged to submit a sketch plan to Lebanon County Planning Department, South Lebanon Township Planning Commission and South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors for advice on the requirements necessary to achieve conformity to the standards of these regulations, as well as, to alert the subdivider as early as possible to factors which must be considered in the design of a subdivision, such as pertinent elements of any County or Municipal land use, thoroughfare or other community plans.
Review of a sketch plan is an informal, advisory process to guide
the subdivider in eventual preparation of a formal preliminary or final plan.

Sketch plans and subsequent official minor and major subdivision and land development plans should be accompanied by any letters of transmittal or development details necessary to explain existing or proposed site conditions which are not
self-explanatory on the actual sketch, minor or major subdivision
or land development plan.

-9-
 




SECTION 3.03 MINOR SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT

A.	Classification - A division of land to facilitate a lot addition or a land exchange or a division of land which adjoins an existing public street and does not involve the opening, widening, extension or improvement of any street or the installation of any public utility out­ side the frontage road and does not involve more than five (5) lots or dwelling units (except that subdivision of lots from a property after five (5) or more lots have been previously subdivided is a major subdivision).

Dedication or establishment of an unimproved right-of­ way or easement shall be a minor subdivision.	Re­ platting, resubdivision or revision of five (5) lots or less shall also be considered a minor subdivision.
Multi-family, commercial, industrial and mobilehome
park development shall be a major, not minor, subdivision
or land development, regardless of the number of lots or units created.

B.	Application - A final plat complying with the requirements set forth in this Ordinance shall be prepared for each minor subdivision or land development and review of said plat shall be requested from the Lebanon County Planning Department, South Lebanon Township Planning Commission,
and South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors.

When filing an application for approval of a minor subdivision or land development, the subdivider shall submit one (1) mylar or original, one (1) clothback print, and eight (8) blue line paper prints of the proposal on 18" x 24" sheets.

c. Review - Upon receipt of the minor subdivision or land development plan, the Lebanon County Planning Department shall begin to review the final plan for compliance with the Ordinance.	Where applicable, the plan may be forwarded
to the County Engineer, Township Engineer, the Soil Conserva­
tion Service or other agencies for review and comment.	The Lebanon County Planning Department shall review and comment on the final plan as submitted not later than thirty (30) days after such application is filed.	Such review and comment shall then be submitted to the South Lebanon Town­ ship Planning Commission along with the prints and other pertinent data.	With the failure of the Lebanon County Planning Department to render a report and submit it to the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission within the time and in the manner required herein, the South Lebanon Town­ ship Planning Commission may proceed without the report
-10-
 




unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the report, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.

After the review of all plans by the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission, the plans shall be submitted to the
South Lebanon Township Board of supervisors for final approval. When the plans have not been approved by the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission, the plans may be submitted to
the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors within thirty
(30) days after the rejection by the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission for their decision as set forth herein.

D.	Approval or Disapproval - After an application for approval of a plat of a minor subdivision or land development has been filed with the South Lebanon Township Board of Super­ visors, together with all maps, necessary data, and fees, the plan shall be reviewed and processed.	The subdivider or developer shall pay required review fees at the time of official submission of the plat and official submission shall not be deemed to have been made until receipt of all the required review fees.	The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors shall complete the review and either approve or disapprove the plat no later than ninety (90)   days after such application submission is filed.	The decision shall
be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision.

When the application is approved, it shall be appro­ priately signed and dated and copies shall be distributed according to Section 3.0J(E) of this Ordinance.	When the application is disapproved, the decision shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the require­ ments which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite to the provisions of the Ordinance relied upon.	A disapproved copy of the subdivision or land development plan shall be retained by the Lebanon County Planning De­ partment, South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, and the remaining copies shall be returned to the subdivider, developer and/or his agent.

Failure of the South Lebanon Township Board of Super­ visors to render a decision and communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed approval of the application in the terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of pre-
-11-
 





sentation of communication of the decision in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.	How­ ever, removal or withdrawal of the subdivision or land de­ velopment plan from the approval process by the subdivider, developer and/or his agent shall be considered withdrawal
of plan application, shall not obligate the South Lebanon
Township Board of Supervisors to approve or disapprove the plan within the herein described timetable and shall not result in a deemed approval when ninety (90) days have elapsed.	Upon knowledge of plan withdrawal, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors shall notify, in writing, the subdivider or land developer that plan with­ drawal has disrupted the approval process and no approval or disapproval will be rendered unless the subdivision or land development plan is resubmitted as a new application.

E.	Recording - After approval of a minor subdivision or land development plat by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, the mylar copy shall be placed on record in the Lebanon County Planning Department office and the clothback print shall be filed and recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, said recording to occur within ninety (90) days of the final or deemed approval date of the plan or the approval shall be null and void. The Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plat for re­ cording unless such plat officially notes the approval of
the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors.	Copies of an approved plat shall be sent to the applicant and addi­ tional copies may be distributed to the Pennsylvania De­ partment of Transportation, County Emergency Management Agency, County Assessment Office, Metropolitan Edison Company, Pennsylvania Power and Light Company, Bell of Pennsylvania, or other utility or related agency making timely request for copies.

SECTION 3.04 MAJOR SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT - PRELIMINARY
PLAN

A.		Classification - Any subdivision or land development in­ volving more than five (5)   lots or dwelling units; or any subdivision or land development on a property after five (5) or more lots or dwelling units have previously been sub­ divided from that property; or any subdivision or 1and development proposing the opening, widening, extension or improvement of a street shall be deemed to be a major sub­ division or land development.	Multi-family, mobilehome park, commercial and industrial development shall be considered major subdivision or land development, regardless of the number of lots or units created.
-12-
 





B.	Application - A preliminary plat complying with the re­ quirements set forth in this Ordinance shall be prepared
for each major subdivision or land development and a review requested from the Lebanon County Planning Department, South
Lebanon Township Planning Commission, and South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors.

When filing an application for preliminary approval of a major subdivision or land development, the subdivider shall submit six (6) blue line prints of the proposal.	As part of the submission, the subdivider shall also submit six (6) paper prints of the improvement plan (if not contained on initial sheet) containing details of the physical site improvements (roadways, utilities, etc.) proposed for the subdivision or land development.	All sheets shall be 1811    x 2411     or 2411    x 36".

c.	Review - Upon receipt of the preliminary plans (and im­ provement plan, if separate), the Lebanon County Planning Department shall begin to review the plan for compliance with this Ordinance.	The preliminary plan shall be examined for suitable relationship to adjoining subdivisions or un­ developed land, feasibility of the program for improvements, and provide an opportunity for advice, suggestions, and ad­ justments to meet ordinance requirements before the plan becomes rigid.	The submission of alternate plans is recommended.

Where applicable, the plan may be forwarded to the County Engineer, Township Engineer, Soil Conservation Service, or other appropriate agency for review and comment. The Lebanon County Planning Department shall review and comment on the preliminary plan as submitted not later than thirty (30) days after such application is filed.	Such review and comment shall then be submitted to the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission along with the prints and other pertinent data.

With the failure of the Lebanon County Planning De­ partment to render a report and submit it to the South. Lebanon Township Planning Commission within the time and in the manner required herein, the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission may proceed without the report unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or changes in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the report, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.

After the review of preliminary plans by the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission, the plans shall be
-13-
 





submitted to the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors for final approval.	When the plans have not been approved by the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission, the plans may be submitted to the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors within thirty
(30) days after the rejection by the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission for their decision as set forth herein.

D.	Approval or Disapproval - After an application for preliminary approva of a plat of a major subdivision or land development has been filed with the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, together with all improve­ ment plans, maps, necessary data and fees, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors shall complete the review and either approve or disapprove the plan in accordance with the procedure outlined in Section 303(D).

E.	Recording - After approval of a preliminary plan for a major subdivision or land development plat by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, recording of the preliminary plan is not authorized.	Approval of the preliminary plan assures the subdivider for a period of five (5) years from the date of approval that:

1.	The general layout of streets, lots, and other features are approved and shall be the basis for the preparation of the final plan; and

2.	The general terms and any special conditions under which the approval of the plan was granted will not be changed; and

3.	The subdivider may install improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plan and other requirements contained in this Ordinance and the South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance.

Approval of a preliminary plan does not con­ stitute approval of the final plan, and therefore, does not authorize the recording of the subdivision or land development plan or the sale or transfer of lots.	After a period of five (5)   years, approval of the preliminary plan shall expire.

SECTION 3.05 MAJOR SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT - FINAL PLAN

A.	Classification - Any subdivision or land development involving more than five (5) lots or dwelling units;
-14-
 





or any subdivision or land development on a property after five (5) or more lots or dwelling units have previously been subdivided from that property; or any subdivision or land development proposing the opening, widening, extension or improvement of a street shall be deemed to be a major subdivision or land development.	Multi-family, mobilehome park, commercial and industrial development shall be considered major subdivision or land development, regardless of the number of lots or units created.

B.	Application - Within five (5) years after the approval of the preliminary plat, a final plat with all necessary supplemental data shall be officially submitted to the
Lebanon County Planning Department, South Lebanon Township Planning Commission, South Lebanon Township Board of Super­ visors with a request for review.	Failure to submit a final plan within five (5) years of the date of an approval
of the preliminary plat shall void the preliminary approval,
unless extended in writing by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors.	Said expired or voided preliminary plan shall not be used as a basis for any development or construction.	Any subsequent development shall be preceded by a new preliminary plan.

When filing an application for a final approval of the major subdivision or land development, the subdivider or developer shall submit one (1) mylar copy or original, one
(1)	clothback print, and eight (8) blue line paper prints of the proposal on 1811   x 24" sheets.

The subdivider or developer may apply for final approval of: 1) only a portion, section or phase of the entire sub­ division or land development as preliminarily approved; or
2) the entire subdivision or land development.

c. Review - Upon receipt of the final plan, the Lebanon County Planning Department shall begin to review the plan for compliance with this Ordinance.	The final plan shall be examined for conformity to the preliminary plan for design and detail of required site improvements and for adherence to other standards of this Ordinance.	The plan shall also be examined to determine if the required site improvements have been installed or, in lieu thereof, a bond or financial security has been submitted.	Where applicable, the plan
may be forwarded to the County Engineer, the Township
Engineer, the Soil Conservation Service or other agencies for review and comment.	The Lebanon County Planning Depart­ ment shall review and comment on the final plan as submitted not later than thirty (30) days after such application is filed.	Such review and comment shall then be submitted to
-15-
 





the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission along with the prints and other pertinent data.

With the failure of the Lebanon County Planning Department to render a report and submit it to the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission within the time and in the manner required herein, the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission may proceed without the report unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation
of communication of the report, in which case, failure
to meet the extended time or change in manner of presenta­ tion of communication shall have like effect.

After the review of all plans by the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission, the plans shall be submitted to the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors for final approval.	When the plans have not been approved by the South Lebanon Township Planning Commission, the plans may
be submitted to the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors within thirty (30) days after the rejection by the South Lebanon Township Planning commission for their decision as set forth herein.

D.	Approval or Disapproval - After an application for final approval of a plat of a major subdivision or land develop­ ment has been filed with the South Lebanon Township Board
of Supervisors, approval or disapproval shall be granted in accordance with Section 3.03(0) of this Ordinance.

However, no plat shall be finally approved unless the streets on such plat have been improved as may be required by ordinance, and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street
lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, landscaping, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, storm water management facilities, and other site improvements as may be required by this Ordinance and any applicable municipal requirements have been installed in accordance with such requirements.
In lieu of the completion of any site improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat, a financial
security shall be deposited by the subdivider/developer with the municipality in an amount to cover the costs of any site improvements which may be required by ordinance.
Such financial security shall provide for and secure to the
public, the completion of any site improvements which may be
required for the subdivision or land development.	F nancial improvement guarantees shall further be subject to the re­ quirements of Chapter 5, Section 5.18 of this Ordinance and Section 5.09 - 5.11 of Act 247.

-16-
 





E.	Recording - After approval of a final plat for a major subdivision or land development by the south Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, the plat shall be recorded and copies distributed in the manner pre­
scribed in Chapter 3, Section 3.03(E) of this Ordinance.

Recording shall entitle the subdivider to sell, transfer or develop the land shown on the plat in accordance with the approved plat, subject to any condition attached thereto.	Where final plans are approved for only a portion, section or phase of the entire subdivision or land development, sale, transfer
or development may proceed only on that approved portion, section or phase.

When a final plat has been approved, no subsequent change or amendment in zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the subdivider or land developer to commence and complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms of such approval within five
(5) years from such approval.	Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval.

When the subdivider or land developer has failed to substantially complete development of the approved plan within five (5) years of the aforesaid approval
date and when changes in a zoning, subdivision, or other
governing ordinance have occurred which affect the design of the approved plat, the subdivision or land development shall be subject to the changes in the zoning, subdivision, or other governing ordinance.	The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors shall notify, in writing, the sub­ divider or land developer that approval has expired and submission and approval of a revised preliminary and/or final plan (as necessary to detail changes), illustrating
compliance with the revised ordinance, is required prior to
further development or lot transfer.












-17-
 




CHAPTER 4 - PLANS AND PLATS: REQUIRED INFORMATION SECTION 4.01 INTENT
Plans, maps, data and plats shall be prepared and furnished by the developer as required herein to assure accurate surveying, to provide adequate information for designing and preparing plans, and to facilitate review, approval and recording of plats.	Plans and maps shall be neat, legible, uncluttered and easily readable to provide clear documentation of all data.

SECTION 4.02 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS

The subdivider or land developer shall furnish, as part of an application for approval of a minor subdivision or land development plan, the following information on the required 1811      x 24" final plan sheets:

A.	Title Block

1.	Identification of the plan as a final plan; and

2.	Name of the development, if any; and

3.	Name, address and phone number of the record owner(s), subdivider(s), developer(s), and authorized agent(s); and

4.	Name of the municipality; and

5.	Written and graphic scale of plan; and

6.	Name, address and phone number of plan preparer; and

7.	Date of plan preparation and date of sub­ sequent revisions; and

a.	Deed reference or source of title.

B.	Signature Blocks

Space for date, signature and type of formal action by each of the following:

1.	Lebanon County Planning Department

2.	South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors

3.	South Lebanon Township Planning Commission
-18-
 




4.	Engineer, where applicable

5.	Other officials, where required elsewhere by this Ordinance or other municipal ordinances.

c.	Maps and Data

1.	Location drawing or map section, at a scale of
111   = 8001 , showing the location of the proposed
subdivision in relation to named streets, boundaries, previous subdivisions, and the like.

The proposed subdivision or land development area shall be identified by a tone or pattern differ­ entiation and residual land of the subdivider shall be outlined.

The location drawing shall also contain a reference to north and, where possible, be depicted in northerly alignment with the property drawing.

2.	Property drawing of the parcel which is to be subdivided.	Residual land shall be shown to the extent necessary to assure compliance with all applicable standards.	The lot, tract or parcel drawing shall include:

a.	Bearings and dimensions for all property lines; corporation lines; center and right-of-way lines of streets; easements and other rights-of-way; natural and artificial water courses, streams and flood plain boundaries; wetlands; and other boundary lines with distances, radii arcs, chords and tangents of all deflection angles, nearest second and error of closure of not more than one
(1)	foot in 10,000 feet.

b.	Proposed lot, tract, or parcel lines in prominent, solid lines. Lot, tract, or parcel lines proposed for removal shall be shown in dashed or broken lines.

c.	Location and identification of all control points (iron pins, monuments, etc.) to which all dime sions, angles and bearings are to be referred.

d.	Lot numbers or letters in progressive order to identify each lot or tract.	Numbers
-19-
 





shall be utilized only for lots, tracts or parcels which are eliqible for independent or individual use, whereas letters shall be utilized for lot additions, land exchanges and transfer of lots or parcels which are not eligible for individual use or develop­ ment.	Lot numbers or letters from previous plans shall be encircled by a dashed or broken line circle while currently proposed lot numbers or letters shall be encircled
by a solid line circle.

e.	Square footage and acreaqe of all lots or parcels involved in the subdivision or land development, exclusive of land dedicated
for public right-of-way.

f.	The location, size and use of all existing buildings.	Proposed buildings shall be shown to the extent necessary to demonstrate compliance with other ordinance criteria.

g.	The building setback line prescribed in the applicable zoning code.	·

3.	Streets, utilities, topoqraphy and natural features on the proposed subdivision and within 100 feet of the boundaries, in accordance with the following:

a.	Layout, right-of-way, pavement width and name of all roads and streets.

b.	Size and location of all existing and proposed utilities including easements.

c.	Existing and proposed on-lot well and sewage disposal system locations, as well as soil probe and percolation test locations for sewaqe disposal systems.

d.	The topography and drainage of all pro­ posed development sites shall be depicted. Contour intervals shall be a maximum of five (5) feet, except that development areas with a grade of less than 5% shall be depicted utilizing two (2) foot contour intervals.	Lot additions and currently developed sites shall be required to stipulate only lot corner elevations or general topographic information.

-20-
 





e.	Streams, ponds, waterways, flood plains, quarries, sinkholes and other significant topographical, physical or natural features.

4.	Storm water management facilities, where required by Ordinance.

5.	North arrow and graphic and written scale.	The scale shall not exceed 501    to the inch.	Deed re­ ference and source of title to the land being sub­ divided shall be included, as shown by the County Recorder of Deeds.

6.	Name of all surrounding property owners.

D.	Plan Notes and Conditions

All necessary or recommended supplementary subdivision or land development plan notes or conditions shall be prominently lettered on the plan.	This shall include, but not be limited to:

1.	Total number of lots or dwelling units proposed by the plan.

2.	Applicable zoning standards for front, rear and side yard setbacks, minimum lot area, minimum lot width and zoning district.

3.	Statement of intended use for all lots except those intended for single family detached dwellings.

4.	Statement of deed restrictions or covenants which may be a condition of sale of the property.

5.	Other specifics or clarifications necessary to complete the plan.

E.	Certifications and Dedications

1.	A certificate of ownership shall be signed by the property owner(s) verifying ownership and acceptance of the plan.

2.	A statement shall be signed by the owner(s) offering land for·dedication to public use for all appropriate streets, rights-of-way, ease­ ments, parks, and the like.

3.	A certification statement by the plan pre-

-21-
 




parer (registered surveyor, engineer, or land­ scape architect) verifying the plan accuracy.

4.	Seal of the registered surveyor, engineer or landscape architect responsible for plan prep­ aration.	Any plan establishing property boundaries shall be prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor.

SECTION 4.03 MAJOR SUBDIVISION - PRELIMINARY PLAN

The subdivider or land developer shall furnish, as part of an application for preliminary approval of a major subdivision or land development plan, the following information on the required preliminary plan sheets.

A.	Title Block

All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02A of this Ordinance.

B.	Signature Blocks

All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02B of this Ordinance.

c.	Maps and Data

All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02, Subsection c, Paragraphs 1, 4, 5 and 6 of this Ordinance.
Information required in Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall also be supplied as specified, except that:

1.	Lots shall be depicted, but individual bearings and dimensions are not required. Lot areas may be approximated.

2.		Topographic information shall be completed at two (2) foot contour intervals.	It shall show approximate direction and gradient of ground slope on immediately adjacent land; indicate subsurface condition of tract if not typical; show water courses, marshes, sinkholes, wetlands, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees and other significant features.

3.		Street and utility information shall be de­ tailed.	Street profiles, cross sections and grades shall be specified, detailing cartway,
-22-
 





curb, and shoulder design where applicable. Location, size, profiles, elevations and cross sections shall be submitted for all sanitary sewers, water lines, storm sewers, sidewalks, street lights, storm water management
facilities and other proposed site improvements.

D.	Plan Notes and Conditions

All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02(D) of this Ordinance.

E.	Certifications and Dedications

All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02(E) of this Ordinance.

SECTION 4.04 MAJOR SUBDIVISION - FINAL PLAN

The subdivider or land developer shall furnish, as part of an application for final approval of a major subdivision or land development plan, the following information on the required 1811     x 2411     final plan sheet(s):

A.	Title Block

All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02(A) of this Ordinance.

B.	Signature Blocks

All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02(B) of this Ordinance.

c.	Maps and Data

The plan shall include only the phase or section of the subdivision or land development proposed for immediate recording and development. All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02(C) of this Ordinance shall be supplied.

D.	Plan Notes and Conditions

All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02(0) of this Ordinance.


-23-
 




E.	Certification and Dedications

All information required in Chapter 4, Section 4.02(E) of this Ordinance.























































-24-
 



CHAPTER 5

REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS SECTION 5.01 INTENT
The design standards established in this Chapter are intended to be fundamental requirements to be applied with professional skill in the subdividing and planning of land so as to produce attractive and harmonious neighborhoods, convenient
and safe streets, and economical layouts of residential and other land development.	The design standards are further intended to encourage and promote flexibility and ingenuity in the layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, in accordance with modern and evolving principles of site planning and
development.

It is also the intent of this Chapter to require subdividers and developers to follow all applicable codes, regulations, and standards adopted by South Lebanon Township and Lebanon County relative to improvements to the subdivision or development sites. In all cases, the codes, regulations and standards of the municipality shall be followed and the improvements shall be approved by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors
before the final plan is approved.	All improvements as specified in this Chapter or in applicable municipal ordinances shall be installed before the final plat is approved or, in lieu thereof, a guarantee of installation shall be provided by the subdivider or developer prior to final plat approval.	The guarantee shall assure the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors that the required improvements will be installed in accordance with the subdivision or land development plan.

During the design and approval of subdivision and land development plans, the Lebanon County Planning Department, South Lebanon Township Planning Commission, South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, and the developer shall give primary consideration to all thoroughfare plans, water plans, sewer plans, community facility plans, and official maps as may be in effect in South Lebanon Township.

SECTION 5.02 GENERAL STANDARDS

In addition to the standards contained elsewhere in these regulations, the following general standards shall be observed.

A.	Existing utilities and improvements shall be utilized wherever possible.	New roads and extended utility services shall be discouraged if existing services and facilities may be utilized.	Scattered urban de­
velopment shall be avoided.

-25-
 




B.	Development designs shall minimize street lengths necessary to serve developed properties.

c.		Side lot lines should be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines, unless the purpose of lot line orientation is to obtain greater solar access.

D.	Depth of residential lots should be not less
than one (1) nor more than two and a half (2 1/2) times the lot width.

E.	Every lot shall abut a street.	Lot frontage or access shall be physically accessible by standard vehicle in existing condition or the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors shall require illu­ stration of the site improvements planned and necessary to alter steep banks, flood plain, visibility limitations, and the like, to a condition that will facilitate safe and adequate access.	The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may
also require that lots be arranged to reserve a
right-of-way for street access and utility access to future lots.

F.	Double or reverse frontage lots may be preferred
or required when lot access to an adjoining street is not permitted or separation from the street is desired because of topographic, orientation, aesthetic, congestion, safety or high noise level considerations.

G.	Adequate easements or rights-of-way shall be required for drainage and utilities.	Easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and, whenever possible, shall be centered on side or rear lot lines.
No structure or buildings shall be erected within
such easements.

H.	Additional lot areas beyond minimum size may be re­ quired:

1.	On slopes in excess of 15%.

2.	To control erosion or storm water runoff.

3.	To provide sufficient area for sewage disposal.

I.		Lots shall be suitably shaped to encourage and facilitate use and maintenance of all portions of the lot.	Accordingly, lots shall be square or

-26-
 





generally rectangular in shape.	Lot configurations which result in flag lots and L-shaped, T-shaped, triangular or otherwise inappropriately shaped lots lots shall be avoided.

J.	Site design and development shall include reasonable efforts to save existing trees and vegetation.

K.	The standards of this Ordinance shall apply to all lots being subdivided or developed and residual land which is created by the subdivision or land  development activity.

L.	Subdivision of .property with existing dwellings or development shall be regulated by the following:

1.	Each dwelling or use shall be serviced by separate utility connections.	Shared sewage systems are not permitted.

2.	Each dwelling or use subdivided shall be on sufficient land area to satisfy minimum lot area and yard setback requirements. Where adequate land area is not available to satisfy minimum standards, subdivision may be permitted when:

a.	Each dwelling or principal building is in good structural condition.

b.	Mobile homes are not involved.

c.	An  equitable distribution of land is proposed between the existing uses  or buildings.

M.	Lot additions, land exchanges, agricultural use only lands, and any other specific or special purpose sub­ division or land development shall include prominent plan notes to avoid misinterpretation of the intent
of the subdivision or land development plan.	Appli­
cable deed restrictions may be required.

N.	Deeds filed subsequent to subdivision or land develop­ ment approval shall accurately and correctly describe the property therein.	Deeds shall be in complete compliance with all plan notes and conditions.

Recording a deed which omits or contradicts the in­ formation on an approved subdivision or land develop-

-27-
 




ment plan shall be in a violation of this Ordinance. SECTION 5.03 ENERGY CONSERVATION STANDARDS
Conservation of energy shall be an important principle in the design of subdivisions and land developments.	Plans shall facilitate the energy efficient placement of homes and buildings on lots.	Whenever the following criteria are found to be appropriate to a site, development design shall be in accordance with the standards contained herein.

A.	Orientation

1.	Lots shall be designed for energy efficient siting of buildings with respect to slopes and existing trees.

2.	Southerly exposures should be utilized for development.	North slopes, especially those over 10% slope, should be avoided because
the long shadows created severely restrict solar access.

3.	New lots and new residences shall be oriented to make maximum effective use of passive solar energy.	The long ais (depth) of each lot should run North-South, with a possible East-West variation of 22-1/2 degrees.	Lot design should provide for lots of adequate width, depth, and slope for solar orienta­ tion.	Lot layout should facilitate solar access by at least 75% of the proposed dwellings or buildings within a development.

4.	The largest yard setback should be stipulated on the south side of proposed buildings. Buildings should be situated to the North end of the lot  to permit maximum on-lot control of solar skyspace.

B.	Streets

1.	Streets should be oriented along an East-West axis, with maximum North-South deviations of 30 degrees.	This should be required to the maximum extent possible, although size, con­ figuration or orientation of the property: nature of the surrounding development: circu­ lation patterns; existing physical features such as topography and vegetation (trees);

-28-
 




and improved design potential may be con­ sidered to determine the feasibility of this requirement for a given site.

2.	Street system shall be designed to reduce overall lengths and facilitate traffic flow (minimum number of intersections).

c.	Vegetation and Wind

1.	Site design shall emphasize the preservation of all beneficial natural features of the site, such as existing slope, naturally wooded areas, and water courses.	The site design should also avoid requiring removal of large isolated trees and desirable woods and other vegetation, particularly those existing plant materials which serve as wind barriers and aid in energy conservation.

2.	Developments shall be designed to maximize wind buffering and/or breeze channelization capabilities of vegetation, topography and structure layouts.	Wind breaks and buffers should utilize evergreens to protect north and northwesterly exposure.	cooling breezes from the southwest should be channelled past buildings.	Deciduous trees shall be located in areas which will enable them to shade buildings from the summer sun, but still allow penetration of the winter sun.

SECTION 5.04 TOPOGRAPHY

Subdivisions shall be planned to take advantage of the topography of land in order to: utilize the natural contours, economize in the construction of drainage facilities, reduce the amount of grading, and minimize destruction of trees and topsoil. The natural features and other distinctive characteristics of the site shall be integrated into the plan to create functional variations in the neighborhoods.

Additionally, environmental safeguards may be mandated on slopes in excess of 15%.	On steep slopes (in excess of 15%), site and lot design shall be adjusted, where necessary, to mitigate the detrimental effects of development on -steeper slopes.	The following topographic considerations shall be utilized in design of subdivisions and land developments:


-29-
 





A.	Streets - Land which is relatively flat or of very gentle slopes should be planned so that the streets follow the natural drainage courses and as many lots as possible shall be above the street grade.	On
more irregular topography, streets shall be designed to avoid extensive cuts and fills and follow the ridges or be planned approximately parallel to contour lines, and adjusted, however, so that lots
on one (1) side of the street will not be excessively below the street grade.

B.	Natural Drainage - Subdivisions shall be designed, particularly on land of very gentle slopes, to take every advantage of natural grades so that
all the land can be drained without excessive grading.	Unless water courses or drainage ways are enclosed, the plan shall be adjusted so that rear lot lines shall be approximately parallel
to the natural or straightened course, and only where such plan is not possible, should side lot lines be arranged parallel to an open drainage course.	Easements for drainage ways and low­ lying land which are subject to flooding may be included as part of a lot but shall not be used as building sites or included in calculating the required lot area or width.

c. Natural Features - Natural features, irregulatities, changes in level, brooks, lakes, hilltops, and
other focal points within the site, and distant views outside the subdivision shall be integrated in the design to obtain variations and interest
in each neighborhood and more attractive building sites.	Trees, topsoil, and other natural resources shall be preserved and utilized in the development of the subdivision.

D.		Driveways - Private driveways shall be designed to furnish safe and convenient access, with reasonable clear sigh distance at intersection with street. Steep slopes shall be traversed diagonally to minimize grades.	Driveway grades shall not exceed 15% slope.	The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may require paving of driveways ex­ ceeding 10% slope to minimize erosion.

SECTION 5.05 GRADING

The developer shall grade each subdivision or land

-30-
 





development to establish street grades, floor elevations of buildings, and lot grades in proper relation to each other and to existing topography.	However, grading shall be kept to a minimum to avoid loss of topsoil and erosion potent al.		Lots shall be graded to secure drainage away from buildings.	The grading shall facilitate collection of storm water in designated areas and
avoid concentration of water in the sewage system location.

The grading of the roadway shall extend the full width of the cartway, shoulder and swale area, if applicable. Where possible, grass strips or channels between the curb or shoulder and
right-of-way line should be graded at 3:1 slope; however, when unusual topographic conditions exist, good engineering practice shall prevail.

SECTION 5.06 LOT SIZES AND STANDARDS

The minimum lot size and lot width requirements established by the South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance shall be utilized as minimum subdivision standards.	All lots shall satisfy the municipal zoning standard for lot width and lot size at the time of subdivision.	Additionally, the building setback lines	· established by  the municipal zoning ordinance shall be applicable and shall be noted on each subdivision or land development plan. Additionally, each subdivision or land development plan shall satisfy all other applicable zoning standards, unless variance thereto has been granted.

SECTION 5.07 SEWAGE DISPOSAL

Sewage disposal facilities shall be designed and constructed to meet the needs of the proposed subdivision or land development.	Sewage disposal facilities shall meet all requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources and South Lebanon Township.	The following requirements
specify the design and installation standards for subsurface sewage disposal and public and private sewerage systems.

A.	Subsurface Sewage Disposal - All subdivisions and land developments proposing subsurface sewage dis­ posal shall be designed and submitted in compliance with the prevailing requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.		It is the intent of this section to coordinate a simultaneous review of sub­ division and land development plans with sewage planning modules at the municipal level, thereby avoiding the approval of lots that are not suitable for sewage disposal.	In accordance with those standards, application for subdivision or land

-31-
 






development	pproval shall satisfy the following procedural requirements:

1.	Minor Subdivision - The subdivider shall submit the sewage planning module and required associated information to the sewage enforce­ ment officer at the time of final plat appli­ cation.	The subdivision or land development plan shall not be processed until documentation is provided to verify that the sewage enforce­ ment officer has received the sewage planning module.	All newly created lots, whether for immediate or future use, shall be tested and approved for sewage suitability.

2.	Major Subdivision - The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plan depicting general lot layout and street design, as required elsewhere herein.
After preliminary approval, the subdivider shall submit the required sewage planning module and associated information to the sewage enforcement officer at the time of final plan application.	The subdivision or land development plan shall not be processed until documentation is provided to verify that the sewage enforcement officer has re­ ceived the sewage planning module.

B.	Existing Public Sewers - When a subdivision or land development has public sewers available on-site or within one thousand (l,000) feet of the site, sewer lines shall be included on the subdivision or land development plan and installation must be approved by the municipal authority responsible for the sewer system.

c. Planned Sewer Area - When a proposed subdivision or land development is located in an area not presently served by public sewers, but which has received design data preparatory to sewer system installation within eighteen
(18) months, then the municipality shall determine the necessity of installing house connections and/or capped mains, even though on-site facilities will be required in the interim.	Installation of house connections and capped mains shall be in accordance with municipal design data and approved by the municipal engineer
prior to approval of a preliminary or final plan.

D.	Private Sewerage System - When a subdivision or land
development is to be provided with a private sewerage

-32-
 






system, a statement shall be submitted to the Municipality from th Pennsylvania Department of Environment Resources verifying that a permit has been issued approving the proposed facilities. Additionally, the Municipality must be satisfied that adequate provisions have been made to guarantee the construction and maintenance of the proposed private sewerage system.

D.	Plan Notice

1.	Subsurface Sewage Disposal - All subdivision and land development plans shall contain a plan
note specifying that approval of the plan does
not guarantee permit issuance for sewage disposal.

2.	Public Sewers - All subdivision and land develop­ ment plans shall contain a plan note specifying that connection to public sewer lines is required.

SECTION 5.08 WATER SUPPLY

A water supply system shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider or developer as required by the municipality, water company, or water authority in relation to the specific site of the proposed subdivision or land development.	The water supply system shall be capable of meeting the domestic and fire protection needs of the site.	When possible, the subdivision or
land development should be served by a public water supply system approved by municipal water officials or a community water system approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.	If the subdivision or land development is to be supplied by a public or community water system, the subdivider or developer shall submit a written certification, commitment or evidence that the municipal water company or authority or the association of lot owners or private company, as applicable, has adequate water capacity and has agreed to provide water service.

Where the development is adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of a public water supply system or a community system approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, the developer shall install a water supply system in the development and connect the system with the existing facilities.	All construction shall be according to the specifications of the Township Engineer.

In those cases where a public or community water system is not available or practical, a well shall be provided for each lot.	Wells shall be placed uphill from sewage disposal systems. Wells shall not be within one hundred feet (100') of any part of the absorption field of any on-site sewage disposal system and
-33-
 






they shall not be placed within fifty feet (501 )	of lakes, streams, ponds, quarries, etc.

Subdivision and land development plans shall contain a plan note specifying the source of water supply.	Plans proposing the use of public or community water shall contain a note specifying that connection to the public or community water line, as applicable, is required.	Plans proposing the use of individual wells shall contain a note specifying that the lot(s) has not been tested for the availability of water of adequate quality or quantity and no guarantee of water availability is provided.

SECTION 5.9 STREETS

In addition to relating to topography, natural features and solar orientation, streets shall be designed according to the function served, the use of abutting land, and standards of width, intersections, maximum grades and curvatures.	The Municipality shall require that all developments have adequate access.	Where major subdivision is proposed or may occur because of the patterns started by minor subdivision activity, the Municipality should require reservation for, or installation of, two or more streets to insure safe and convenient access. Elimination or vacation of previously approved streets shall be approved only when the Municipality determines that 1) alternate access has been provided in another, more suitable location, 2) further development is not possible utilizing the street, and 3) any land owners who purchased property with reliance upon the street agree in writing to its elimination.

The developer shall design and construct streets, including pavements, shoulders, gutters, curbs, and the like, as required by municipal ordinance.

A.	Classification and General Design Goals

1.	Major Streets - function primarily for the movement of fast traffic between points of heavy traffic generation.	They are often known as arterial streets or highways.	They shall be planned for continuation of existing streets in the system at the same or greater width in accordance with adopted municipal standards.	Major streets shall contain as few intersections as possible.

2.		Collector Streets - function to collect traffic from local streets and distribute it into major streets, and, as such, they will normally contain a relatively large number of intersections with local streets and few with main streets.	A
-34-
 






collector street system may be required wherever a residential neighborhood near a major street is over 150 acres in area or where the local street pattern is so designed as to converge and serve over 500 one-family dwellings, or 100
multi-family units.	Collector streets shall be
planned for continuity and to lead more or less directly to one or more focal points or centers of traffic generation, and may become bus routes.

3.	Local Streets - provide direct access to each lot and function to allow traffic to circulate toward the principal directions of travel, bus routes, schools and playgrounds; however, the design shall discourage through and high speed traffic.	The street pattern shall be indirect and yet continuous to prevent through traffic, formed of straight, moderately winding, curved, looped or angular streets.	Tee-intersections shall predominate and cross-intersections shall be minimized.	There shall be an underlying systematic neighborhood pattern; however, gridiron and other rigid geometrical patterns should be avoided where possible.

The street pattern shall include extensions to the boundaries of the development to provide circulation between adjoining neighborhoods.

4.	Cul-de-Sac Streets - provide direct access to properties from other streets.	Ordinarily, a cul-de-sac is a short street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal traffic movement. Drainage should be towards the open end.	If drainage is toward the closed end it shall be conducted away in an underground storm sewer.

B.	Minimum Street Standards - See Chart on next page.

c.	Supplementary Street Standards - In addition to the specific standards cited in Section B, the following street standards shall apply to design and construction of streets:

1.	Intersections

a.	Streets shall be designed to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (90 degrees).	No street shall intersect
-35-
 
B.	MINIMUM STREET STANDARDS





STREET LASSIFICATIC'N	


RIGHT-OF- WAY WIDTH	
STREET WIDTH WITH CURBS 	

GRADE VERTICAL AI,IGNMENT	RADIUM CURVATURE HORIZONTAL ALIGNMENT 		

REVERSE CURVE TANGENT	


SIGHT DISTANCE	


OTIIER
REQU.lREMENTS

ajor Streets	
80'	
48'	
6%	
500'	
200'	
400'	
Street width
							subject to
							PennDOT re-
							quirements

ollector treets	

60'	

36'	

8%	

300'	

100'	

200'	

ocal Streets	
50'	
34'	
10%	
150'	
50'	
125'	
Pavement width
shall be in- creased by 8' where on-street parking is planned or lots average 100' or less in width


ul-de-Sac
Streets	so•	26'	10%	150'	50'	100'	Maximum length
(90I    at	(5% at	Of  600I•   Serve
turnaround)	turnaround)	maximum 12 lots
or dwelling units.
Pavement width
shall be in- creased by 8' where on-street parking is planned or lots average 100' or less in width
 






another at less than 75 degrees.	An oblique street should be curbed approaching an intersection and should be at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom.

b.	No more than two (2)   streets shall inter­ sect at any one point.

c.	Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of the street.	Where intersections cannot practically be connected, a minimum of 150 feet shall separate the center lines of offset local streets, and 400 feet minimum shall be provided for collector and major streets.

d.		Street curb intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of twenty (20)	feet for local streets and thirty (30)   feet for collector or major streets.	The radius point shall be concentric with that for the property line.

e.	Intersections shall be designed with a flat" grade.	In hilly or rolling topography, a leveling area shall be provided at the approach to an intersection.	The leveling area shall have a maximum grade of two per cent (2%)	for sixty (60)   feet preceding the intersection, measured from the nearest
right-of-way line of the intersecting street.

f.	Clear sight triangles of seventy-five
(75) feet measured along the center line from the point of intersection, shall be provided and maintained at all inter­ sections.

2.		Street Names - shall not duplicate others nearby, and shall be subject to the approval of the Municipality.	Street signs shall be erected to identify all streets.	such signs shall conform
to municipal specifications and shall be installed
by the developer in a manner and time specified by the
municipality.

3.	Street Expansion - where a subdivision adjoins un­ subdivided land sufficient streets shall be planned to extend to the boundary lines so that all parcels may be subdivided and a coordinated street system
-37-
 





obtained.

4.	Streets for Multi-family Development - shall be planned to connect with major or collector streets to avoid generating large volumes of traffic on local residential streets.

5.	Reserve Strips - the creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street.

6.	Right-of-Way Widths - land for the right-of-way for the opening or extension of any street within
a subdivision shall be dedicated by the developer. Where a property abuts a street which does not conform to the right-of-way width required by this Ordinance or other ordinances of the Municipality, the additional width necessary to meet current standards shall be dedicated when such land is subdivided.

7.	Auxiliary Street Improvements - In addition to the required pavement and shoulder widths, streets shall be designed and constructed with curbs, street lights, gutters, culverts, catch basis, sidewalks
and other improvements required by municipal ordinance or deemed necessary for a proposed subdivision.

a.	Traffic Control and Speed Signs. Shall be erected within the subdivision and the signs shall conform to municipal specifications and shall be installed by the developer in a manner and time specified by the municipality.

D.	Unimproved Streets or Rights-of-Way - Subdivision on unimproved (unpaved) streets or access rights-of-way is discouraged.	However, one lot may access via an un­ improved right-of-way provided that the right-of-way
is a minimum of 50' in width and so located and designed
that a street could be installed in the event of future subdivision activity.

E.	Private Streets - Private streets are to be dis­ couraged.	They will be approved only if they are designed and constructed to meet public street standards and maintenance is guaranteed in perpetuity via a bonafide homeowner's association (or similar organization) agreement and appropriate financial security for repair and maintenance.
-38-
 





F.	Street Construction Standards - Streets and rights­ of-way shall be improved to meet Municipal standards.
It shall be the developer's responsibility to satisfy all applicable municipal construction requirements and design standards, or in lieu thereof, deposit a
security in compliance with Chapter s, Section 5.18 of
this Ordinance and established municipal policies.	All
public and private streets shall meet the following
standards:

1.	Adequate surface and subsurface drainage shall be provided.

2.	All topsoil shall be removed from the area to be paved.

3.	There shall be installed a base to consist of eight (8) inches of 2A modified rolled stone under the paved surface of the cartway.

4.	The base course shall be constructed of minimum
.two inches (211 )	ID-2 Binder Course in accordance
with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Depart­
ment of Transportation Manual Form 408.	The base binder course being constructed with #2B stone with the specified bituminous residues on the aggregate shall conform to the Form 408 specifications.

s. The surface course shall be constructed of minimum one inch (l") ID-2 Binder Course in accordance with the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation Manual Form 408.
The surface or wearing course being constructed
with #lB stone with the specified bituminous residues on the aggregate shall conform to the
Form 408 Specifications.

G.	State Approval of Streets and Access - to insure that street designs comply with all applicable standards, the Municipality may submit any preliminary and final sub­ division or land development plans to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for review and comment.

Subdivision and land development plans which will require access to a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PENNDOT) shall contain a plan note specifying that a highway occupancy permit is re­ quired from PENNDOT before driveway access to the
-39-
 






state highway is permitted.	The plan note shall also specify that plan approval does not guarantee that a PENNDOT permit will be issued.

SECTION 5.10 CURBS AND GUTTERS

curbs and gutters shall be installed on each side of the street surface by the developer in accordance with the following specifications:

1.	Curbs, gutters, or combination curbs and gutters shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth in Section 641, "Plain Cement Concrete curb Gutter," in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, 1970, as amended.

2.	Where vertical curbs are provided they shall be not less than six (6) inches wide at the top
and seven (7) inches wide at the bottom.	The overall depth of the curb shall be not less than twenty-two (22) inches.	The curb shall rest on a six (6) inch crushed stone base.

3.	The cross sections of gutters and combination curbs and gutters shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on approved drawings.

4.	Curbs and gutters shall be set and finished to the lines and grades given on the approved drawings.

5.	The developer shall notify the Governing Body a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the start of construction.

SECTION 5.11 SIDEWALKS

The installation of sidewalks by the developer may be required on both sides of the street, as determined by the Governing Body, in any subdivision where the installation is necessary for the public safety.

1.	Sidewalks shall be within the right-of-way
of the street and shall extend in width from the right-of-way line toward the curb line.

2.	Sidewalks shall be four ( ) f et wid , in one-family residential developments.
-40-
 






3.	Sidewalks shall be five (5) feet wide in multi-family developments.

4.	Sidewalks shall be ten (10) feet wide in Commercial developments.

s. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the specifications as set forth in Section 676 "Cement Concrete Sidewalks" in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specification, 1970, as amended.

6.		The developer shall notify the Township a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the start of the construction.

SECTION 5.12 STREET LIGHTS

Street lighting in all developments is required to be installed by the developer unless exempted by the Governing Body.
The developer shall consult with the local power company regarding the design and installation of a street lighting
system.	The local power company's specifications and regulations shall prevail.

SECTION 5.13 POSTAL ADDRESS

All buildings within the subdivision shall be given a post office address by the developer with the approval of the local post office.

SECTION 5.14 DRIVEWAYS

Driveways shall be located in accordance with the development plan of the block and may be grouped in pairs or spaced separately.	They shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line when spaced separately.

SECTION 5.15 MONUMENTS

Sufficient monuments shall be set to ensure that reliable survey points are available for all parts of the subdivision.	At least one (1) monument shall be placed for every two (2) lots or every two hundred (200) feet of streets, whichever requirement is less.	The monument shall consist of either a case iron box
inside of which shall be placed a 3/4 inch steel pin three (3) feet in length, with the top of the pin set to serve as the
survey point, or 411     square x 3011     in length concrete containing an
iron bar for strength and drill hole for line, set level with finished grade.	All lot corners and changes in direction shall be identified by steel pins.
-41-
 





The top of the monument box shall be set at the finished grade upon completion of the grading of the street.

SECTION 5.16 UTILITIES AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS

All subdivisions shall be designed and serviced with adequate utilities, including electricity and telephone service.	The developer shall be responsible to cooperate with the utility companies to insurance installation of the necessary utilities. All utilities shall be underground, except where developments of five (5)   lots or less are exempted by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.	Where required, the developer shall obtain a letter from the utility company confirming that service may be extended to the development.

When required by the municipality, the developer shall provide a street lighting duct system, in accordance with the specifications of the appropriate public utility.

In areas where public water lines are available, fire hydrants shall be installed by the developer.	Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1000 feet apart and within 500 feet of any dwelling or inhabited structure.	The nearest fire protection unit may be contacted for input regarding the design and placement of a fire hydrant network.

SECTION 5.17 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS

The land improvements required to be completed by the developer of a subdivision or land development, as set forth in this Chapter, shall be designed and installed in accordance with this Ordinance and other codes of the municipality.	The improvements.shall be of such size and capacities as are required for the development of the proposed subdivision and of extra sizes as may be necessary to serve nearby land which is an integral part of the neighborhood service or drainage areas.

The developer shall be required to extend the improvements to serve adjoining unsubdivided land.	If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed subdivision, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may require the developer to construct off-site extensions of the improvements. Procedures for providing any necessary extra-size and off-site improvements and general standards for pro-rating costs shall be coordinated with the municipality and shall be in accordance
with th following:

A.	Extra-Size Improvements - The developer shall be re­ quired to pay for a part of the materials or con­ struction of streets, sewers or water lines which
are determined by the South Lebanon Township Board
-42-
 






Township Board of Supervisors according to the standards set forth in this Chapter to be in excess of the size required for the development of the subdivision and the integral neighborhood, service, or drainage area.

If a storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or a water main is required, but each less in size than the sewer trunk lines or water mains which are to be constructed and financed on a regional basis, the municipality shall construct the extra size utility and require a deposit in advance from the developer
for the cost of the utility he is required to install and his portion of other costs which the municipality may assess against the benefitted property owners of the service or drainage area.

B.		Extensions to Boundaries - The developer shall be required to extend the improvements to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining unsubdivided land; however, where the Department and/or the municipality determines that a connecting street is necessary for the future subdividing of adjoining land, but the present construction of pavement and/or utilities therein are not warranted, the Department and/or municipality may require the dedication of land, the pavement intersections con­ structed, utilities extended at least three (3)
feet beyond the pavement, and connections provided
and made available for future extensions by other developers.

c.	Off-Site Extensions - If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed sub­ division, the Governing Body may require as a precedence to approval of a preliminary or final plan, assurances that such improvement extensions shall be provided as follows:

1.	If the Governing Body finds the extensions across undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties
or a municipal expense until some future time, the developer may be required, if he wishes to
proceed with the development, to obtain necessary easements or rights-of-way and construct and pay for extensions. such improvements shall be available for connec-

-43-
 





tions by developers of adjoining land, or

2.	The municipality may construct and pay for the extensions and assess the costs to the owners benefitted and require a deposit from the developer as described in subsection (A)
herein.	The municipality may establish a sinking fund to pay for such development costs and not collect the assessments on the intervening land until it is developed.

D.	Proratina Costs - In making determinations for prorating costs for the construction of off-site extensions or extra-size improvements, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors shall consider in addition to the standards set forth in this Chapter and other regula­ tions of the municipality the following conditions:

1.	The relative location and size of the pro­ posed subdivision.

2.	The traffic estimated to be qenerated by the development in relation to present streets,

3.	The natural drainage area for sewers and the service area for water,

4.	The development benefits that will accrue to the subdivision,

s. The sequence of land and utility development in the vicinity, and

6.	Any other condition it may find pertinent.

SECTION 5.18 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS OR GUARANTEE THEREOF PREREQUISITE TO FINAL PLAN APPROVAL

A.	Performance Guarantee in Lieu of Installation - No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plan have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition, or improved as may be required by the subdivision land use ordinance and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street liqhts, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, storm water management facilities and other improvements as may be required by the subdivision land use ordinance


-44-
 





have been installed in accordance with this Ordinance. In lieu of the completion of any improvement required as a condition for the final approval of a plat, the subdivider or developer shall deposit with the municipality a fiscal security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of any improvements or common amenities including, but not limited to roads, storm water detention and/or retention basis and other related drainage facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be required.

B.	Type Guarantee - Without limitation as to other types
of financial security which the municipality may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld,
Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of this Section.	Such financial security shall be
posted with a bonding company or Federal or Common-
wealth chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the Commonwealth. Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of any improve­ ments which may be required on or before the date
fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.

c. Amount of Guarantee - The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the required im­ provements shall be equal to one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost of completion estimated as of ninety (90) days following the date scheduled for completion by the developer.	Annually the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may adjust the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion
of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the ninetieth (90th) day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion.

Subsequent to said adjustment, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may require the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the financial security equals said one

-45-
 




hundred and ten percent (110%). Any additional security shall be posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.

The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reason­ able estimate of such costs.	The Township Engineer shall review and approve the cost estimate or, for good cause, refuse to accept the estimate, in which case he shall calculate an accurate cost estimate of the required site improvements.

If the party posting the financial security re­ quires more than one (1) year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security may be increased by an additional ten (10) percent of each year period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one (1) year period by using the above bidding procedure.	A developer who fails to complete the improvements within the allotted time specified
in the financial guarantee shall, at least thirty
(30) days in advance of the guarantee expiration date, renew or resubmit a financial guarantee.
Failure to keep a financial guarantee in effect until the completion and approval of all improvements shall be a violation of this Ordinance.

D.	Progressive Installation - In the case where developer is projected over a period of years, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plats by sections or stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees as to im­ provements in future sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of any
finally approved section of the development.

E.	Release from Guarantee - As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial security may request the release, from time to time, of such portions of the financial security

-46-
 





necessary for payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work.	Any such requests shall be made in writing to the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, and within forty-five (45) days of re­ ceipt of such request the applicable municipal engineer, shall certify, in writing, to his
employers whether or not such portion of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved plat.	When the im­ provements are certified to be in accordance with the approved plat, the municipality shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institu­ tion of an amount as estimated by the municipal engineer fairly representing the value of the im­ provements completed.	If the municipality fails to act within said forty-five (45) day period, the release of funds shall be deemed to have been approved as requested.	The municipality may, prior to final release at the time of completion and certification by its engineer, require retention of ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvement.

The applicant shall assume the necessary ex­ pense incurred for the inspection of improvements. Such inspection costs shall be based upon a schedule established and amended from time to time as deemed necessary.

F.	Maintenance Guarantee - Where the municipality accepts dedication of all or some of the required improvements following completion, the municipality may require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design and specifications depicted on the final plat for a term
not to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance and dedication.	Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this Section with regard to installation of such improve­ ments.	The amount of financial security shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.

G.	Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements - In the event that any required improvements have not been installed as provided in this Ordinance or in accordance with the approved final plat, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisor is hereby granted the power to

-47-
 





enforce any corporate bond, or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies.	If proceeds of such bond, or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or
part of the subdivision or land development and may
institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements.	All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of
the improvements covered by such security, and not
for any other municipal purpose.	Failure to properly install the required improvements shall also constitute a violation of this Ordinance, punishable as provided
by Chapter a, Section 8.06 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 5.19 INSURANCE

The developer agrees to indemnify and save harmless the municipality against and from any and all loss, cost, damage, liability, and expense on account of damage to property of, or inJury to or death of, the parties thereto or third person, caused by, growing out of, or in any way whatsoever attributable to the construction of said improvements and the use of the street delineated on the subdivision plat during construction. The developer further agrees, but without limiting its liability to indemnify the municipality to carry liability insurance contracts with a reliable insurance company covering the period
of said construction in the sum of $200,000 to $400,00 for injury to or death of person(s) and in the sum of $200,000 for damage to or destruction of property, which insurance contracts shall include the municipality as named insured.

SECTION 5.20 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND OCCUPANCY

A building or zoning permit may be issued and building construction started after the approval of the final plat. Occupancy shall not be permitted prior to the completion of streets, storm water management facilities and other improvements necessary for the reasonable use of the building, unless written authorization is granted by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors where improvements have been guaranteed by valid bond or other security.


-48-
 
,.







SECTION 5.21 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT

All plans submitted for approval must comply with Ordinance Number 14, an Ordinance establishing storm water management and design criteria for each subdivision of five lots or more or land development of an area in excess of twenty thousand square feet within South Lebanon Township.





















































-49-
 



CHAPTER 6 - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT SECTION 6.01 INTENT
The purpose of the regulations set forth in this Chapter is to monitor the subdivision and/or development of flood plain areas in order to promote and protect the general health, welfare, and safety of the community; to require that each subdivision lot in flood plain areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate access; to insure that public facilities which serve such lots or development be designed and installed to preclude flood -damage; and to protect individuals from purchasing lands which are unsuitable for development because of flood plan lands.	The subsequent sections shall be considered requirements supplemental to those procedures and standards specified elsewhere in the Subdivision Land Use Ordinance, municipal zoning ordinances, the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code, and any other applicable ordinances and codes.

SECTION 6.02 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS UTILIZED IN THIS CHAPTER

A.	Building - A structure which has a roof supported by columns, piers, or walls, which is intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel or which is to house a use of a commercial or manufacturing activity.

B.	Developement - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to buildings, mobile homes, or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.

c. Flood Plain - (1) a relatively flat or low area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial
or complete inundation by water, (2) an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface water from any source.

D.	Floodway - That portion of the one hundred (100) year flood plain including the channel of a river of other watercourse and adjacent land areas which are required to carry and discharge the one hundred (100) year flood where the activities permitted elsewhere in the flood plan district will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any given point.	Detailed studies of the Regulatory Flood by the Federal Insurance Administrator provide specific flood profiles and allow for the delineation of floodway and flood fringe areas within
the bounds of the flood plain.	For those areas where no
floodway has been identified by the Flood Insurance Study,
the floodway may be identified by other available studies or sources of information provided by a registered professional engineer.
-so-
 





E.	Regulatory Flood - The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis upon which the flood plain management provisions of this and other ordinances have been prepared; for purpose of this Ordinance, the one hundred (100) year flood, as defined by the Federal Insurance Administrator.

F.	Regulatory Flood Elevation - The 100 year flood elevation based upon the information contained in the Official Flood Insurance Study.

G.	Structure - A man-made object usually assembled of interdependent parts or components which is designed to have a more or less fixed location, whether or not permanently attached at that location.

SECTION 6.03 APPLICATIONS PROCEDURES AND PLAT REQUIREMENTS

The following procedures shall be required in addition to those specified otherwise in these regulations.

A.	Pre-Application Procedures

1.	It is suggested that prospective developers consult the Pennsylvania Department of En­ vironmental Resources concerning soil suit­ ability when on-site sewage disposal facilities are proposed.

2.	Prospective developers shall consult the County Conservation District representative concerning erosion and sediment control and the probable effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development.	Concurrently, a determination should be made as to whether or not any flood hazards either exist or will be created as a
result of the proposed subdivision or development.

B.	Preliminary Plan Requirements

The following information shall be required as part of the Preliminary Plan when a subdivision is in a flood plain area and shall be prepared by a registered surveyor:

1.	A map illustrating the location of the proposed subdivision or land development with respect to the municipality's flood plain areas including information on, but not limited to, Regulatory Flood Elevations, boundaries of flood plain areas, proposed lots and sites, fill, and flood or  erosion protective facilities.

2.	Where the subdivision or land development lies
-51-
 





partially or completely in the flood plain area or where the subdivision borders on the flood plain area, the preliminary plan map shall include detailed information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities, and building lots.	All
such maps shall also show contours at intervals
of two (2) feet and identify accurately the
boundaries of the flood plain area.

c.	Final Plan Requirements

The following information shall be required as part of the Final Plan and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor:

1.	All information required for submission of the Preliminary Plan plus any changes required by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors.

2.	A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings, structures, roads, and public utilities to be constructed in flood plain areas.	All such maps shall show contours at intervals of two (2)    feet and identify accurately the boundaries of the flood plain area.

SECTION 6.04 DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS

The design standards and improvements specified herein shall be considered requirements in addition to those of Chapter 5 and otherwise listed in this Ordinance.

A.	General

1.	Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land located in flood plain areas may be platted for development with the provision
that the developer construct all buildings and
structures to preclude flood damage in accordance
with this and any other laws or ordinances re­
gulating such development.

2.	Building sites for residences or any other type . of dwellings or accommodations and building sites for structures or buildings other than residential uses shall be permitted in the flood plain only when in compliance with appropriate municipal
zoning ordinances, the Lebanon County Floodproofing
Building Code, and any other applicable regulations.
-52-
 





3.		If the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors determine that only a part of a proposed plat can be safely developed, they shall limit development to that part and shall require that development proceed consistent with this determination.

4.	When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors determine that additional
controls are required to insure safe development, they may require the developer to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land.	Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every recorded plat.

5.	Lots which are within the flood plain shall be subject to the following:

a.	Any lots created or revised shall have not more than 50% of their area within the flood plain, except that large lots may be exempted provided a minimum one (1) acre
area of said lot is outside the flood plain.

b.	Lot access to a public road shall not be restricted or prevented by flood plain areas.

B.	Excavation and Grading

Where any excavation or grading is proposed or where any existing trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover will be emoved, the developer shall consult the County Conservation District representative concerning plans for erosion and sediment control and to also obtain a report on the soil characteristics of the site so that determination can be
made as to the type and degree of development site may
accommodate.	Before undertaking any excavation or grading, the developer shall obtain a Grading and Excavation Permit if such is required by the municipality.

c.	Drainage Facilities

Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface water without damage to persons or property.	The system shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings and on-site disposal sites.

Plans shall be subject to the approval of the South Lebanon Township Board of supervisors.	south Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may also require a pre­
-53-
 





liminary underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods.	Drainage plans shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.

D.	Streets

The finished excavation of proposed streets shall be no more than two (2) feet below the Regulatory Flood Elevation.	South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets to determine compliance with this requirement. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.

E.	Sewer Facilities

All sanitary sewer systems located in flood plain areas, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to a point two (2) feet above the Regulatory Flood Elevation.

1.	The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems where such systems will not function due to high ground water, flooding, or unsuitable soil characteristics.	The South Lebanon Township
Board of Supervisors may require that the developer note on the face of the plat and in any deed of conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited in designated areas.

2.	The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may prescribe adequate methods for waste disposal.	If a sanitary sewer system is located on or within
1000 feet of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development, the South Lebanon Township Board of
Supervisors shall require the developer to provide sewage facilities to connect to this system where practical, and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed by the developer in connecting to the system.

F.	Water Facilities

All water systems located in flood plain areas, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to a point two (2) feet above the Regulatory Flood Elevation.	If there is an existing public water supply system on or near the sub­ division, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors shall require the developer to connect to this system where
-54-
 



practical, and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed by the developer in connecting to the system.

G.	Other Public and/or Private Utilities and Facilities

All other public and/or private utilities and facilities shall be elevated or floodproofed to a point two (2) feet above the Regulatory Flood Elevation.

SECTION 6.05 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE

No final plat shall be approved by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors until the improvements re­ quired by this Ordinance are completed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the South Lebanon Township Board
of Supervisors.	In lieu of such construction, approval may be granted prior to completion providing:

A.	The developer enters into an agreement with the municipality guaranteeing that improvements will be installed in accordance with the plans, specifications, and schedules approved by the municipality prior to plat approval.	This agreement shall also guarantee that no lot will be sold or building constructed in any flood plain area prior to completion of all protective works or measures planned for such lot and necessary access to facilities; and

B.	The developer provides a fiscal surety to guarantee per­  formance of this agreement and completion of the improvements as planned.	The surety may include a certified check, escrow account, irrevocable letter of credit or other bond acceptable to the municipality.	The procedural requirements of Chapter 5, Section 5.18 of this Ordinance shall apply to any such bonding proposal.

SECTION 6.06 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY

The grant of a permit or approval of a subdivision and/or land development plan in the identified flood plain area shall not constitute a representation guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the municipality or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the municipality, its officials or employees.







-55-
 




CHAPTER 7 - ADMINISTRATION, FEES AND PENALTIES SECTION 7.01 INTENT
This subdivision and land use ordinance shall be considered to set forth the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, property or general welfare, pursuant to the authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act Number 247, 1968 sessions, as amended, or such statutes hereinafter in effect, and shall be construed most favorably to the Municipality as encouraging standards of
planning and development exceeding these basic and minimum regulations.

SECTION 7.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors are authorized to administer the provisions of this subdivision and land use ordinance as herein provided, and to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance on behalf of South Lebanon Township.

In addition to other remedies provided herein, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may, on behalf of South Lebanon township, institute and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises.	The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.

The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of this ordinance.	This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:

A.	The owner of record at the time of such violation; and

B.	The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation; and

c. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard
as to whether such current owner had actual or con­ structive knowledge of the violation; and
-56-
 




D.		The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time
of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive know­ ledge of the violation.

As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such real property, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real property.

SECTION 7.03 MODIFICATIONS

The provisions of this Ordinance are intended as minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and inhabitants of South Lebanon Township.	The South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of the requirements of one or more provisions of this Ordinance if the South Leba on Township Board of supervisors concludes that the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modifications will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this Ordinance is observed.

All requests for a modification shall be in writing to the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors and shall accompany and be part of the application for development.	The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of the Ordinance involved and the minimum modification necessary.

All such modification requests shall be approved or disapproved by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors.
A written record of the action shall be kept for all modification requests.

SECTION 7.04 APPEALS

A subdivider or developer aggrieved by any action of the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors or the Municipality regarding refusal to approve a subdivision or land development plan may, within thirty (30) days of such refusal, appeal to the Common Pleas Court of Lebanon County.	Any other appeals by aggrieved parties or other landowners shall be subject to the appeal procedures outlined in Article X of Act 247.
-57-
 




SECTION 7.05 SCHEDULE OF FEES

A.		Fee Procedures - Each subdivision or land develop­ ment plan application shall be accompanied by the required review and recording fees, as established herein.	Fees shall be payable at the time of plan submission (unless otherwise noted herein) and
plan processing, approval and recording shall not be completed until all required fees are paid.

There shall be no refund or credit of fees or a portion of any fee should the subdivider or developer withdraw the plan during the review process or fail to receive plan approval.

The fee schedule set forth in this section
may be amended from time to time by adoption of a
resolution by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors setting forth the new fees.

B.	Township Fees - Fees for review, processing and approval of subdivision and land developement plans shall be payable to South Lebanon Township at the time of application, in accordance with the following schedule:

1.	Minor Subdivision, Not Involving New Lots (Lot addition, land exchange, division of double home or existing buildings, etc.)

FINAL PLAN-----------------------$40.00

2.	Minor and Major Subdivision or Land Development With New Lots/Units
(See Chapter 3, Sections 3.03, 3.04, and 3.05 for explanation of minor and major classi- fications}

 

Number of Lots/Units

1-5
 

Preliminary Plan Fee

$100(where applicable)
 

Final Plan Fee

$  75
 




 
101-200
201 +
 
$400
$500 +  $2 per lot/
unit over 200

-58-
 
$250
$300 + $2 per lot/unit over
200
 




3.	Land Development Plans
(Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, etc. For multi-family, residential, see #2 above)

Acres*	Plan Review Fee

0-2	$100
2.01-5	$150
5.01-5	$200
10.01-25	$250
25.01 +	$300

*Acreage of tract for newly developed lot or acreage undergoing review for expansions.

c.	Engineer Review Fees - All applications involving storm water management or engineering review shall be accompanied by fees, payable to South Lebanon Township for the Township Engineer, in accordance with the following:

1.	For review of subdivision and land development plans and requests for inspection:

 




Preliminary Plans
Final Plans Inspections
 
1-5
Lots/Units


$25/lot or unit
$40/lot or unit
$20/lot or unit
 
6-19
Lots/Units


$24/lot or unit
$16/lot or unit
$14/lot or unit
 

10 or more Lots/Units


$20/lot or unit
$12/lot or unit
$14/lot or unit
 


2.	For review of commercial, industrial, or in­ stitutional land developments, re-submitted plans, inspections, and other plans which do not qualify for the per lot or unit rate:

a.	A base fee of $100 for review or in­ spection.	Plan review or inspections requiring more than 2-1/2 hours of Township Engineer time shall be subject to an additional fee based upon the hourly rate established in #2 (b).

b.	An hourly rate of $40 per hour of Township Engineer review or inspection time.	·

3.	All fees shall be payable at the time of appli­
cation, except that:

-59-
 




D.	Lebanon County Fees - Fees for review and processing of Subdivision and Land Develop­ ment Plans shall be payable to Lebanon County at the time of submission, in
accordance with the Lebanon County Ordinance.

E.	Recording Fee - A recording fee shall accompany all final plan applications.	The fee, currently
$12.00 per plan, shall be payable to the Lebanon County Recorder of Deeds and subject to change as that office may deem necessary.

SECTION 7.06 PENALTIES

Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this subdivision and land development ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, pay a judgement of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Municipality as a result thereof.

District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors in accordance with this Section.	No judgement shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable unt l the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice.	If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgement, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors may enforce the judgement on behalf of the Municipality pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure.	Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the Ordinance to have believed that there was no violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.

SECTION 7.07 AMENDMENTS

Amendments to this Ordinance may be initiated by  the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors.	Before enactment of a proposed amendment or amendments the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice.


-60-
 



SECTION 7.08 VALIDITY

Should any section, subsection or provisions of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any other part thereof.

SECTION 7.09 EFFECTIVE DATE

This Subdivision Land Use Ordinance shall become effective on five (5) days after the adoption date.

Adopted this 5th day of June, 1990.

ATTEST:		SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP BO OF SUPERVISORS
 
_&_A_ -·- -+-- _(SEAL)
 
 	£: 		(SEAL)
CHAIRMAN

-Z-	(SEAL)
VICE-CHAI	' '
 

 






I hereby certify this to be a true and accurate copy of the South Lebanon Township Subdivision and Land Use Ordinance.




Curtis E. Ku Secretary-Treasurer













-61-
 
SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION  N0.1056



WHEREAS, the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors last adopted a fee schedule for review of Subdivision and/or Land Development plans on June 5, 1990; and,

WHEREAS, South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors finds that the rules and regulations which govern Subdivision and Land Development have changed, therefore giving rise to the need to amend the fee schedule,

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors hereby fixes the cost of filing fees for review and processing of all Subdivision or Land Development Plans within the Township in accordance with t e following Schedule:

 
A.	Minor Subdivision, Not Involving New Lots
{Add-on, annexation, land exchange, etc.)
 

$100
 

B.	Minor and Major Subdivisions or Land Developments with New Lots/Units

 
# of Lots/Units '1-5
6-10
11-20
21-50
51 -100
101 -200
201 +
 
Preliminarv Plan Fee
$ 200 + $ 100/Lot
$ 300 + $ 100/Lot
$ 400 + $ 90/Lot
$ 500 + $ 80/Lot
$ 600 + $ 70/Lot
$ 700 + $ 60/Lot
$ 800 + $ 50/Lot
 
Final Plan Fee
$ 100 + $  30/Lot :_
$ 200 + $  30/Lot
$ 300 + $ 30/Lot
$ 400 + $ 30/Lot
$ 500 + $ 30/Lot
$ 600 + $ 30/Lot
$ 700 + $ 30/Lot
 

C.	Land  Development  Plans ·
(Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, etc.)

Acres* 0-2	Plan Review Fee
$  800
2.01 -5	$1,200
5.01 -10	$ 2,000
10.01 -15	$ 2.400
1 .01 -25	$ 2,800
25.01 -50	$ 3,500
50-100	$ 4,000
100 +	$ 5,000 + $ 10 per acre for each acre over 100 acres

•	Acreage of tract to be based upon lot size of tract undergoing land development or acreage of disturbed land area stipulated in the erosion & sediment control permit application, whichever is larger.



D.	Engineer Review Fees - Al.I applications involving storm water management or engineering review shall be accompanied  by fees, payable to $outh Lebanon Township for the Townsf1ip Engineer, in accordance with the following.   Plan reviews or inspections requiring more than fees charged, shall be subject to an additional fee based upon the hourly rate established in
#2b.	.
 

1.	For review of subdivision and land development plans and requests for inspections:

 


Preliminary Plans Final Plans Inspection
 
1-5 Lots/Units
·$ 60 per lot/unit
$ 50 per lot/unit
$ 40 per lot/unit
 
6-19 Lots/Units
$ 40 per lot/unit
$ 30 per lot/unit
$ 30 per lot/unit
 
20 or More Lots/Units
$ 30 per lot/unit
$ 20 per lot/unit
$ 20 per lot/unit
 

2.	For review of commercial, industrial. or institutional land development, resubmitted plans, inspections. or other plans which do not qualify for the per lot/unit rate:

a.	A base fee of $500 for review or inspection. Plan reviews or inspections requiring more than 5 hours of Township Engineer time shall be subject to an additional fee based upon the hourly rate established in #2 b.
b.	An hourly rate of$ 100 per hour for Township Engineer review or inspection time.

3.	All fees payable at the time of application, except that:

a.	Inspection fees based upon the per lot/unit or base fee rates shall be paid by separate checks with the final plan, prior to recording the final plan; and
b.	The hourly rate specified in #2 b. for review of supplemental review fees shall be
payable after review. but before plan approval; and
c.	The hourly rate specified in #2 b. for inspection or supplemental inspection fees shall be payable after inspection but before final approval of release of applicable
financial guarantees.

4.	Review Special Reports (traffic, environmental, etc.)	Hourly Rates

 
NOTE:
 


1.	County Fees are not included in the above schedule.  Applicant shall pay County fees directly to the County Planning Department.
2.	For projects which have a combined Preliminary/Final Plan. fees shall be paid in
cumulative.
 

Any Resolution, or part of Resolution, conflicting with this Resolution shall be hereby repealed insofar as the same affects this resolution.

ADOPTED THIS 23Ro DAY Qf MARCH, 2004..


 


\):._.. ).	 	
ViceChairman c




SuperviS6r
 



 





.. '
 
SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP
ORDINANCE NO.#	210
 

AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND AND TO BE INCORPORATED INTO THE EXISTING SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION LAND USE ORDINANCE, ORDINANCE NO. 164, Aivu:NDING. CHAPTER 5 "REQUIRED  IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS",  BY ADDING A NEW SECTIQN 5.02.0, PUBLIC DEDICATION OF PARK AND ·OPEN SPACE LAND; AND BY AMENDING CHAPTER 4, "PLANS AND PLATS: REQUIRED INFORMATION", SECTIONS 4.02.D AND
4.02 E.	.	.




WHEREAS, 1he South Lebanon Township Supervisors have adopted a Recreation, Parks and Open Space Plan which contains recommendations for the mandatory dedication of park and open space land: and,

WHEREAS, South Lebanon Township has previously adopted a Subdivision Land Use Ordinance, Ordinance No. 164, as South Lebanon Township's ordinance governing subdivision and land development; and,

WHEREAS, South Lebanon Township does not currently provide for such
.dedication as a r.equirement of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance; and.

WHEREAS, the South Lebanon Township Supervisors .have deemed it necessary for the protection, health, and welfare of the residents of South Lebanon Township to adopt an ordinance, which mandates and regulates the dedication of park and open. space land.·

NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the South
Lebanon Township Supervl ors, as follows:	· ·





 


"SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 164, THE SUBDIVISION
LAND USE ORDINANCE"  Is hereby amended for all subdivision and land development  ··.
in South Lebanon Township in the foJfowing manner:
 
.
I
... I
I
i

I I I
 

SECTION 1:  Chapter 4, Section 4.02, Minor Subdivisions, is hereby amended by
adding new subsection D-(6), as follows:

ao (6).	Each sub ivision and land development sh ll include the mandatory e ication of ·park and open space land or the payment of a fee-in.. lieu thereof, ·consistent with the provisions of this ordinance. The plan shall
include notes which explain the calculation of the amount of land or the fee-in-lieu thereof, and the applicanfs intention.to offer same, or pay same, whichever may be appropriate, to the Township at the time recording of the approved plan.


SECTION 2: Chapter 4, Section 4.02, Minor Subdivisions, is hereby amended by adding new subsection E-(5), as follows:

"E(5). The Owner's certification and dedication statement shall include . mandatory dedication of park and open space land or the payment of a fee-in­ lieu thereof consistent with and as required by this ordinance."

SECTION 3:  Chapter 5, Section 5.02, Required Improvements and Design Standards,
. is hereby amended by adding new subse tiOf! 0., as follows:

0. Parkland and Open Space Requirements:

1.	The land reserved and dedicated to the Township for park and open space	usage shall be a single l t which shall comply with the requir  ents of this ordinance, the South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance, and the following specific requirements:

a.	The land, where feasible, must be a minimum of 5 acres in size (unless the intended use is for a special use park or linear park development).                                                                :       ·   · ·


b.	The land, where feasible, shall be in such a location that additional adjacent land abutting fyio or more boundary lines shall be
undeve oped, and available for purch se by the Township for expan ion of the -recreation area, and of suc.h character (terrain, topography, physical features, etc.) that the adjacent land can
reasonably be developed into a park or recreational land which
assessment and determination shall be made by the Township
Supervisors.

c.	The land shall be easily and safely accessible for.vehicles,
pedestrians, arid/or bicycles.
 
. -..
. d.	A maximum of 15% of the tract may consist of floodplain, wetland,
steep slopes, utility easements or rights-of-way, or other features that otherwise render the lots undevelopable for its intended
 




I
....	I
1.
 

recreation use. ,

e.	The tract shall have accessibility to utilities including, water, sewer, and power, unless deemed unnecessary by the Township for the
\ .intended park facility development  such as a greenwayllinear  park
··development.	·

f.	The tract shall not contain stormwater facilities designed to detain or retain stormwater for the parent tract or another site.	..

2.	Consistent with the standards of the South Lebanon Township Recreation, Park arid Open Space Plan. the amount of park and open space land required to be dedicated hall equal at least 10 acres of park land per 1,000 residents, or O.025 acres of land per residential lot or equivalent· residential dwelling shall be dedicated under this part.

3.	Where the Township Supervisors determine that because shape, location, access. topography. or other physical features of the land, that it is· impractical to dedicate land to the.Township or set aside recreation area as required by Section 5.02(0)(2) above, the Township Supervisors shall require payment of a fee-in-lieu of such land which shall be payable to the Township prior to recording each final plan and shall be In an amount
equal to the percentage of the total number of dwelling units for each
phase.	·

The initial fee in lieu of land shall be set at $150 per residential lot or equivalent dwelling unit This fee may be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the Township Supervisors. The fees collected hereunder shall be utilized by the Township for recreational purposes and sl)all be administered in accordance with Section 503 (11} of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

A fee·authorized under this Section shall, upon its receipt by the Township
be deposited in. an interest bearing account. l'nterest earned on such an · ·
··	account shall become funds in that account.  Funds from such accounts
shall be expended to acquire land and/a design and construct recreati<m · facilities, and/or pay for recreational planning and plan development.

4.	Upon agreement by the developer, the Township may accept the construction of recreational facilities, th .Payment of fees-in-lieu thereof, the private reservation of land for rec eatfonal purposes, the dedication of land in other areas of the Township, or a combination ·of the above.

If the developer proposes the ·private reservation of land, through either the inclusion of such land as common elements of a condominium or planned community as contained in the Pennsylvania Uniform
 

Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.ss 3103 et seq. or the Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 Pa. C. S. ss 5101 et seq., then such documentatio shall be recorded. and shall provide that the land cannot · be f4rther developed.  Furthermore, the Township shall be granted the rights'tb·maintain the land as set forth in Article VII of the Municipalities
Pl nnirig Code dealing with the maint nance of common open space bi
plan ed residential developments. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
d veloper may request that the Township Supervisors approve transfer of
the land to an·organization dedicated to the qonservation of naturat ··.
· resources with deed restrictions preventing further development
acceptable to the Township Solicitor.

5.	The landowner shall enter into an agreer11ent with the Township setting	· forth the fees to be paid, the facilities to be constructed, or the land to be
privately reserved and the method.of its maintenance. AU such agreements shall be executed prior to final plan approval.



SECTION 4: All ordinances or part of ordinances conflicting with the Provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION s, Except as modified herein, the South Lebanon Township Subdivision Land
Use Ordinance as presently enacted shall remain in full force and effe t.

SECTION 6: This Ordinance shall become effective upon its enactment.



ORDAINED and.ENACTED this _2S_t_h	day of	March	'2003.


LEBANON  TOWNSHIP  SUPERVISORS
a	n County; Pennsylvania

·1
 
RESOLUTION NO. 1064 	 RECREATIONAL FEE INCREASE

RESOLUTION OF THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP,
LEBANON COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA (hereinafter "the municipality").


WHEREAS, on March 25, 2003 by Ordinance Number 270 ,pursuant to the provisions and allowances of the Municipalities Planning Code, the South Lebanon Township Supervisors amended the South Lebanon .Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance to require the mandatory dedication of park and open space land for all residential subdivisions located within the Township; and,                                                                                                                        ·


WHEREAS, Ordinance Number 270 provided for an alternative of the payment of $750 per residential lot as a fee-in-lieu of the dedfoation of park and open space; and,

WHEREAS, Ordinance Number 270 provided that the fee-in-lieu ofland may be adjusted from time to time by Resolution of the Board of Township Supervisors; and,

WHEREAS, the cost ofland, the cost of improvements ofland, the cost ofbui.lding materials and labor for the construction or improvement of park land have all increased significantly over the course of the recent two year period, thereby justifying a need for an increase in the fee-in-lieu of land to be required for each residential lot in all land subdivisions in South Lebanon Township.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Supervisors of the Township of South Lebanon hereby amend Section 3, Paragraph 0, Subsection 3 of Ordinance Number 270 and do hereby establish that the fee-in-lieu of dedication of park and open space land is set at $1,225 per

residential_::: unit
lll. fi:. " cA/	_(1........-1	--	-
Secretary	Chairman "

. 1 /: 	




S perv1 or

I, curtis  E.  Kulp  Secretary, South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and correct copy of the Township's Resolution No. _1_9_6_4  	 adopted     August 24, 2004.
c_,J;_K J{j?/
Secretary Signature	I	S	E	A	L
 

SOUTH LEBANON  TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 288

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NUMBER 164 (SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION LAND USE ORDINANCE AS FOLLOWS: AMENDING CHAPTER FIVE (REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS), SECTION 5.09 (STREETS), SUBPARAGRAPH (F) (STREET CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS) BY ESTABLISHING STANDARDS FOR THE PREPARATION OF SUBGRADE AND THE MATERIALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF PAVEMENT BY THE DEVELOPER; BY AMENDING SECTION 5.16: (UTILITIBS AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS) BY PROVIDING FOR THE INSTALLATION OF FIRE HYDRANTS ON THE SUBDIVIDED PROPERTY LOCATED WITHIN THE COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS; BY AMENDING CHAPTER THREE (PROCEDURES) SECTION 3.05 (MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS OR LAND DEVELOPMENT-FINAL  PLAN) SUBPARAGRAPH EBY ELIMINATING
THE WORD SUBSTANTIALLY IN PARAGRAPH FOUR.

BE IT ORDAINED Ai ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:

SECTION ONE.  Chapter Five (Required Improvements and Design Standards) Section 5.09 (Streets) Subsection (F.) Subparagraphs 3, 4, and 5 (Street Construction
Standards) is hereby amended to read as follows:
,

3.	InResidential Districts, there shall be installed a subbase to consist of eight inches (8") in two lifts of compacted 2A Modified rolled stone under the paved surface of the cartway. In Commercial and Industrial Districts, there shall be installed a subbase to consist of twelve inches (12") in three lifts of compacted 2A Modified stone under the paved surface.

4.	InResidential Districts, the base course shall be constructed of minimum five inches (5") of compacted Superpave Asphalt Mixture, 25.0 mm Base Course, PG 64-22. In Commercial and Industrial Districts, the base course shall be constructed of minimum of five inches (5") of compacted Superpave Asphalt Mixture, 25.0 mm Base Course, PG 64-22 and three inches (3") of compacted Superpave Asphalt Mixture, 25.0 mm Binder Course, PG 64-22.. The construction to be in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation Manual Form 408 and as hereinafter amended.

.	5.  In All Districts, the surface course shall be constructed of minimum of one and a half inches (I  1/2") of compacted Superpave Asphalt Mixture, 9.5 mm Wearing
 
Course, PG 64-22.  The construction to be in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation Manual Form 408 and as hereinafter amended. The surface or wearing course shall conform to the Form 408 Specifications and as hereinafter amended.


SECTION TWO. Chapter Five (Required Improvements and Design Standards) Section 5.16, (Utilities and Other Improvements) is hereby amended to add the following to the Third Paragraph of Section 5.16:

In any Commercial or Industrial zoning district in South Lebanon Township, where a public water supply system is installed in a development, the developer shall provide fire hydrants along the perimeter of any building to be constructed on said subdivided lot no less than 1,000 feet apart.  All fire hydrants to be installed along the perimeter of any building shall be accessible to fire fighting apparatus.  This provision shall apply to all lots located in the Commercial or Industrial Zoning Districts including the construction of any commercial or manufacturing facility in said Zoning Districts.

SECTION THREE.  Chapter Three (Procedures) Section 3.05 (Major Subdivision or Land Development- Final Plan) Subparagraph E paragraph four is hereby amended to delete the word substantially.

SECTION FOUR.  This Ordinance shail become effective in five (5) days. Adopted this 28th day of June, 2005.
ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF
SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSIDP
Ii,{
Secretary	Chairman



BY:
· e-Chairmaii.



BY:
e	er
 





SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 302


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NUMBER 278 (SOUTH LEBANON		TOWNSillP		ZONING			ORDINANCE)			ARTICLE		I (DEFINITIONS)  BY AMENDING  THE DEFINITION  OF LOT, THROUGH PROVIDING FOR ONE FRONT YARD AND ONE REAR YARD AND THE AREA	PROVIDING		PRIMARY	ACCESS		TO		THE		LOT	BEING DESIGNATED		AS		THE		FRONT		YARD,		AND		PERMITTING ACCESSORARY  USES  IN  THE  REAR  YARD;  AMENDING  ARTICLE  1 (DEFINITIONS)  BY PROVIDING  FOR A DEFINITION  OF WOOD  FIRED BOILERS	WlilCH		CONTAIN	A	FIRE	BOX	WITH		WATER		PIPES RUNNING TO AN ATTACHED/UNATTACHED  BUILDING TO TRANSFER HEAT  FOR  SPACE  AND  WATER			HEATING;  AMENDING  ARTICLE TlilRTEEN  (SUPPLEMENTAL  DISTRICT  REGULATIONS)   BY ADDING SECTION 13.22 PROHIBITING WOOD-FIRED  BOILERS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS  EXCEPT  THE  A-AGRICULTURAL  DISTRICT;  AMENDING ARTICLE	SIX		(A-AGRICULTURAL		DISTRICT)	SECTION			6.02. (PERMITTED USES)  BY RENUMBERING  SUBSECTION MAS N AND BY ADDING	A		NEW		SUBSECTION		M	PERMITTING		WOOD-FIRED BOILERS;		AMENDING		ARTICLE		8	(R-2		MEDIUM		DENSITY RESIDENTIAL		DISTRICT)	SECTION		8.02		(PERMITTED		USES), SUBSECTION D (TOWNHOUSES)  SUBSECTION 7   BY ADDING A NEW SUBSECTION 12 BY PROVIDING THAT ALL   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS APPROVED  PURSUANT TO A SUBDIVISION PLAN AFTER DECEMBER 31, 2007 SHALL BE ATTACHED  TO THE PRINCIPLE  STRUCTURE,  BE CONSTRUCTED OF THE SAME MATERIAL  AS  THE STRUCTURE, AND THE EIGHTY (80) SQUARE FOOT REQUIREMENT  NOT BE INCLUDED IN THE  SQUARE  FOOTAGE  FOR ANY GARAGE; BY ADDING A NEW PARAGRAPH	D		TO		SUBSECTION		7		PROVIDING		THAT		ALL TOWNHOUSES   CONSTRUCTED  AFTER  DECEMBER   31,  2007  SHALL HAVE  A  TEN  FOOT  EASEMENT  ALONG  THE  EDGE  OF  THE  REAR YARD  FOR  INGRESS  AND  EGRESS  TO  THE  REAR  YARD  OF  THE ATTACHED  TOWNHOUSES AND PROHIBITING ANY FENCES,  SHEDS, TREES  OR OTHER  OBSTRUCTIONS  IN THE  EASEMENT;  AMENDING ORDINANCE	NUMBER		164			(SOUTH		LEBANON		TOWNSlllP SUBDVISION  LAND  USE  ORDINANCE)  CHAPTER  2		(DEFINITIONS) SECTION 2.01 (GENERAL TERMS) BY ADDING A PARAGRAPH TO THE



1
 

I   I



DEFINITION OF SUBDIVISION BY PERMITING A SUBDIVISION FOR THE PURPOSE OF ERECTING A BUILDING AND/OR DWELLING ONLY ALONG AN APPROVED PUBLIC  STREET OR A PRIVATE STREET IMPROVED TO  SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSIDP'S STREET SPECIFICATIONS.


BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, and  it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authorities of the same as follows:

SECTION ONE: Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article One (Definitions) Lot, Through is hereby amended to add the following to the definition:

a.	LOT THROUGH -The through lot shall have one (1) front yard and one (1) rear yard. The area of frontage providing primary access to the lot shall be designated as the front yard. Fences, hedges, walls, sheds, swimming pools, and any other accessory uses are permitted in the rear yard at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township;

SECTION TWO: Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article One (Definitions) is hereby amended to add the following definition:

b.	WOOD-FIRED BOILERS - Wood fired or coal-fired boilers containing a fire box with water pipes running to an attached or unattached building to transfer heat for both space and water heating.

SECTION THREE. Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article Thirteen (Supplemental District Regulations) is hereby amended to add a new section 13.22 as follows:


SECTION 13.22 - Wood Fired Boilers. Wood Fired Boilers are prohibited in all zoning districts except in the A-Agricultural District.

SECTION FOUR. Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article Six (A-Agricultural District) Section 6.02 (Permitted Uses) is hereby amended to renumber Subsection M as N and adding a new Section M as follows:

M. Wood-Fired Boilers provided the boiler be 200 feet from an adjoining residential building and contain a smoke stack a minimum of 15 feet from ground level.





2
 
·' .


SECTION FIVE: Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article Eight (R-2 Medium Density Residential District) Section 8.02 (Permitted Uses) Subsection D (7) is hereby amended to read as follows:

Detached accessory buildings or structures used for storage only shall be permitted on individual lots provided the size of the structure does not exceed eighty (80) square feet and the height is no more than eight feet six inches. This provision shall apply to townhouses which were approved pursuant to a subdivision plan as of December 31, 2007. Detached accessory buildings or structures are prohibited for all townhouses approved pursuant to a subdivision plan after December 31, 2007. All townhouses which were  approved pursuant to a subdivision plan after December 31, 2007 shall provide for storage areas of 80 square feet and the height be no more than eight feet six inches which shall be attached to the structure, provided the exterior of the attached structure is constructed of the same material as the structure and provided all requirements of this ordinance are met. The eighty square feet of storage area is in excess of any square footage calculated for a garage. Garages and other normal accessory structures may be attached to the structure of each individual lot provided all of the requirements of this Ordinance are met. Detached accessory buildings and structures for common use by the entire development shall be permitted on common areas as per Article 13of this Ordinance.

SECTION SIX. Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article Eight (R-2 Medium Density Residential District) Section 8.02 (Permitted Uses) Subsection D (7) is hereby amended a new Subsection 12 as follows:

12. All Townhouses approved pursuant to a subdivision plan after December 31, 2007 shall have a ten foot easement along the edge of the rear yard for purposes of an ingress and egress to other rear yards of the attached townhouses.  No fences, sheds, trees, shrubs or other obstructions shall be placed within the ten foot easement.

SECTION SEVEN. The definition of  Subdivision  set  forth  in Ordinance Number 164  (South  Lebanon  Subdivision  Land  Ordinance, Chapter 2 (Definitions), Section 2.02 (Specific Terms) is hereby amended to add the following paragraph:




3
 
,.




The Subdivision to create a lot for purpose of erecting a building and/or dwelling must be along an approved public street or a private street improved to South Lebanon Township's street specifications.

SECTION  EIGHT.	All  other  Ordinances	inconsistent	with   this Ordinance are hereby repealed.

 


days.
 
SECTION  NINE.	This Ordinance  shall become  effective  in five  (5)
 

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 14th day of May, 2008.



ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

                       BY:




BY:	_:_	-
"e-Chairma'ii



BY:
M  mber




























4
 









ZONING

ORl>INANCE




Ordinance # 278






THE TOWNSHIP	OF SOUTH  LEBANON LEBANON	CO., PA ADOPTED: 3/9/04
 
\







TABLE OF CONTENTS




ARTICLE	PAGE
Preamble	1
1.	Definitions	3
2.	Establishment of Districts: Provision for Official Zoning Map	21
3.	Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries	23
4.	Application of District Regulations	24
5.	Use Districts	26
6.	A -Agricultural District	27
7.	R-1 -Low Density Residential District	36
8.	R-2-Medium Density Residential District	41
9.	C-1 - General Commercial District	51
10.	0 & I -Office and Institutional District	55
11.	1-1-Industrial District	57
12.	Flood Plain Districts	64
13.	Supplementary District Regulations	80
14.	Environmental Improvements and Energy Conservation Requirements	86
15.	Off-Street Parking	94
16.	Signs and Advertising Structures	103
17.	Nonconformities	112
18.	Administration and Enforcement	118
 
19.	Zoning Hearing Board - Establishment & Procedure	122
20.	Zoning Hearing Board -Powers and Duties	124
21.	Appeals from the Zoning Hearing Board	132
22.	Duties of Administrative Official, Zoning Hearing Board, Township Supervisors, and Courts on Matters of Appeal	133
23.	Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses	134
24.	Amendments	135
25.	Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements	136
26.	Complaints Regarding Violations	137
27.	Penalties for Violation	138
28.	Separability Clause	139
29.	Repeal of Conflicting Ordinance/Effective Date	140
 

SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 218
AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 97 "THE ZONING ORDINANCE"


An Ordinance, amending Ordinance No. 97, establishing comprehensive zoning regulations	for the Township of South Lebanon, and providing for the administration, enforcement, and amendment thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247) and for the repeal of all ordinances in conflict herewith.

WHEREAS,	ARTICLE VI, Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, empowers the Township to enact a zoning ordinance and to provide for its administration, enforcement, and amendment, and

WHEREAS, the Township of South Lebanon adopted such an ordinance on November 24, 1981, effective five days thereafter, and

WHEREAS, the Township Supervisors deem it necessary for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the Township to amend said Ordinance No. 97, and

WHEREAS, the Township Planning Commission of South Lebanon Township proposed said amendments in accordance with Article VI, Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, and

WHEREAS, said amendment was submitted to the Lebanon County Planning Department pursuant to Article VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, and

WHEREAS, the Planning Commission divided the Township into districts and has prepared regulations pertaining to such districts in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan and the community Goals and Objectives stated herein, designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare  to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements, and

WHEREAS, the Planning Commission has given reasonable consideration, among other things to the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality, and
 
-.







WHEREAS, the Township Supervisors have given due public notice of the amendment, and

WHEREAS, all .requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, with regard to the preparation of the recommendation of the Planning Commission and subsequent action of the Township Supervisors have been met;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SOUTH LEBANON, LEBANON COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED BY    THE    AUTHORITY    OF    THE    SAME    AS    FOLLOWS.

















































2
 



ARTICLE I

DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this Ordinance, have the meaning herein indicated;

Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The singular includes the plural.

The words "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as, an individual.

The word "lot" includes the word "tract" or "parcel".

The term "shall" is always mandatory, the work "may'' is permissive.

The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied".

ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building detached from and subordinate to the principal building or use on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the principal building, but not including vehicles, mobile homes, travel trailers, truck trailers, or any parts thereof. An accessory building may not house a principal use nor may it stand alone on a lot as a principal building.

ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building.

ACT 247: See "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,"

AGRICULTURE:	The cultivation of the soil for food products or  other marketable	products, not including animal  husbandry  or  storage  and/or processing of products  grown on other premises.

AIRPORT: An improved airstrip/landing strip where aircraft can land and take off,	usually equipped with hangers, facilities for refueling and repair, accommodations for passengers, freight, and the like.

AIRSTRIP/LANDING STRIP: An area adapted with minimal improvements for use as a temporary runway for aircraft.




3
 

ALLEY:	A public thoroughfare (less than 20' in width), other than a street, which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation.

ALTERATION:	Any enlargement of the total floor area of a building, any enclosure by adding walls beneath a previously roofed area, any extension of a roof line to cover additional lot area not previously covered, or any construction which increases the cubic content of a building.

ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.

ANIMAL HUSBANDRY: The raising, breeding, keeping or care of farm animals or livestock, including fowl or insects, for meat, by-products or other utility which is intended as a business or gainful occupation.

ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, INTENSIVE: The practice of raising, breeding, or keeping of livestock or fowl that involves large numbers of  animals or birds concentrated in a small area utilizing mass feeding. This shall include feedlots, poultry houses, and other buildings, structures, corrals, or pens in which animals are confined in close quarters. This shall also include the raising of swine under any conditions.

ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, NON-INTENSIVE: The practice of raising, breeding, or keeping livestock or fowl that involves animals or birds which obtain their principal food source by grazing or foraging from the land and receive only supplementary	feed at centralized feeding stations. This shall include conventional dairying operations and similar uses satisfying the above criteria.

APARTMENT:	A dwelling unit which is part of a dwelling complex as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, such as garden apartments, two-family detached, or two family semi-detached, and is commonly rented on a monthly or longer basis.

AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP: A building that is used for the repair or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels, fenders, bumpers, and/or accessories of automobiles and other vehicles for conveyance.

BASEMENT: A story partly below the finished grade, but having at least one­ half of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling) above the average level of the finished grade where such grade abuts the exterior walls of the building. A basement shall be considered as one story in determining the permissible number of stories.

BED AND BREAKFAST LODGING:  See "Guest Home".




4
 

BUFFER AREA: A yard space, adjacent to a property line or building, which contains landscaping and plantings designed to screen, separate and shield  a potentially incompatible use from adjoining properties.

BUILDING: A structure which has a roof supported by columns, piers, or walls, which is intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel or which is to house a use of a commercial or manufacturing activity.

BUILDING, ATTACHED: A building which has two (2) party walls in common. BUILDING, DETACHED. A building which has no party walls.
BUILDING, SEMI-DETACHED: A building which has only one (1) party wall in common.

BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted.

BUILDING AREA: The total areas of outside dimensions on a horizontal plane at ground level of the principal building all accessory buildings exclusive of cornices, eaves, gutters, or chimneys projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches; bay windows not extending more than one (1) story and not projecting more than five (5) feet, and steps and balconies.

BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical dimensions measured from the average elevation of the finished lot or grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the ceiling of the top story, in the case of a flat roof; to the deckline of a mansard roof; and to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof.

BUILDING LINE: A line located along and drawn parallel to a wall or other exterior supporting member of a structure or portion thereof, excluding self­ supportive projecting architectural features that project five (5) feet or less. Yard requirements are applied from the lot lines to said building lines.

CAMPGROUND: A parcel of land upon which two (2) or more campsites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the general public as temporary  living quarters for recreation, education, or vacation purposes and where acceptable sanitary facilities are provided for each campsite or for the campground as a whole. Camping units which are not occupied on a daily basis shall not be stored in areas reserved as campsites but may be stored in designated areas elsewhere in the campground. Flood plain areas shall not be utilized for sanitary facilities or camping unit storage.

CARPORT:  See "Garage, Private".



5
 




CELLAR: A story partly below the finished grade having at least one-half of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling) below the average level of the adjoining finished grade where such grade abuts the exterior walls of the building. A cellar shall not be considered a story in determining the permissible number of stories.

CENTERLINE: The line, whether painted or not, which is the center of the paved portion of a street or road. The centerline may also be equidistant from the edges of the street right-of-way unless indicated differently on a subdivision or development plan.

CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE: A certificate issued and enforced by the Zoning Administrator upon the completion of the construction of a new building or upon a change or conversion of a structure of use or a building which certifies that the applicant has complied with any and all requirements and regulations as provided herein and all other applicable requirements. This certificate is also utilized for registration of nonconforming uses of land or nonconforming uses of land and structures in combination.

CLINIC: An individual building or cluster of buildings (on a lot in single or common ownership) operated by one or more licensed medical or dental practitioners for the purpose of providing medical or dental treatment to the public on an outpatient basis.

COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel of land or water or combination of both located within a development site and designed and intended for use or enjoyment of residents of a planned development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public facilities.

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A document designed by and for South Lebanon Township to state basis, policies, development objectives, and directions of future growth. It is a factual document that describes how the principal, social, and economic past have formed the present-day Township; and, it serves as an aid in the decision-making and rule-making process that shape the Township's growth.

CONSTRUCTION: The building, reconstruction, demolition activities for reconstruction, extension, expansion, alterations, substantial improvement, erection or relocation of a building or structure, including mobile homes. This shall include the placing of construction materials in a permanent position and fastened or placed in a permanent manner. Earth moving activities shall not be deemed construction.





6
 

CONVALESCENT HOME:  See "Nursing Home".

COURT: An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building which is bounded on two (2) sides by the walls of such building.

COVERAGE:  See "Lot Coverage".

CUL-DE-SAC: A street with a single means of entry and exit. A cul-de-sac has two (2) parts, the stem and the turnaround.

DAY CARE CENTER: A facility in which child care is provided for seven (7) or more children at any one time, for profit or not for profit, where child care areas are not also being used as a family residence. A day care center, if situated on the premises of an operating community service facility, including but not limited to a public or private school, place of worship, community center or library, and associated with that activity, shall be considered accessory to the principal use of the property concerned. Child care services also may be provided as an accessory use to office, commercial or industrial uses provided that such services are for the sole use of current employees of said business or industry.

DAY CARE FACILITY, ADULT: A non-residential premises in which out-of­ home care, excluding care provided by relatives, is provided for four (4) or more functionally disabled, elderly adults for part of a 24 hour day. When such care is situated within an existing health care or nursing home facility, overnight adult care may be provided on a limited basis.

DAY CARE HOME, FAMILY: Any family residence, other than the child's own home, in which child day care is provided as an accessory use in the living areas of the residence. Child day care is provided, for profit or not for profit, to four to six children, who are not relatives of the caregiver.

DAY CARE HOME, GROUP: Any family residence, other than the child's own home, in which child day care is provided as an accessory use in the living areas of the residence. Child day care is provided, for profit or not for profit, to more than six (6) but less than twelve (12) children, who are not relatives of the caregiver.

DENSITY: The ratio of permitted uses to lot area specified by each district or type of use throughout this Ordinance.

DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The provisions for the development of a planned residential development, including a plat of subdivision; all covenants relating to use, location, and bulk of buildings and other structures; intensity of  use or density of development; streets, ways, and parking facilities; common open space; and public facilities.


7
 

DISTRICT: A portion of South Lebanon Township within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.

DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED. A detached (separate) building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family on an individual lot; however; this shall not include single unit mobile homes which are defined separately.

DWELLING,  SINGLE  FAMILY  SEMI-DETACHED:    A  building  with  one  (1)
dwelling unit form the ground to roof and only one (1) party wall in common with another dwelling unit. Commonly described as a duplex, the semi-detached, single family dwelling is on an individual lot, is connected on one (1) side to a
similar dwelling on an adjacent lot and is usually owner-occupied.

DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED: A separate building on an individual lot with two (2) dwelling units from ground to roof (one unit over the other). These units are normally renter-occupied and are not designed for further subdivision.

DWELLING,   TWO-FAMILY   SEMI-DETACHED:      A  building  with   two   (2)
dwelling units from ground to roof (one unit over the other) and only one (1) party wall in common with another, connected to a building which may contain one (1) or two  (2)  dwelling  units.    The  two-family  semi-detached  dwelling  is on  an
individual lot, and may be rental or owner-occupied.

DWELLING UNIT: One (1) or more rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities for one (1) family.

FAMILY: One (1) or more persons living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit and doing the cooking on the premises; however, this shall not include a group of persons occupying a boarding house, guest home, club, hotel, motel, fraternity or sorority house, etc.

FARM: A parcel of land of ten (10) or more acres used principally in the raising or production of agricultural products, with the customary dwelling, farm structures, storage and equipment. Adjoining tracts, parcels or  separately deeded properties which are owned and farmed integrally as part of the same farming operation shall be considered jointly as one farm.

FLOOD PLAIN:  See Article 12.




8
 

GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building or structure which is accessory to the principal building, which provides for the storage of motor vehicles of the families residing on the premises and in which no occupation, business or service for profit is conducted.

GARAGE, REPAIR: A structure, building or area of land or any portion thereof used primarily for the  servicing and repair of automotive vehicles. A repair garage may provide one (1) or more of the following services: general mechanical repair of motor vehicles including state inspection, lubrication, washing, or sale of accessories and motor vehicle fuels. Uses permissible as a repair garage do not include body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, and storage of certain vehicles as per Section 13.17 of this Ordinance. A retail garage is not an automobile body shop or a retail automotive parts store.

GARDEN APARTMENTS: Multi-family apartment buildings located on a plot of land under one (1) ownership. Garden apartments are two (2) stories high, with individual apartments on each story.  Garden apartment buildings  shall contain at least four (4), but not more than sixteen (16) dwelling units in a  single structure, with the units generally  renter-occupied.  The  garden  apartments share: (a) a common yard area which is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the complex, (b) common off-street parking, (c) common outside apartment access for some or all units, (d) central utilities.

GASOLINE STATION: A structure, building, or area of land or any portion thereof that is used solely for the sale of gasoline, or other motor vehicle fuel, lubricants, or minor accessories for travelers' convenience (e.g. windshield wiper blade, spark plugs, fuses, bulbs, etc.). Said use shall not include  the sale of automotive parts, tires, service, polishing or washing. Any business or industry dispensing gasoline solely for its own use and vehicles will not be  deemed a gasoline station.

GRADE, FINISHED: The co.mpleted surfaces of lawns, walks, and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans of designs relating thereto.

GREENHOUSE: A building designed to allow the maximum amount of sunlight, and to control temperature and humidity in order to propagate plants or vegetation growth whereas the plant or its part is removed for sale or process elsewhere, or are enjoyed or consumed by the occupants of the premises. Any greenhouse in which there are retail sales and/or items stocked for resale is a commercial use.

GROUP FAMILY DWELLING: A group of individuals not related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship living together in a single family dwelling unit as one (1) housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management



9
 

plan based on an intentionally  structured  relationship  providing  organization and stability. A Group Family Dwelling shall not include hospitals, sanitariums, sanatoriums, clinics, or professional offices.

GUEST HOME: A single family detached dwelling that contains the primary residence of the owner/manager(s) and his family as well as short-term housing primarily for transient automotive travelers. No facilities for cooking or eating are provided in any rooming unit, and meals, if provided, are served family style to guests as part of the overall lodging arrangements.

HABITABLE FLOOR AREA: The sum of the floor area of all heated, finished rooms, within a dwelling unit, used on a daily basis for habitation. Such area may include living rooms; recreation rooms; kitchens; dining rooms; bedrooms; bathrooms, hallways; closets; heated and finished basements, cellars, and attics; attached garages which have been converted into an integral part of the living quarters; but does not include garages; porches, whether roofed, unroofed or enclosed; roofed terraces; unfinished and unheated basements, attics, cellars, or garages; etc.

HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful occupation conducted within a dwelling which is of a service or professional nature such that the following conditions are met, as applicable: (1) the proprietor engages primarily in the sale of a service,
(2) the handling of any durable goods is limited to primarily repairing or hand­ crafting, and (3) the handling of non-durable or consumable goods for sale is incidental to the service. Such home occupations include but are not limited to: physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers  and accountants;  insurance, real estate or securities brokers; barbers and beauticians;  photographers;  tutors of individual students; seamstresses and tailors; and other occupations meeting these criteria which are not otherwise prohibited by law. Occupations of a nature that involve the stocking of items for retail or wholesale transfer, or use of facilities that involve a gathering of people, or occupations that normally use large areas, or customarily or not compatible with dwellings, by  virtue  of creating excessive noise, fumes, odor, dust, electrical interference, or substantially more than normal residential levels of traffic are prohibited. Prohibited home occupations include but are not limited to: retail and wholesale stores; instructional classes of all types; shop and  equipment storage of contractors; auto, truck or engine repair; medical or dental clinics.

HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION: The residents of a subdivision, garden apartments, or townhouse development who are bound by contractual agreement as a conditions of their occupancy to share costs for maintenance of common open space, private streets, other duties unique to their surroundings. The agreement is not related to municipal ordinances.




10
 

HOSPITAL: A place for the diagnosis, treatment, or other care of humans and having facilities for inpatient care including such establishments as a sanitarium, sanatorium, and preventorium.

HOTEL OR LODGING HOUSE: A building used as the more or less temporary abiding place of three (3) or more individuals who are, for compensation, lodged with or without meals, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. A hotel may include  restaurants,  newsstands,  and other accessory services primarily for serving its occupants and only incidentally the public.

JUNK YARD: A lot, land, or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage, and/or sale of waste papers, rags, scrap metal, or discarded materials, or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, and for the sale of parts thereof, as more specifically defined in South Lebanon Township Ordinance Number 15, and its amendments.

KENNEL:  (See Pet Kennel)

LANDSCAPING:	Changing, rearranging or adding to the vegetation or appearance of land to produce a visual, aesthetic or environmental effect appropriate to the use of land. Landscaping may include reshaping the land by moving earth, as well as preserving the original vegetation or adding vegetation.

LAUNDROMAT: A business premises equipped with individual clothes washing and/or drying machines for the use of retail customers, exclusive of laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in a multi-family housing development.

LICENSED   PENNSYLVANIA    HEALTH   PROFESSIONAL:       Persons   duly
authorized by the State of Pennsylvania to practice specialties limited to the following for purposes of this Ordinance. Chiropractors, Dentists, Dental Hygienists, Medical Doctors, Midwives, Nurses, Optometrists, Osteopaths, Opticians, Podiatrists, Psychiatrists, Psychologists, and Physical Therapists.

LIVESTOCK:	Any member of the bovine, equine, porcine, or ovine species, including but not limited to cows, steers, horses, ponies, pigs, sheep, goats chickens and turkeys.

LOADING/UNLOADING SPACE: An off-street space not less than twelve  (12) feet wide and fifty-five (55) feet long and having a  minimum  clear  height  of fifteen (15) feet, exclusive of access area, for the parking of one (1) vehicle while loading and  unloading  merchandise  or materials.





11
 

LOT: A single tract or parcel of land, which may legally be described as such, held in a single or joining ownership, which is occupied  or capable of being occupied by one (1) principal building or principal use together with such accessory building, structures, and such open spaces as are arranged and permitted by this Ordinance.

LOT, CORNER: A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, and which has an interior angle of less than  135 degrees at the intersection of the two (2) street lines.

LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do not abut a street.

LOT, THROUGH: An interior lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.

LOT AREA: An area of land which is determined by the limits of the property line bounding that area and expressed in terms of square feet or acres. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be included in calculating the required lot area.

LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot or property area covered by buildings or structures, excluding driveways, sidewalks, and other standard paved vehicular or pedestrian access ways.

LOT DEPTH: A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.

LOT LINE: Any line dividing a lot from anothe1· lot, street, or parcel.

LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to its depth. Required lot width shall be measured at right angles to its depth . Required lot width shall be measured at the most forward allowable building line or setback line; however, in the case where one side lot line is not parallel to the other side lot line, or of pie-shaped lots, the required lot width shall be measured at a point equal to fifty (50) percent of the depth of the lot.

MOBILE HOME: A transportable, single unit structure intended for permanent occupancy as a single family dwelling or office, which is contained in one (1) unit or in two (2) units designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and which is constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.


12
 

MOBILE HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS: A lot or area which is a planned development and designated to contain two or more mobile homes for rent or for sale.	Any lot or area proposed to utilize such design where individual mobile home sites are ·proposed for sale shall be known as a mobile home subdivision. Both parks and subdivisions are not to be construed to include recreational vehicles.

MOBILE HOME SITE: An area within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision designated to contain one mobile home and the necessary utility connections and appurtenances. The area may be rented to an occupant as in a mobile home park, or sold to an occupant, as in a mobile home subdivision.

MODULAR HOME: A sectional, single family dwelling, intended for permanent occupancy, contained in two (2) or more units designed to be permanently joined into one (1) integral unit, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for assembly operations and construction of the necessary permanent foundation. For the purposes of this Ordinance, modular homes shall be treated the same as conventional stick-built single family dwellings.

MOTEL:	A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units, designed with separate entrances and designed for occupancy, primarily for transient automotive travelers, and provided with accessory off-street parking facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as tourist cabins, motor lodges, and similar terms, but shall not be construed to include mobile or immobile trailers or homes.

NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot of record, existing at the date of the passage of this Ordinance or any amendments thereof, which does not at this time have the minimum lot width or contain the minimum lot area for the zoning district in which it is located.

NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.

NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: A structure, building, or part thereof which, at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendments thereto, does not comply with the provisions of this Ordinance or such amendments, with respect to restrictions on lot coverage, height, yard requirements, location on the lot, or other similar requirements.

NONCONFORMING USE: A use, whether of land, building, or structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendments thereto, where such use was lawfully in existence at the time of the amendment of this Ordinance or such amendments thereto.



13
 

NURSERY, HORTICULTURE: Any lot or parcel of land  used  to  cultivate, propagate,  and  grow  trees,  shrubs,  vines,  and   other   plants   including   the buildings, structures, and equipment customarily incidental and accessory to the principal  use.    ·

NURSERY (SCHOOL):  "See Day Care Center".

NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.

OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL: A building containing office space for  one  (1)  or more persons engaged in occupations  or  callings  which  required  extensive learned and academic preparation to secure  knowledge  or  skill in  a profession such as medicine, law, divinity or science, wherein professional  advice, guidance or instruction is provided. Occupations or vocations which are trades, crafts, or businesses and often involve the sale of a product shall not be considered professional offices.

OPEN SPACE: The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with the building.

PARENT TRACT. Existing Farm or a combination of tracts, parcels, or separately deeded properties used as a farm and held in single ownership as of November 24, 1981.

PARKING LOT: An off-street surfaced area designed solely for the parking of motor vehicles, including driveways, passageways, and maneuvering space appurtenant  thereto.

PARKING SPACE: An open or enclosed area accessible from a street or alley for parking of motor vehicles for owners, occupants, employees, customers, or tenants of the principal building or use. Each parking space shall be not less than ten (10) feet wide and not less than twenty (20) feet long, exclusive of all drives, curbs, and turning space.

PENNSYLVANIA   MUNICIPALITIES   PLANNING    CODE:      This   enabling
legislation provides the mechanism whereby municipalities can plan for community development through the adoption of a  comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance and the establishment of planning commissions, planning departments and zoning hearing boards. The Code authorizes the above bodies to request appropriations, charge fees, make inspections, hold public hearings, make legal appeals, and process penalties for violations.  For the purposes of this




14
 

Ordinance, the Code, enacted as Act 247 of 1968, is intended  to include  the current code and any future amendments and shall be referred to hereafter as "Act 247" or (PMPC).

PERMIT:  Building and Zoning Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator.

PET, HOUSEHOLD: Any customary domestic animal or bird that is kept for pleasure rather than utility and which may be kept inside or outside of a dwelling.

PET NOVELTY: An animal, bird or insect that is kept for pleasure that is not a customary household pet, nor of a domesticated variety, provided that it is not otherwise prohibited by law and is kept inside a dwelling.

PET KENNEL: An enclosure or area (located outside a dwelling) which is designed for keeping more than three (3) birds or animals; however, this does not include pet zoos or menageries.

 
PLANNING	COMMISSION:
Commission.
 
The	South	Lebanon	Township	Planning
 

PLANNING DEPARTMENT  SITE REVIEW  COMMITTEE:   A three  (3) to five
(5)  member  committee  appointed  by  the  Director  of  the  Lebanon  County
Planning Department from department personnel.  This committee reviews sites to provide recommendations on design and appropriate use of vegetation, topography, building orientation and other site amenities which will result in effective energy conversation and environmental control.

POULTRY:  (See Livestock)

PREMISES: Any lot, parcel, or tract of land and any building  constructed thereon.

PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A building in which  is conducted  the principal  use  of the lot on which it is located.

PRINCIPAL USE: The main purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.

PUBLIC NOTICE: Notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered  at the hearing.   The first publication  shall not be more  than thirty
(30) days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.



15
 

PRIVATE ROAD: A legally established road right-of-way, other than a street, which provides the primary vehicular access to a lot.

PUBLIC SEWER: The municipally owned and operated Sewage Collection System.

PUBLIC WATER: The system of water distribution and sales operated by license and authority of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.

RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: A commercial establishment where food or beverage is sold for consumption on the premises either in a customer's vehicle or in an outside area, but not within a building.

RESTAURANT, DRIVE THROUGH: An  accessory  use  to  a  commercial restaurant where the customer receives food or beverage via a drive-up window without the need for the customer to leave his vehicle.

RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: A commercial establishment where a limited selection of food or beverage is sold either for consumption on the premises or as a "take out" service. Food preparation is designed for immediate service to customers and food is normally prepared in advance to facilitate this type of "fast" service.

RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE:  (See Street Line) ROAD:  (See Street)
ROW HOUSE: (See "Town House")

SANITARIUM, SANATORIUM: A private hospital, whether or not such facility is operated for profit.

SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: A building or groups of buildings divided into separate compartments used to meet the temporary storage needs of small businesses, apartment dwellers and other residential uses. Storage of hazardous material and/or wastes are prohibited.

SETBACK: The horizontal distance from a lot line to the part of the building nearest to such a lot line.

SHOPPING CENTER: A group of stores, two (2) or more in number, planned and designed as an integrated unit with off-street parking provided on the property as an integral part of the unit.






16
 

SIGN: The word "sign" includes any writing (including letter, word or numeral); pictorial representation (including illustration or decoration); emblem (including device, symbol, or trademark); or any other device or similar character which (1) is a structure or any part thereof, or is attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building or other structure; (2) is used to announce direct attention to, or advertise; and (3) is visible from outside a building.

SIGN ADVERTISING: Any sign which is owned or operated by any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of outdoor advertising for direct profit gained from the rental of such signs or any sign advertising a commodity not sold or produced on the premises, including "billboards".

SIGN, DOUBLE-FACED: A sign consisting of two (2) display areas placed back to back or joined along a common edge and is treated as having one (1) sign area. If the display areas are joined along a common edge and the interior angle is greater than forty-five (45) degrees, the structure shall be treated as having two
(2) sign areas.

SIGN FREESTANDING: An independently supported sign which is not attached to any building or structure.

SIGN GROUND: A permanent sign supported independently of a building or other structure and having its own support(s) placed in or upon the ground.

SIGN PROJECTING:  A sign erected or displayed which is attached to the wall of a building and projects in a perpendicular fashion from said wall. Wall signs that project more than twelve (12) inches shall be treated as projecting signs.

SIGN ROOF: A sign erected or displayed on a roof top; roof signs shall not exceed the maximum height requirements for buildings or structures.

SIGN WALL: A sign erected or displayed on or parallel to the surface of a building and does not project more than twelve (12) inches therefrom.

SIGN AREA: The area of a sign shall be construed to include the entire display surface and background, whether open or enclosed, which encompasses lettering, wording, designs, and symbols, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which is incidental to the display itself. The area shall be determined using the largest visible sign or silhouette area. When the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or printed on a surface, the area shall be considered to be the smallest rectangular shape or shapes which can be drawn together to encompass all of the letters and symbols.

SITE PLAN: A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown topography; location  of  all  building,  roads,  rights-of-way,   and  boundaries;   all  essential


17
 

dimensions and bearings; and any other information deemed necessary by the Township in unusual or special cases.

SPECIAL EXCEPTION: A use specified in the district regulations which is permitted only if the Zoning Hearing Board·grants it as a Special Exception use and allows issuance of a permit by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.

STORY: A story is that part of a building between the surface of any floor and the next floor above it. A "split level" story shall be considered a second story if its floor level is six (6) feet or more above the level of the line of the finished floor next below it. Any floor under a sloping roof at the top of a building which is more than two (2) feet below the top plate shall be counted as a story; and, if less than two (2) feet below the top plate, shall be counted as a half story.

STREET: A public thoroughfare, right-of-way, (or private road or right-of-way) twenty (20) feet in width or greater which affords primary vehicular access to abutting properties.

STREET LINE: The line determining the limit of the street or public right-of­ way, either existing or contemplated. Also referred to as the street lot line or road right-of-way line. Where a definite right-of-way width has not been established, the street line shall be determined as a line twenty-five (25) feet from the center line of the existing street.

STRUCTURE: A man-made object usually assembled of interdependent parts or components which is designed to have a more or less fixed location, whether or not permanently attached at that location.

SUBDIVISION: The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purposes, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided, however, that the division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten
(10)	acres, not involving any new street or easement of access, or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.

TOWN HOUSE: A single family dwelling located on an independent lot and constructed as a part of a series of three (3) or more connected  single family dwellings with one (1) dwelling unit from floor to roof. Town houses are typically two (2) stories high and units are considered attached dwellings, except for the end units of a building series which are semi-detached. Town houses are generally owner-occupied  and provide residents with individual yards, parking,





18
 

and utility access.  Common areas and facilities, including parking areas, may be designed for joint utilization by all residents of the town house development.

TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis (motorized home, converted bus, tent trailer, tent, or similar devise) designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes.

USE:	The specific purpose of which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be  occupied  or  maintained.  The  term "permitted	use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.

USE, ACCESSORY: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building.

USE, PRINCIPAL: The main purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.

VARIAN CE: A modification of the regulations of this Ordinance granted by the Zoning Hearing Board to the petitioner on grounds of practical difficulties or an unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed, pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and Act 247.

YARD: An open space, other than a court, unoccupied by a structure; provided, however, that fences, walls, posts, trees, lawn furniture, and other customary yard accessories are permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.

YARD, REQUIRED FRONT: An unoccupied space, open to the sky, provided between the front property line (road right-of-way line) and a line drawn parallel thereto, at such distance therefrom  as may be specified therein for any district, and extending for the full width of the lot.

YARD, REQUIRED REAR: An unoccupied space, open to the sky, between the rear property line and a line drawn parallel, thereto at such distance therefrom as may be specified herein for any district, and extending for the full width of the lot.

YARD, REQUIRED SIDE: An unoccupied space, open to the sky, between the side property line and a line drawn parallel thereto at such distance therefrom as may be specified herein for any district, and extending the full depot of the lot.







19
 

YARD, FRONT: An unoccupied space, open to the sky, between  the  front property line (road right-of-way line) and the building line of  the  principal building closest to the front property line.

YARD, REAR: An unoccupied space, open to the sky, between the rear property line and the building line of the principal building which is closest to the rear property line.

YARD, SIDE: An unoccupied space, open to the sky, between the side property line and the side building line of the principal building. In most cases, a lot has two (2) side yards located on opposite sides of the principal building.

ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The agent(s) or official(s) designated by the Township  supervisors to enforce the Zoning Ordinance of the Township.














































20
 

ARTICLE 2

ESTABLISHMENT  OF DISTRICTS: PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP

SECTION 2.01	OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. The Township is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.

The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, attested by the Secretary, and bearing the seal of the Township under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Article 2, Section 2.01 of Ordinance Number of the Township of South Lebanon, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, "together with the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.

If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, changes are ·made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Township Supervisors with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: "On (date), by official action of the Township Supervisors, the following (change) changes were made in the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of nature of change)", which entry shall be signed by the Chairman of the Supervisors and attested by the Township Secretary. No amendment to this Ordinance which involves matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map.

No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided under Article 27.

Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map, which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map which shall be located in the office of the Township Supervisors and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the Township.

SECTION 2.02        REPLACEMENT  OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.  In the
event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret  because  of  the  nature  of   number  of changes  and  additions,  the



21
 

Township Supervisors may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map shall be  identified by the signature of the Chairman or Vice-chairman of the Board of Supervisors, attested by the Township Secretary, and bearing the seal of the Township under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map, adopted                                                , as part of Ordinance Number
 	of the Township of South Lebanon, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania."

Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof, remaining shall be preserved together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
















































22
 

ARTICLE 3

RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:

SECTION 3.01. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines.

SECTION 3.02. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted  lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.

SECTION 3.03. Boundaries indicated as approximately following  township limits shall be construed as following such township limits.

SECTION 3.04. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.

SECTION 3.05. Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features indicated in Section 3.01through3.04 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.

SECTION 3.06. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Map, or in other circumstances not covered by Sections 3.01 through 3.05 above, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the District boundaries.

SECTION 3.07. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance, the Zoning Hearing Board may permit, as a Special Exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.


















23
 

ARTICLE 4

APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS




The regulations set by this Ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided:

SECTION 4.01. No buildings, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.

SECTION 4.02. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:

1.	to exceed the height or bulk;

2.	to accommodate or house a greater number of families;

3.	to occupy a greater percentage of lot area;

4.	to have narrower or small rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 4.03. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.

SECTION 4.04. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements within their respective zoning districts established by this Ordinance.

SECTION 4.05. When a specific use is neither permitted nor prohibited in the schedule of district regulations, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make a determination, as an Administrative Review, as to the similarity or compatibility of the use in question to the permitted uses in the district, basing the decision on the overall intent stipulated for the district.





24
 

SECTION 4.06. Where a district boundary line divides a lot, which was a lot of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator may permit the extension of the requirements of the less restrictive district no more than thirty (30) feet into the remaining portion of the lot located in a more restrictive district.

SECTION 4.07. All territory except floodplains, which may hereafter be annexed to the Township shall be considered to be in the (A) Agricultural District until otherwise classified. All annexed territory which has been delineated as floodplain by the Federal Insurance Administrator in an Official Flood Insurance Study shall be considered to be the F-1, Approximated Flood Plain District until otherwise classified.
















































25
 

ARTICLE 5 USE DISTRICTS
SECTION 5.01. For the purpose of regulating and restricting the location  of trades, industries, multiple family houses, single family houses, and other uses of property, the number of square feet of lot area per dwelling unit, the width of lots, the location and size of yards, and the size and height of buildings, the Township is divided into classes of use districts termed respectively:




Class A	Agricultural Districts

Class R-1	Low Density Residential Districts

Class R-2	Medium Density Residential Districts

Class C-1	General Commercial Districts

Class I-1	Industrial  Districts Class F-1, F-2, F-3 & F-4 Flood Plain Districts
Class 0 and I	Office and Institutional Districts































26
 

ARTICLE 6

A -AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT

SECTION 6.01. INTENT. The regulations of the Agricultural Districts are designed to protect and preserve the existing agricultural lands of the Township and those areas where environmental conditions are most conductive to agricultural operations which will produce high crop yields. Principal farm land and conversion to non-farm usage is discouraged. Where designated for non­ prime farm land, limited residential, non-residential, and farm-related commercial uses are permitted to facilitate those individuals who may desire to locate in an agricultural setting.

SECTION 6.02.  PERMITTED USES.  The following uses are permitted, subject to the requirements listed herein and in Section 6.03 and 6.04 of this Ordinance:

A.	Agriculture, crop and truck  farming, pasturing, truck gardening,  horticulture, nurseries,	aviaries,  hatcheries,  apiaries,  and  similar  agricultural  uses. Greenhouses are also permitted, provided that they do not involve retail sales.

B.	Non-intensive animal husbandry.

C.	Intensive animal husbandry, provided that:

1.	Structure in which livestock or fow1 are kept shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet to any lot line or road right-of-way and thirteen hundred (1300) feet to any residentially zoned property.

2.	No storage of manure or odor or dust producing substances shall be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of any lot line or road right-of-way and five hundred (500) feet from any  residentially zoned property.

D.	Pet kennels, provided that they are located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any road right-of-way or lot line.

E.	Public conversation areas for the preservation of open space, water, soil, forest and wildlife resources.

F.	Public park  and  recreation  areas,  forest preserves,  game  refuges  and  similar non-intensive uses.

G.	Golf courses and country clubs.

H.	Churches, associated parish houses, and cemeteries.



27
 

I.	Single family dwellings, in accordance with the requirements of Sections 6.03 and 6.04 of this Ordinance, including maximum lot area requirements.

J.	Group Family Dwellings provided that the following conditions are met:

1.	Proof of a group family living arrangement shall be verified through the appropriate state or local agency sponsor/approving use. A copy of the required license or registration and any subsequent changes thereto shall be filed with the Zoning Officer prior to initiation of the use or change.

2.	All parking for the use shall be off-street. In addition to the two (2) off-street parking spaces required for the dwelling unit, sufficient additional off-street parking shall be provided to adequately handle the parking needs of the use (e.g. 1additional space for each resident vehicle kept on the premises).

K.	Family Day Care Homes provided that the following conditions are met:

1.	Day care shall be provided by the resident of  the  home  and  a maximum of one (1) non-resident assistant.

2.	Applicant shall obtain and maintain a registration certificate from the Penna. Dept. of Welfare for the Family Day Care Home; a copy of said certificate shall be attached to the building permit.

3.	Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided in addition to the two (2) required for the residence.

4.	No signs pertaining to the day care service shall be permitted.

L.	Customary accessory uses and structures incidental to any of the above permitt d uses, including the following:

1.	Roadside stands for the sale of "home-grown" or "home-made" products when located not less than twenty (20) feet from the road cartway and not within the road right-of-way.

2.		Home occupations and accessory uses, as regulated in Article 13 of this Ordinance.

M.	Upon approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, the following Special Exception uses are permitted provided the use complies with the conditions listed herein and Article 21 of this Ordinance.   Additionally, the applicable requirements of




28
 

Sections 6.03 and 6.04 of this ordinance, including maximum lot area, shall also apply.

1.	Semi..public or private recreational areas, game and wildlife hunting and gunning clubs, camps and structures necessary for the operation of these uses.

2.	Riding academies, commercial stables and animal hospitals.

3.	Saw mills and other establishments associated with forestry.

4.	Agriculturally oriented commercial establishments (e.g. farm implement dealers, feed mills, seed stores, butchering shops, etc.).

5.	Guest Homes provided that the following conditions are met:

a.	The number of bedrooms for guests shall be a minimum of two  (2) and a maximum of six (6).  No more than two (2) adults  and two (2) children may occupy any one guest room. All bedrooms for guests shall be housed within one
(1)	principal building;

b.	The property shall be  served by public water and sewer facilities;

c.	There shall be one (1) full bathroom for every two (2) guest bedrooms,	and if there are an odd number of guest bedrooms, there shall be an additional half bath provided. The manager's quarters shall have separate, full bathroom facilities and may have separate cooking/ eating areas.

d.	There shall be one (1) central eating area for guests if on­ site  meals are provided. Guest rooms shall not have separate cooking or eating facilities. The serving of meals shall be  limited to the resident family and guests of the establishment.	Any meals served to guests shall  be included in the room rental package;

e.	The premises shall be managed by a person or persons who shall be permanent full-time residents within the structure housing the bedroom facilities. Non-resident employees shall be limited to two (2), in addition to the resident members of the family;






29
 

f.	Parking facilities shall consist of a combined total of one
(1)	parking  space  for  each  guest  bedroom,  plus  two  (2)
spaces for the managers/owners, plus one (1) space for each employee. Parking facilities shall be located to the rear of the guest home and shall be screened from the roadway and adjacent properties by fencing and/or screen plantings;

g.	For each road frontage, there shall be a maximum of one
(1)	free-standing or projecting sign.  Said sign shall be no
larger than six (6) square feet in area and identify only the name of the Guest Home and its proprietor(s);

h.	The  maximum  uninterrupted  length  of  stay  at  a  guest house shall be fourteen (14) days;

i.	The use of any amenities provided by the guest house such as swimming pool or tennis courts shall be restricted in use to the resident family and guests of the establishment.

6.	Group Day Care Homes provided that the following conditions are met:

a.	Applicant shall obtain written approval or licensure of the Group Day Care Home from the Penna. Dept. of Welfare.

b.	Day care shall be provided by the resident of the home and a maximum of two (2) non-resident assistants.

c.	A minimum of three (3) off-street parking spaces shall be provided in addition to the required for the residence.

d.	Loading and unloading of children from vehicles shall only be permitted on the driveway or on the approved parking area.

e.	The size of sign permitted shall be limited to that allowed for a home occupation.

SECTION 6.03. GENERAL DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS. All principal buildings, structures and uses erected or established after the adoption date of this Ordinance shall comply with the following requirements.

A.		Existing farms and properties shall be permitted the following number of lots or principal  uses,  based  upon  farm  or property  size  at  the  date  of  adoption  of




30
 

Ordinance Number 97, dated November 24, 1981. Lots or uses shall remain with the parent tract.

 

SIZE OF FARM OR PROPERTY
0 acres to less than 10 acres
 
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF LOTS OR USES
Any number in accordance with Section 6.04
 

10 acres to less than 50 acres	3
50 acres to less than 100 acres	4
100 acres to less than 175 acres	5
175 acres to less then  250 acres	6
250 acres to less than 400 acres	7
400 acres or more	8

Existing unsubdivided dwellings and principal, non-residential uses located on the farm or property shall be considered part of the permitted allotment. Furthermore, the maximum permitted number of lots or uses shall apply whether or not individual lots are subdivided at the time the uses are established. Resubdivision of lots created after the adoption date of this Ordinance shall also be subject to the maximum allotment determined for the original farm or property.

B.	All applications for Building and Zoning Permits to erect a single family dwelling or   principal,  non-residential  use  structure   on  unsubdivided   land   and   all applications for subdivision shall be accompanied by an  agricultural  plan identifying the following:

1.	Size, shape and dimensions of the farm or property; size and location of all existing buildings; and size, location and use of all proposed buildings or lots.

2.	Lots or uses previously approved under these regulations.

3.	Land under active cultivation and land in woodlots or forests.

4.	Soil information for the farm or property, including soil series and soil capability class, subclass and unit as classified within the 1981 Soil Survey of Lebanon County, Pennsylvania and Agricultural Handbook #210 of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conversation Service.





31
 

5.	When a subdivision occurs, a notation as to which lot addition or lots carry with it a right of further uses or lots shall be included on the Deed to the newly created lots.

C.	Applications to erect or establish a use or subdivide a farm or property shall be reviewed subject to the following criteria:

1.	All uses or lots shall be  established  or  located  on  non-prime farmland (Soil Capability Classes III-VIII), when such  land  is available; and

2.	The least suitable farmland (highest numbered Soil Capability Unit) shall be utilized for development in all cases unless the applicant can demonstrate its unsuitability for the proposed use. When a soil has been determined to be unsuitable because of slope, drainage, flooding,	sewage disposal deficiencies or other physical characteristics, then the least suitable remaining farmland shall be utilized for development, and

3.	When a farm or property is comprised entirely of prime farmland (Soil Capability Classes I and II), then the least suitable or least prime land shall be utilized for development; and

4.	Lots and uses shall be grouped, where possible, adjacent to other similar lots and uses to avoid a scattering of development. Lots and uses shall not be located near intensive farming operations. Sub­ division or development shall not necessitate any new streets, except that one(l) lot or use may be accessed via an unimproved fifty (50) foot right-of-way: and

5.	Application for the last lot or use permitted within a farm or property shall be accompanied by a proposed deed for the residual farm land or property. Said proposed deed shall contain a restriction to identify that subdivision and development allotments have been used and that no further subdivision, development or establishment of additional principal uses shall be permitted. Said restrictive deed shall be recorded within thirty (30) days of subdivision or permit approval for the last allowable lot or use. Failure to record said deed, subsequent removal of the deed restriction or subsequent subdivision	or establishment of additional uses or lots shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance, punishable in accordance with Article 27 of the Ordinance.






32
 

6.	Land additions  to non-agricultural land shall be considered a lot, unless the South Lebanon Township's Sewage Enforcement Officer justifies an adjacent property owner needs additional land for sewer purposes.

7.	A limit of one use or lot may be allocated every seven (7) years of continuous ownership, if any use or  lot  remains  from  the  quota allocated to the original parent tract. Uses of lots  shall  not  be accumulated over a period of time, as there shall be seven (7) years between uses or lots. Property owners as of the effective date of the adoption of this subsection may utilize one use or lot commencing the adoption of this subsection.




SECTION 6.04.	LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.	A lot area, lot width, lot coverage, yard depths, and building height satisfying the requirements of the following table, unless otherwise specified heretofore in Section 6.02 and 6.03, shall be provided for every dwelling unit and/or principal non-residential building or use hereafter erected, altered, or established in this district.





































33
 

DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS

 
LOT  REQUIREMENTS

MIN.   MAX.	MIN.	MAX. LOT	LOT	LOT	LOT
 
YARD  REQUIREMENTS


ONE	TOTAL
 
USE


















RESIDENTIAL
 
AREA	AREA	WIDTH COVERAGE	FRONT
 
SIDE	SIDES   REAR
 

 
Single Family Detached
 
1	2	125'	20%
acre	acre
 
50'	20'	50'
 



*Maximum lot area shall not apply to lot additions for agricultural purposes and permitted use specified within Sections 6.02A through 6.02H of this Ordinance or any multiple usage or subdivision in which each separate use or subdivided plot exceeds 100 acres.

No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 )stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height unless authorized as a Special Exception.

SECTION 6.05  MINIMUM  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.	Off  -street
parking shall be provided in accordance with Article 15 of this Ordinance.

SECTION   6.06	SIGNS  AND  ADVERTISING   STRUCTURES.	Sign   shall   be
permitted in accordance with Article 16 of this Ordinance.

SECTION	6.07	SUPPLEMENTARY	DISTRICT	REGULATIONS.	The
Supplementary District  Regulations  in Article  13 shall apply, where  applicable,  as
additional requirements for this district.







34
 

SECTION	6.08	ENVIRONMENTAL	IMPROVEMENTS	AND	ENERGY
CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS.	The  environmental   and  energy  requirements
in Article 14 shall apply where applicable, as additional requirements for this district.





























































35
 

ARTICLE 7

R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

SECTION  7.01.	INTENT.	The regulations for these districts are designed to accommodate and encourage low density development, primarily residential in nature, consistent with the characteristics of the prevailing open environment of the Township. Development is restricted to low density, single family residential development and related compatible uses designed to serve the  residential community.

SECTION 7.02 PERMITTED USES

A.	Single family detached dwellings.

B.	Group Family Dwellings subject to the conditions listed in Section 6.02(J) of this Ordinance.

C.	Churches and similar places of worship and parish houses.

D.	Publicly owned nursery, kindergarten, elementary, middle, and high schools.

E.	Public parks and public playgrounds.

F.	Municipal buildings and community facilities such as police and fire protection facilities, museums, libraries, etc. provided that they do not contain restaurants, cafes, membership clubs or other places offering food, beverages, dancing or entertainment.

G.	Agriculture,  truck  farming,  gardening,  flower  and  tree  nurseries,  and  non­ commercial greenhouses, but not including animal husbandry or pet kennels.

H.	Guest  Homes  subject  to  the  conditions  listed  in  Section  6.02(M)  (5)  of  this Ordinance.

I.	Accessory uses and buildings incidental to any of the above permitted uses as provided for in Article 13 of this Ordinance.

J.	Home occupations as regulated in Article 13 of this Ordinance.

K.	Family Day Care Homes provided they are subject to the conditions listed in
Section 6.02(k) of this Ordinance.








36
 

L.	Upon approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, the following Special Exception uses  are permitted provided  the use complies with the conditions listed herein and the applicable requirements specified in Article 20 of this Ordinance:

1.	Hospitals, nursing, or convalescent homes and cemeteries.

2.	Clinics, professional offices and banks, subject to these requirements:

a.	The architectural design of the structure shall be harmonious with other structures in the neighborhood.

b.	Parking shall not be permitted in the front yard.

3.	Non-profit, church related homes for the elderly, including (1) custodial or sanitarium type of care, (2) intermediate care involving dormitory areas with common meal facilities, and (3) individual residential living quarters with separate cooking facilities, provided that the following conditions are met:

a.	A subdivision and/or land development plan shall be filed in  accordance  with  the  Subdivision  Ordinance  of  South Lebanon Township.

b.	Self-sufficient dwelling units for permanent guests of the home, which are separate and detached from the principal care facility, shall conform in all respects with the requirements for such dwelling units specified in the R-2, Medium		Density Residential District, including town house	and garden apartment requirements where applicable.		Although they may be planned as clustered housing, such residential development shall be designed to facilitate		subdivision or sale of individual units in accordance with the applicable lot area, lot  width,  and yard requirements of Section 8.03 of the Ordinance.

4.	Semi-public and private recreation uses such as golf courses, country clubs, swimming and/or tennis clubs provided that no principal building, accessory structure, pool, tennis court, or parking area is located within one hundred (100) feet of any road right-of-way line or lot line. Additionally, swimming pools associated with these uses shall be completely enclosed with a continuous, impenetrable fence no less than six (6) feet in height above the ground level and the fence shall be equipped with a lockable gate.




37
 

5.	Privately owned nursery, elementary, middle, and high schools.

6.	Private institutions of higher education, convents,  and monasteries provided that the following conditions are met:

a.	A minim um lot area of three (3) acres for the first 300 students or enrollees plus one (1) acre for each additional 100 students or enrollees.

b.	Dormitory or residential quarters shall be located minimum of 100 feet from any property line.

7.	Non-intensive	animal  husbandry   or  pet   kennels   subject  to  the following conditions:

a.	A minimum lot size of ten (10) acres shall be provided.

b.	Building in which livestock, poultry, insects, or other than customary household pets are kept shall be no closer than two hundred (200) feet to any lot line or road right-of-way.

c.	No storage of manure, odor, or dust producing substances shall be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of any lot line and one hundred (100) feet of a road right-of-way.

8.	Group Day Care Homes subject to the conditions listed in Section 6.02(M6) of this Ordinance.

9.	Day Care Centers provided that the following conditions are met:

a.	The property shall be served by public water and sewer facilities.

b.	Applicant shall obtain written approval or license for the Day Care Center from the Penna. Dept. of Public Welfare.

c.	Plans for the construction or modification of the facility shall be reviewed/approved by the Penna. Dept. of Labor and Industry and written proof of said  review/approval shall be provided.

d.	Unloading and loading of children from vehicles shall only be permitted on the driveway or on the approved parking area.





38
 

e.	Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one (1) space for each employee, plus four (4) spaces for the first ten (10) licensed capacity slots for children, plus one (1) space for each additional ten (10) slots for children approved for the center. Off-street parking shall also be provided for vehicles owned and operated by the facility as a part of its day care services.

f.	Play areas for children shall be fenced and shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet to any lot line or road right-of­ way, except that play area setbacks may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet from side and rear lot lines when a dense	screen planting is established and  maintained within the setback area.

SECTION 7.03. LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS. A lot area, lot width, lot coverage, yard coverage, yard depths, and building height satisfying the requirements of the following table, unless otherwise  specified  heretofore  in Section 7.02, shall be provided for every dwelling unit, and/or principal non­ residential building or use hereafter  erected,  altered, or established  in this district.





































39
 

DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS

LOT REQUIREMENTS	YARD REQUIREMENTS

MIN	MIN	MAX
LOT	LOT	LOT	ONE	TOTAL
USE        AREA     WIDTH COVERAGE    FRONT    SIDE    SIDES    REAR

NON-RESIDENTIAL
BUILDING	3 acre	250'	20%	100'	20'	40'	75'

SINGLE FAMILY 	 DETACHED 	
No Public
Utilities	1acre	150'	25%	40'	20'	40'	30'

Public Water
or Sewer	15,000	120'	30%	30'	10'	20'	30'
sq. ft.

Public Water
and Sewer	12,500	100'	30%	30'	10'	20'	30'
sq. ft.


No  building  shall exceed  two  and  one-half  (2  Y2)  stories  or  thirty-five  (35)  feet  in  heigl unless  authorized  as a Special Exception.


SECTION 7.04   MINIMUM  OFF-STREET  PARKING  REQUIREMENTS.	Off-street
parking shall be provided in accordance with Article 15 of this Ordinance.

SECTION  7.05	SIGNS  AND  ADVERTISING   STRUCTURES.	Signs   shall   be
permitted in accordance with Article 16 of this Ordinance.

SECTION	7.06	SUPPLEMENTARY	DISTRICT	REGULATIONS.	The
Supplementary District  Regulations  in Article  13 shall apply, where  applicable,  as
additional requirements for this district.

SECTION	7.07	ENVIRONMENTAL	IMPROVEMENTS	AND	ENERGY
CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS.	The environmental and energy requirements in Article 14 shall apply, where applicable, as additional requirements for this district.









40
 


ARTICLE 8

R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

SECTION 8.01	INTENT.	The regulations of the R-2 Residential District are designed to promote the development of a variety of medium density housing types in areas where necessary municipal services, commercial facilities and other community amenities are available.

SECTION 8.02 PERMITTED USES.

A.	Single family detached and semi-detached dwellings.

B.	Group Family Dwellings subject to the conditions listed in Section 6.02(J) of this Ordinance.

C.	Two-family detached and semi-detached dwellings.

D.	Town houses, provided that the following requirements are met:

1.	Minimum lot area of 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit.

2.	Maximum development density shall not exceed seven (7) dwelling units per gross acre.

3.	Minimum lot width of twenty-four (24) feet.

4.	A minimum front and rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet each, as measured from the property line or any paved parking area, shall be provided for each town house unit.

5.	Side yard minimums of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided from the unattached sides of buildings; however, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided from any paved parking areas. A minimum distance of thirty-five (35) feet shall also separate each group of town houses.

6.	No group of town houses shall consist of more than six (6) attached units, with no more than two (2) continuous dwellings with the same front setback, each variation of the setback being at least four (4) feet.	Developers are encouraged to use variety in design and construction to enhance appearance.

7.	Detached accessory buildings or structures used for storage only shall  be  permitted  on  individual  lots provided  the  size  of  the



41
 

structure does not exceed eighty (80) square feet and the height is no more than eight feet six inches. This provision shall apply to townhouses which exist as of March 31, 1996. All townhouses constructed after March 31, 1996 shall provide for storage areas which shall be attached to the principal structure, provided the exterior of the attached structure is constructed of the same material as the principal structure and provided all requirements of this ordinance are met. Garages and other normal accessory structures may be attached to the principal structure of each individual lot provided all of the requirements of this Ordinance are met. Attached accessory buildings and structures for common use by the entire development shall be permitted on common areas as per Article 13 of this Ordinance.

8.	Townhouse development shall be in compliance with Section 8.04 of this Ordinance.

9.	The site shall be served by public water  and sewer facilities, with design for individual unit service where lots are to be sold.

10.	Off-street parking as required by Article 15 of this Ordinance, shall be located within 150 feet of the dwelling unit to be served.

11.	Town house development requires the submission of a subdivision plan and compliance with the Subdivision Ordinance of South Lebanon Township.

E.	Garden Apartments, provided that the following conditions are met:

I.	Maximum development density shall not exceed twelve (12) dwelling units per gross acre.

2.	A minimum site size of 24,000 square feet  shall be provided  for garden apartment development

3.	Garden apartment buildings shall contain at least four (4) but not more than sixteen (16) dwelling units in a single structure.

4.	A minimum  setback of thirty (30) feet shall be provided from any road  right-of-way,  driveway, or paved parking area.   Additionally, the  guiding setback line shall be a minim um distance of thirty (30) feet from any front, side, or rear property line.

5.	A minimum isolation distance of fifty (50) feet shall be provided between garden apartment buildings.



42
 

6.	The site shall be served by public water and public sewer facilities.

7.	If provided, balconies shall not extend more then eight (8) feet from the face of any principal building and the minimum floor area of any balcony shall be 72 square feet.

8.	If patios are provided at ground level, they shall be designed for visual privacy and shall be minimum of 150 square feet.

9.	Garden apartment development shall be in compliance with Section
8.04 of this Ordinance.

10.	Off-street parking as required by Article 15 of this Ordinance, shall be located within 150 feet of the dwelling unit to be served. Furthermore, parking facilities and driveways shall be located  no less than twenty-five (25) feet from any road right-of-way  and ten
(10) feet from all other property lines.

11.	Garden apartment development requires the submission of a subdivision plan and compliance with the Subdivision Ordinance of South Lebanon Township.

F.	Churches and similar places of worship and parish houses.

G.	Public parks and public playgrounds.

H.	Municipal buildings and community facilities such as police and fire protection facilities, museums, libraries, and the like, provided that they do not contain restaurants, cafes, and the like, membership clubs or other places offering food, beverages, dancing or entertainment

I.	Publicly owned nursery, kindergarten, elementary, middle, and high schools.

J.	Guest  Homes  subject  to  the  conditions  listed  in  Section  6.02(M)(5)  of  this Ordinance.

K.	Family Day  Care Homes provided  subject to the conditions listed in Section 6.02(K) of this Ordinance.

L.	Accessory uses and buildings incidental to any of the above permitted  uses as provided for in Article 13 of this Ordinance.

M.	Home occupations as regulated in Article 13 of this Ordinance.






43
 

N.	Upon approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, the following Special Exceptions uses  are permitted provided the use complies with the conditions listed herein and the applicable requirements specified in Article 20 of this Ordinance:

1.	Special Exception uses specified in Section 7.02(L)(#l through #9) of the R- 1, Low Density Residential District, subject to the conditions stated therein.

2.	Mobile home parks and subdivisions subject to the following regulations:

a.	Scope -  All mobile home parks and subdivisions hereafter established in the R-2 District and all expansions or alterations to existing mobile home parks and subdivisions are subject to all applicable regulations of this section.

b.	Use of Terms - A development subject to these regulations shall be know as a park in this section unless specified differently in the text.

c.	Park Size - each park hereafter designed shall be at least ten
(10) acre.  The park shall not be divided by any public street or alley but may contact any street or alley.  Hereafter, any street
or alley so contacted  shall be  know  as a perimeter  street or alley.

d.	Density - each park shall have a maximum density of six (6) mobile homes per gross acre, and no individual mobile home lot in a mobile home subdivision shall be less than 3,000 square feet.

e.	Yard Requirements, Mobile Homes - No mobile home shall be located at less than the following:

1.	One Hundred (100) feet from any perimeter street line or perimeter lot line;

2.	Twenty (20) feet from the edge of a park street;

3.	Twenty (20) feet from any other mobile home;

4.	Ten (10) feet from interior lot lines.

f.	Yard Requirements, All Other Buildings - No service building or accessory building for park residents' general use shall be located at less than the following:



44
 

1.	One Hundred (100) feet from a perimeter street line:

2.	One Hundred (100) feet from a perimeter lot line;

3.	Forty (40) feet from any mobile home.

g.	Park Street - A street installed exclusively for park residents' use	shall have a durable surface capable of supporting residential	traffic and shall conform to the following regulations:

1.	A park street shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide for  one-way and at least twenty-four (24) feet wide for two way traffic when all parking is provided off­ street. A traffic pattern in the park shall allow for efficient access to all points;

2.	Each mobile home site shall be accessible from a park street; however, designated parking for  a site may be provided off the site as provided herein;

3.	Each park shall be provided with at least two (2) points of ingress/egress for vehicular traffic from public streets;

4.	No more than two (2) park streets shall intersect at any one point;

5.	Park streets designated to provide parking for sites shall be widened by eight (8) feet on each side to be used for parking.

h.	Walkways - A walkway with paved surface shall be installed as follows:

1.	Between each mobile home stand, as described herein, and a park street;

2.	Between mobile home sites and common parking areas where the site parking is designated.









45
 

1.	Off-Street Parking

1.	Each mobile home site shall be provided with two (2) parking spaces, as required by Article  15;

2.	Parking spaces for a given site shall be adjacent to each other;

3.	Parking spaces which are provided in a common parking lot shall be appropriately marked for a specific site and shall not be farther than 150 feet from the site to be served;

4.	Parking spaces shall be accessible from a park street only.




J.	Utility Services

1.	Each mobile  home site shall be served by either a public water system or a private, Department of Environmental	Protection approved, community water system which supplies water at a pressure comparable to the municipal system;

2.	Each mobile home site shall be served by a connection	to the public sewer system or to a centralized		sewer system approved by the Department of Environmental Protection;

3.	Each mobile home site shall be served by a connection to an electrical distribution system;

4.	Any transmission line within the limits of the park for	telephone service, electricity, or centralized television reception shall be buried.

k.	Common Open Space Areas

1.	The park shall be provided with common open space areas not less then 15% of gross park area, which are for the enjoyment of all park residents. The areas may include but are not limited to such facilities as service  buildings  for  meeting  room,  laundromats,



46
 


storage cubicles for residents either individually or collectively, playgrounds, swimming pools, fields and courts for various organized team sports, and landscaped areas for passive recreation.

2.	The park shall have at least half its common area at one continuous location, and not more than half of its common area may be in the buffer yard;

3.	No interior play area for children shall be less than 1000 square feet;

4.	The park open space areas may contain a wide variety of facilities at the discretion of the owner; however, it is the intent of this Ordinance that all parks	contain well-maintained improvements for recreation for all ages.

1.	Mobile Home Site Improvements

1.	Each mobile home site shall be provided with a patio area adjacent to the mobile home. The patio shall be at least 200 square feet in size;

2.	The patio shall be properly drained and shall have a durable surface such as concrete or wood;

3.	Each mobile home shall be provided with a skirting of durable material which shall entirely enclose the area beneath the mobile home.

SECTION 8.03	LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.	A lot area, lot width, lot coverage, yard depths and building height satisfying the requirements of the following table, unless otherwise specified heretofore in Section 8.02, shall be provided for every dwelling unit and/or principal non-residential building or use hereafter erected, altered or established in this district.















47
 


DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS

LOT REQUIREMENTS	YARD REQUIREMENTS

	MIN.	MIN	

USE	LOT AREA	LOT
WIDTH	
FRONT	ONE SIDE	TOTAL
SIDES	
REAR

NON-RESIDENTIAL						
BUILDING	3 acre	250'	100'	20'	40'	75'
 

RESIDENTIAL
No Public utilities
 
---------------
 

 
Single Family
Detached	1acre	150'
 


30'
 


15'	30"	30'
 
----	_,,	.. 	
 
------------------·-------·-----------
 






sq. feet
-·-----·-·--------------·---------·-·---------······--·-····-··-···-----·--·--------····-····-·---·--·-····-·        ·-······---·-···--·--··---·--··------------··-·-·--·-----··-···-------

RESIDENTIAL 	
Public water and sewer	

Single Family Detached	
9,000
sq. ft.	
90'	
30'	
10'	
20'	
25'

Single Family Semi-Detached	
8,000
sq. ft.	
80'	
30'	
10'*	
20'*	
25'

Two-family Semi-Detached	
3,000
sq. ft.	
30'	
30'	
10'*	
20'*	
20'


Two Family	4,000	50'	30'	10'	20'	20'
Detached	sq. ft.					
Town House	(SEE SECTION 8.02)

Garden Apartment	(SEE SECTION 8.02) 	

*Yard requirements apply to unattached sides of buildings.

No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 ¥2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height unless authorized by a Special Exception.




48
 


LOT COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS SHALL BE AS FOLLOWS:  USE	MAX. LOT COVERAGE
 
NON-RESIDENTIAL  BUILDING

RESIDENTIAL BUILDING
 
30%

40%
 




SECTION  8.04	SUPPLEMENTAL  TOWN  HOUSE  AND  GARDEN  APARTMENT
STANDARDS.	The following design criteria shall apply as additional requirements for town house and garden apartment development:

A.	The developer should vary architectural treatments within apartment projects, individual apartments, and between dwelling units in a town house development. Variations may include those of exterior elevation, building setbacks, provisions of balconies, architectural details, pitch of roof, exterior materials, or use of color.

B.	Variety and flexibility in design layout and arrangement of buildings, parking areas, services, recreation areas, common open space, and planting that fully consider the particular physical characteristics of site and natural amenities is highly desired.

C.	Screen plantings shall be provided where multiple dwelling unit  land developments abut any non-residential use or where such developments abut any single family residential or other zoning district. Screen plantings shall be designed, located, and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Article 14 of this Ordinance.

D.	All utility lines within a town house or garden apartment development shall be placed underground.

E.	All open space, green areas, patios,  courts, and buffer yards shall be landscaped and maintained to insure the  safety,  privacy,  and comfort  of  town  house  and garden  apartment  residents.

F.	Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be well screened on three (3) sides and contained in covered, vermin proof containers.

SECTION 8.05 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.  In addition
to the requirements posted in Article 8, the off-street parking regulations of Article 15 shall apply where applicable to the uses permitted in this district.






49
 


SECTION 8.06 SIGNS   AND    ADVERTISING	STRUCTURES.	Signs	shall	be
permitted in accordance with Article 16 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 8.07. SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS. The Supplementary
District  Regulations  in  Article	13  shall  apply,  where  applicable,  as  additional requirements for this district.

SECTION 8.08	ENVIROMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS AND ENERGY CONSERVA­
TION REQUIREMENTS.  The environmental and energy requirements in Article 14
shall apply, where applicable, as additional requirements for this district.



















































50
 


ARTICLE 9

C-1, GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT

SECTION 9.01 INTENT. The regulations of this district are designed to accommodate commercial activity within the township. Since these enterprises are for the most part dependent on traffic generated by a major thoroughfare, these uses are grouped together to facilitate shopping via automobile. The requirements contained in this article are designed to promote safe and expedient conveyance of the resulting high traffic volumes.

SECTION 9.02  PERMITTED USES.

A.	Stores for the retailing of all consumer goods not otherwise prohibited by law.

B.	Multiple  commercial  use  complexes  and  shopping  centers  provided  that  the following conditions are met:

1.	The multiple commercial use complex or shopping center shall consist of a group of two or more commercial uses, planned, designed, and constructed	as one (1) principal structure. Each commercial establishment within the complex  shall share at least one (1) party wall with another establishment.

2.	The minimum lot size shall be determined by the total gross floor area of the principal structure, according to the following table.

TOTAL GROSS FLOOR AREA	MINIMUM LOT AREA REQUIRED

 
0 - 20,000 sq. ft.

20,001 - 40,000 sq. ft.
Greater than 40,000 sq. ft.
 
lAcre

2 Acres
2 Acres plus 1acre for each 15,000 sq. ft. (or fraction thereof) in
excess of the initial 40,000 sq. ft.
of floor area.
 

3.	Such use shall comply in all respects with the lot width, lot coverage, yard	and building height requirements of Section 9.04 of this Ordinance.

C.	Personal service shops including barber shops, beauty shops, tailors, shoe repair, dry cleaning, laundromats, and the like.

D.	Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.



51
 

E.	Banks, savings and loan associations, finance agencies, and other offices providing business or professional services.

F.	Messenger, dispatch, express, and courier services.

G.	Taxi and bus passenger stations.

H.	Mortuary and undertaking establishments.

I. Indoor amusement enterprises such as arenas, bowling alleys, dance halls, and other recreation or entertainment establishments.

J.	Drive-in movie theaters.

K.	Restaurant facilities of all types, including drive-in, drive through or fast food, tea rooms, cafes, and other places serving food or beverages, including private, membership, or social clubs and beverage distribution centers.

L.	Printing and publishing firms.

M.	Shops for contractors, plumbers, heating, painting, and upholstering specialists.

N.	Hotels, motels, and boarding houses.

0. Automobile dealers and automobile washes.

P.	Gasoline stations and repair garages subject to the following regulations:

1.	No repair work shall be performed out of doors.

2.	All  automotive  parts,  dismantled  and  derelict  vehicles,  and  similar
·artides shall be stored only within an enclosed building.

3.	All gasoline and petroleum pumps shall be located outside of buildings, no  less than thirty-five (35) feet from any road right-of-way line or property line.

4.	All fuel, oil, or similar combustible petroleum product  storage tanks shall be located under ground  at least thirty-five  (35) feet from any road right-of-way line or lot line.

5.	Automotive vehicles without valid, current license plates and state inspection	shall be restricted according to Section 13.17 of this Ordinance.

Q.	Self-service storage facilities.



52
 


R.	All other uses which in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator are similar to the above uses and in harmony with  the intent of the regulations  for this  district. When a proposed use is not sufficiently similar to enable the Zoning Administrator to  make a ·ruling, the Zoning Hearing Board  may  make  a  determination  as authorized in Section 4.05 of this Ordinance.

S.	Upon approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, the following Special Exception uses are permitted provided that the use complies with the conditions listed herein and the applicable requirements specified in Article 20 of this Ordinance.

1.	Automobile body shops provided that the following conditions are met:

a.	All work shall be conducted indoors.

b.	Paint booths shall be adequately filtered and vented to minimize exhaust of noxious fumes.

c.	Flammable and/or combustible materials shall be stored within a fireproof enclosure within the principal structure or within an accessory building located no less than fifty (50) feet from any lot line.

d.	Outdoor storage of auto parts or equipment shall not be permitted at any time.

2.	Lumber, coal and fuel distribution yards provided the following conditions are met:

a.	All principal and accessory buildings, storage areas, scales, distribution areas, and parking facilities shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any lot line or road right-of-way line.

b.	Fuel storage tanks shall be placed underground at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot line or road right-of-way line or above ground at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot line or road right-of-way line.

SECTION 9.03 PERFORMANCE REQUIRED. All of the above listed uses must be non-objectionable in terms of smoke or dust emission,  odors,  noise,  heat,  vibration, visual impact, or glare, and shall not be injurious or have an adverse  effect  on adjacent areas or the township  as  a  whole.  Should  the  Zoning  Administrator  feel there is any possibility of the above mentioned dangers, the applicant must prove the contrary to the Zoning Hearing Board as an Administrative Review procedure before a permit  is issued.



53
 




SECTION 9.04 LOT AREA. BUILDING HEIGHT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.

A lot area, lot width,  lot coverage, yard  depth, and building height  satisfying the requirements of the following table, unless otherwise specified heretofore in Section
9.02  and9.05,  shall  be  provided  for  every  dwelling  unit  and/or  principal  non­ residential building or use hereafter erected, altered, or established in this district.

DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS

LOT REQUIREMENTS	YARD REQUIREMENTS 	

MIN. LOT	MIN. LOT	MAX. LOT	ONE	TOTAL	
AREA	WIDTH	COVERAGE	FRONT  SIDE	SIDES	REAR

 	!Acre	200'	50%	60'	30'	60'	30' 	

A.	Where a side or rear yard adjoins a residential district, said yards shall be no less than fifty (50) feet.

B.	No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 %) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height unless authorized as a Special Exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.

SECTION 9.05	MINIMUM  OFF-STREET  PARKING  AND  LOADING  REQUIRE­
MENTS.  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Article 15 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 9.06	SIGNS  AND  ADVERTISING   STRUCTURES.  Signs  shall  be  per­
mitted in accordance with Article 16 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 9.07	SUPPLEMENTARY	DISTRICT	REGULATIONS.	The	Supple­
mentary District Regulations in Article 13 shall apply, where applicable, as additional requirements for this district.

SECTION 9.08	ENVIRONMENTAL  IMPROVEMENTS  AND  ENERGY  CONSER­
VATION REQUIREMENTS.	The environmental and energy requirements in Article
14  shall  apply,  where	applicable,   as  additional  requirements   for  this  district.












54
 




ARTICLE 10

0 & I. OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT

SECTION 10.01 INTENT. This district is designed to promote and facilitate a variety of office and institutional uses in an area where public utilities and vehicular access are available or may be readily extended.

SECTION 10.02  PERMITTED USES.

A.	Business and professional offices.

B.	Banks, savings and loan associations and other finance agencies.

C.	Medical, dental, and veterinary clinics, laboratories and associated pharmacies.

D.	Hospital, sanitariums, nursing, and convalescent homes.

E.	Public  and private  schools,  including  colleges  and  other  institutions  of  higher learning.

SECTION 10.03  LOT AREA. BUILDING HEIGHT. AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
A lot width, lot coverage, yard depths and building height satisfying the requirements of the following table, shall be provided for every principal use or building hereafter erected, altered or established in this district.

DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS

 	LOT REQUIREMENTS	YARD REQUIREMENTS
 

Min. Lot
 

Min. Lot
 

Max. Lot
 

One	Total
 
USE	Area	Width	Coverage%	Front   Side	Sides  Rear

NON-RESI-
DENTIAL	1acre	150'	40%	50'	20'	40'	40'



No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 112) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height unless minimum front, side, and rear setbacks are increased one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of building height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet. However, in no instance shall the building height exceed seven and one-half (7 112) stories or ninety
(90) feet.





55
 


SECTION 10.04  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.   Off-street
parking shall be provided in Accordance with Article 15 of this Ordinance.

SECTION   10.05	SIGNS  AND  ADVERTISING   STRUCTURES.   Signs  shall  be
permitted in accordance with Article 16 of this Ordinance.

SECTION	10.06  SUPPLEMENTARY   DISTRICT   REGULATIONS.	The	Supple­
mentary District Regulations in Article 13 shall apply, where applicable, as additional requirements for this district.

SECTION  10.07 ENVIRONMENTAL  IMPROVEMENTS  AND ENERGY  CONSER­
VATION REQUIREMENTS.	The environmental and energy requirements in Article 14 shall apply, where applicable, as additional requirements for this district.















































56
 



ARTICLE 11

I-1, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

SECTION 11.01 INTENT. These districts are designed to accommodate and promote wholesale activities, warehousing, and industrial operations  dependent on existing land uses, physical conditions, and the availability of nearby municipal utilities and transport facilities. The district accommodations extensive industrial  activities in these areas so as to minimize any detrimental effects that they might have on other uses in the Township and at the same time provides an industrial zone free of encroachment from other activities.

SECTION 11.02 PERMITTED USES.

A.	Any uses not otherwise prohibited by law of a  manufacturing,  fabricating, processing, compounding, or  treatment  nature  which,  in  the  opinion  of the Zoning Administrator, would be non-objectionable in terms of smoke or dust emission, odors, noise, or glare, and will not otherwise be injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare and will not have an adverse effect on adjacent areas. Should the Zoning Administrator feel that there is any likelihood of the aforementioned dangers or nuisances, the applicant shall prove the contrary to the Zoning Hearing Board in an Administrative Review before a permit is issued. In such  a case, the Township Planning Commission  shall be  notified  of the hearing in order to provide the Zoning Hearing Board with a recommendation.

B.	Warehousing and wholesaling establishments and storage yards, not including junk yards.

C.	Railroad, trucking, busing, and other transit facilities including storage, repair, and transfer operations.

D.	Automobile body shops, repair garages and gasoline stations provided that the following conditions are met:

1.	All gasoline and petroleum pumps shall  be  located  outside  of building, no less than thirty-five (35) feet from any road right-of­ way line or lot line.

2.	All fuel, oil or similar combustible petroleum product storage tanks shall be located under ground at least thirty-five (35) feet from any road right-of -way line or lot line.

a.	No mechanical or auto body repair work shall be performed out of doors.



57
 



3.	All automotive parts, dismantled and derelict vehicles, and similar articles or parts thereof shall be stored only within an enclosed building.

4.	Automotive vehicles without valid, current license plates and state inspection shall be restricted according to Section 13.17 of this Ordinance.

5.	Any structure housing  an  automobile  body  shop  shall  be  a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any lot line when located adjacent to any residential  district.

6.	Flammable and/or  combustible materials associated with the automobile body shop use shall be stored within a fireproof enclosure within the principal structure or within an accessory building located no less than fifty (50) feet from any lot line.

E.	Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any of the above permitted uses.

F.	Lumber  Distribution  Warehouse/Retail	Facility  provided  that  the  following conditions are met:

1.	All principal and accessory buildings, storage areas, scales, and distribution areas shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from  any road right-of-way  line and fifty (50) feet from any side and rear property lines. Additionally, parking facilities shall be a minimum of  fifty (50) feet from any road right-of-way line and/or side and rear property lines;

2.	All exterior storage of materials /products  shall be in enclosures which are fenced, secured, and maintained in good condition. Said fence shall be at least six (6) feet in height and impenetrable;

3.	All private drives within the facility must  be  improved  with  an asphalt, concrete or other similar hard surface, in accordance with ordinance requirements of the Township Supervisors;

4.	No activities shall discharge into the air hazardous amounts of dust or other particulate matter;

5.	Noise levels shall not exceed 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned property, or otherwise shall not exceed 70dBA




58
 



6.	Where the use abuts a residential district, the buffer area shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet and shall be planted with· a double-wide dense screen planting (minimum width of 10 feet) for the entire length of the residential district area.

G.	Laboratories for scientific or industrial research and development.

H.	Industrial Enterprise Offices, National and regional Corporate Headquarters, Computer, Clerical and Operations Centers for industrial enterprises subject to the following criteria:

1.	The industrial enterprise shall mean an enterprise other than a mercantile, commercial or retail enterprise.

2.	Office operations are designed to attract little or no customer or client traffic other than employees of the enterprise.

3.	No outdoor storage shall be permitted within the front or side yards.	In rear yards, all outdoor storage areas shall be screened from adjoining properties and roads.

I.	Communication facilities requiring transmission antennas, towers, radio or television stations, satellite earth stations, and similar uses provided the following conditions are met:

1.	All communication equipment, including antennas  and  their associated	structures or supports, shall meet principal building/structure setbacks and maximum height limitations and shall not be located in required buffer areas.

2.	All ground-mounted antennas shall be completely enclosed by a minimum eight (8) feet high fence topped by a minimum of one (1) foot of barbed wire strands.

3.	Antennas or towers and  their  associated  structures  or  supports shall be neutral in color and shall not contain or be a part of any form of advertising message or sign.

4.		Radiation emissions from communications equipment associated with the above uses shall not be detectable at or beyond the property line.

J.	Upon approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, the following Special Exception uses  are permitted  provided  that  the  use  complies with  the  conditions listed herein and the applicable requirements specified in Article 20 of this Ordinance:



59
 



1.	Automobile recycling and junk yards used for storage, wrecking, and  converting used or discarded materials provided that the following conditions are met:

a.	Minimum lot area of ten (10) acres.

b.	Such use shall be completely enclosed by an evergreen screen planting to be planted and maintained at a height of not less than eight (8) feet and backed by a solid fence not less than six (6) feet in height.

2.	Air fields, strips, or landing facilities and building accessories provided that the following conditions are met:

a.	Minimum lot area of ten (10) acres.

b.	Applicant shall submit a plot plan of the lot indicating the runway and approach area and existing residences located within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the runway.

c.	Runway shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential district, and no closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line or road right-of-way line.

d.	A description of equipment and facilities to be utilized, and a description of overall development plans for the lot shall be made available to the Zoning Hearing Board.

e.	The airport approach area shall be defined as a three hundred
(300) foot wide area lying within and below an inclined plan extending outward horizontally one thousand (1,000) feet at a
ratio of one (1) foot of height for each twenty (20) feet from each end of the runway. No building, structure or airport hazard shall exceed one (1) foot in height, for each twenty (20) feet  of  length  of  an  established  airport  runway,  with  no
structure or airport hazard to exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height anywhere within the lot.

f.	Any pulsating or intermittent lighting is prohibited.

g.	Flood lights, spot lights and other lighting devices shall be arranged or shielded so as to illuminate parallel to the ground and not in an upward direction.





60
 



h.	Any radio or electronic device shall be permitted only with approval	and   license   by   the   Federal   Communications
-Commission.

i.		All facilities of this nature shall conform and operate  under the	standards set by  the  FAA  and  the    Pennsylvania Aeronautical Commission.

J.		The Zoning Hearing Board may impose other conditions as are appropriate to public safety and welfare, including hours of operation, frequently of use and a location in relation to existing residences.

3.	Sandpits, gravel pits, removal of topsoil, and the excavation, extraction or removal of any natural resource) from the land or ground for any purpose, art ver:ui1rted t:1.bject to tne tallowing conditions:

a.	Application for the Special Exception shall be accompanied by an approved Department of Environmental Protection permit authorizing said activities.

b.	The proposed operation shall not adversely affect soil fertility, drainage, and lateral support of abutting land or other properties, nor shall it contribute to soil erosion by water or wind.

c.	Where any open excavation will have a depth of ten (10) feet or more and a slope of more than thirty (30) percent, there shall be an appropriate, protective fence with suitable gates where necessary, effectively blocking access to the area in which extraction is located. Such fence shall be located no less than fifty (50) feet from the edge of the excavation. All operations shall be screened from nearby residential uses as required by the Zoning Hearing Board.

d.	That portion of access roads located within one hundred (100) feet of any lot in residential use of lot zoned residentially shall be provided with a dustless surface. Access roads shall connect to collector or major road networks avoiding undue movement through residential areas.

e.	At all states of operations, proper drainage shall be provided to prevent the collection and stagnation of water and to prevent harmful effects upon surrounding properties.



61
 



f.	A site plan for rehabilitation, showing both existing and proposed final contours, shall be submitted. After any such operations, the site shall be made reusable for a use permitted in the Zoning District. Where topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for retention on the premises and shall be respread over the premises after the operation is terminated. Except where lakes are created and retained, the area shall be brought to final grade by a layer of earth at least two (2) feet deep or to original thickness, whichever is less, and capable of supporting vegetation. Fill shall be of an acceptable material.

SECTION 11.03	LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.	A lot area, lot width, lot coverage, yard depths, and building height satisfying the requirements of the following list, unless otherwise specified heretofore in this section or Section 11.02, shall be provided for every principal building or use hereafter erected, altered,  or established in this district.

A.	LOT AREA. LOT WIDTH AND COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS

1.	Minimum lot area - 2 acres

2.	Minimum lot width - 200 feet

3.	Maximum lot coverage - 50%

B.	YARD REGULATIONS - For every principal or accessory building or use in the Industrial District, the minimum yard regulations shall be as follows:

1.	Required front yards, measured from the road right-of-way line (lot line) to the building, are as follows:

a.	A depth of not less than  100 feet along any road right-of-way.

b.	A depth of 150 feet if said front yard is across the street from a residential district.

2.	Required side yards, measured from the lot line to the building line,  are as follows:

a.	Not  less  than  twenty  (20)  feet  on  each  side  of  the building.






62
 



b.	No building or structure shall be located less than 150 feet from any residentially zoned district.

3.	Rear yards of not less than thirty (30) feet shall be provided, except than no building or structure shall be located less than 150 feet from any residentially zoned district.

4.	All yards shall be appropriately landscaped and well maintained in accordance with Article 14 of this Ordinance.

C.	HEIGHT REGULATIONS - The height of any principal or accessory building shall not  exceed seventy-five (75) feet, except that chimneys, ·flagpoles, towers, water tanks, and other mechanical appurtenances may be built to a height not to exceed 125 feet above the finished grade when erected upon or as an integral part of the building.

SECTION 11.04	MINIMUM	OFF-STREET	PARKING	AND	LOADING
REQUIREMENTS.	Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article 15 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 11.05	SIGNS  AND  ADVERTISING   STRUCTURES.	Signs   shall  be
permitted in accordance with Article 16 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 11.06	SUPPLEMENTARY	DISTRICT	REGULATIONS.	The
Supplementary District Regulations in Article 13 shall apply, where applicable, as additional requirements for this district.

SECTION 11.07    ENVIRONMENTAL       IMPROVEMENTS       AND       ENERGY
CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS.	The environmental and energy requirements in Article 14 shall apply, where applicable, as additional requirements for this district.





















63
 



ARTICLE 12 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICTS
F-1, F-2, F-3 and F-4

SECTION 12.01 INTENT. These regulations are designed to prohibit or restrict construction of any permanent building or structure, or uses and activities in any Flood Plain District in order to prevent unnecessary loss of life or property from possible natural catastrophe, as well as, to protect stream valleys from ecologically detriment development that may contribute to a water pollution problem, create erosion in and around water courses and induce flooding conditions. In addition, these provisions are intended to prevent the creation of health and safety hazards, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and to minimize future flood damage.

SECTION 12.02  DEFINITIONS	OF   TERMS    UTILIZED	IN   FLOOD	PLAIN DISTRICTS.

A.	Alluvial Soils Maps - Soils maps prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service which indicate  the  location  of  soil types. Alluvial soils on these maps are soils of flood plans  that  are  sediment  deposits washed from upland  areas.   The presence  of an alluvial soil indicates that the land has been flooded at some previous point in time.

B.	Approximated Flood Plain District (F-1) - The Approximated Flood Plain District (F-1) shall be that flood plain area for which no specific flood profiles have been provided. Where the specific Base Flood Elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Flood Plain Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey Flood Prone Quadrangles, etc, the  applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques currently acceptable by the Federal Insurance Administrator (e.g., HEC-2). Consideration shall be given to the methods specified by the U.S. Water Resource Council's Technical Bulletin No. 17 or 17B. This elevation information shall be subject to review by the municipality  and other agencies that it shall designate such as the Corps of Engineers, the Department of Environmental Protection, a River Basin Commission, etc.

C.	Base Flood - The flood, also known as the 100 Year Flood, which has a one percent (1%) change of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; the flood which has been selected to serve as the basis upon which the flood plain management provisions of this and other ordinances have been prepared.




64
 



D.	Base Flood Elevation - The determination by the Federal Insurance Administrator of the water surface elevation of the Base Flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent .(1%) or greater change of occurrence in any given year.

E.	Camping, Short-Term - Location of a camping unit within any one (1) campground for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days in any one calendar month.

F.	Construction - The term "construction" shall include the building, reconstruction, extension, expansion, alteration, substantial improvements, erection or relocation of a building or structure, including manufactured homes, and gas or liquid storage tanks. For flood plain purposes, "new construction" includes structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a flood plain management regulation adopted by municipality.

G.	Development - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings, manufactured homes, or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or the storage of equipment or materials.

H.	Flood - A general and temporary inundation of water on normally dry land areas by water from waterway overflows or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

I. Flood Fringe (F-3) - The portion of the One Hundred (100) Flood Plain not included in the floodway. The basis for the outermost boundary of this district shall be the base flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). These areas are shown on the Floodway Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

J. Flood Plain - (1) A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation by water; (2) an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface water from any source. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the flood plain shall be considered to be the One Hundred Flood Plain which is a flood plain having a one percent (1%) change of being subject to the above conditions during any given year.

K.	Flood Plain Districts - The zoning districts that  establish the bounds of the Base Flood as identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator so that necessary flood plain management control measures can be instituted in flood plain area. These districts include the Approximated Flood Plain (F-1), Floodway (F-2), Flood Fringe (F-3), and Special Flood Plain (F-4) Districts.

L.	Floodway (F-2) - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas  that  must  be  reserved  to  discharge  the  Base  Flood  without  cumulatively



65
 


increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point.	The detailed study of the Base Flood provides specific flood profiles and allows for the delineation of both floodway and flood fringe areas within the bounds of the flood plain. The term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other available studies or sources of information for those flood plain areas where no floodway has been identified in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA.

M.	Historic Structure -Any structure that is:

1.	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Dept. of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

4.	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

a.) By  an  approved  state  program  as  determined  by  the Secretary of the Interior; or

b.) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

N.	Lowest Floor - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basements).
An unfinished or flood resistance enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered
a building's lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built in violation of the applicable non-election design requirements of this Ordinance and the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code.

0. Manufactured Home - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes (1) all mobile homes and (2)


66
 


camping trailers, recreational  vehicles, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

P.	Manufactur d Home Park and/or Subdivision - A lot or area which is a planned development and designated to contain two or more manufactured homes for rent or  for sale. Any lot or area proposed to utilize such design where individual manufactured home sites are proposed for sale shall be known as a manufactured home subdivision.

Q.	One Hundred (100) Year Flood (Base Flood) - A flood selected as the Base Flood that has a one percent  (1%) or greater change of occurring in any given year.

R.	Recreational Vehicle - A vehicular-type of portable structure which is 1) built on a single chassis, 2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, 3) self-propelled or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle,  and 4) primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreation, camping or travel or  seasonal  use  and not  as a permanent  dwelling.  The  term  recreational vehicle includes but is  not  limited   to  travel  trailers,  camping  trailers,   truck campers and self-propelled motor homes.

S.	Special Flood Plain District (F-4) - The Special Flood Plain District shall be that area identified as Zone AE on the Flood Insurance Study, where one hundred (100) year flood elevations have been provided, but no floodway has been delineated.

T.	Structure - A walled or roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank (principally above ground), a manufactured home, or any other man-made object usually assembled of interdependent  parts or components which is designed to have a more or less fixed locations, whether or not permanently attached at that location.

U.	Start of Construction - The first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation  on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure (other than a manufactured home) without a basement of poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For manufactured homes not within a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision, "start of construction" means the affixing of the manufactured home to



67
 



its permanent site. For manufactured homes within the manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivisions, "start of construction" is the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed. For a substantial improvements, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

V.	Substantial Damage Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

W.	Substantial Improvement - Any repair, reconstruction, alteration, or improvement (not including general maintenance or repair) of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either, (a) before the improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the substantial improvement is considered to have occurred when the first alterations of any wall ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct an existing violation of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications, which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".

X.	Toxic Materials - The following materials and substances  which  are  listed  in Section 38.7 of the Department of Community and Economic Development Flood Plain Management Regulations adopted pursuant to the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act (Act 1978-166) have been determined to be dangerous to human life;

1.	Acetone
2.	Ammonia
3.	Benzene
4.	Calcium Carbide
5.	Carbon Disulfide
6.	Celluloid
7.	Chlorine
8.	Hydrochloric acid



68
 



9.	Hydrocyanic acid
10.	Magnesium
11.	Nitric acid and oxides or nitrogen
12.	Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.)
13.	Phosphorus
14.	Potassium
15.	Pesticides, (including insecticides, fungicides, and codenticides)
16.	Sodium
17.	Sulfur and sulfur products
18.	Radioactive	substances,	insofar	as	such	substances	are	not	otherwise
regulated.

SECTION 12.03 DELINEATION OF DISTRICTS. The Flood Plain Districts shall include all areas of this municipality subject to inundation by flood waters of the Base Flood. The basis for the delineation of the four (4) Flood  Plain Districts (Approximated Flood Plain, Floodway, Flood Fringe and Special Flood Plain District) shall be the Official Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map (dated August 15, 1983) or the most recent revisions thereof) and the Official Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or for those areas where no floodway has been identified in the Official Flood Insurance Study, other available studies or sources of information.

Four (4) separate districts are necessary to equitably enforce flood plain management controls in the Flood Plain Districts. The Approximated Flood Plain District (F-1) shall include all areas of the municipality subject to inundation by flood waters of the Base Flood for which no specific flood profiles have been provided. The actual elevation and extent of the district is to be determined by the Base Flood Elevation. In order to determine the Base Flood Elevation, the following variety of sources of data shall be used:

A.  Other Official Flood Hazard Boundary or Floodway Maps.

B. Alluvial Soils Maps prepared by the U.S. Soil Conversation Services.

C.	Local data from the 1972 flood.

D.	Army Corps of Engineers - Flood Plain Information Reports.

E.	U.S. Geological Survey - Flood Prone Quadrangles.

F.	Other available sources of Flood Plain information.

In lieu of the previously mentioned, the municipality shall require the applicant to determine the Base Flood  Elevation with hydrologic  and hydraulic engineering




69
 


techniques.	Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analysis, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality or a qualified agent thereof. The actual elevation and extent of the district shall be determined by the Base Flood Elevation.

The Floodway District (F-2), where flood heights and velocities are greatest, must have more restrictive provisions to prevent encroaching development from elevating flood levels or creating more danger to life or destruction of property. It has been delineated for purposes of this Ordinance using criteria  that  a  certain  area within the flood plain must be capable of carrying the water of the Base Flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. The area included in this district are specifically defined in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on the accompanying Flood Boundary/Floodway Map. In the Flood Fringe District (F-3) where the dangers of flooding are generally of a lesser degree, more types of development may occur, but with necessary restrictions.  In a detailed study area, the Flood Fringe District shall be that area of the one hundred
(100) year flood plain not included in the Floodway District. The basis for the outermost boundary of the Flood Fringe District shall be the Base Flood Elevations contained in the flood profiles of the previously referenced Flood Insurance Study, and as shown on the accompanying maps.  The Special Flood Plain District (F-4), differs
from the above defined flood plain districts in that a base flood elevation has been provided for the one hundred (100) year flood, but a floodway has not been delineated.

All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments shall provide base flood delineations; however, subdivision proposals and other proposed new development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include actual base flood elevation data. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to provide the required base flood elevation data, in a form comparable to HEC-2, which shall be certified as accurate by a Registered Professional Engineer.

The delineation of the Flood Plain, Approximated Flood Plain, Floodway, Flood Fringe, and Special Flood Plain Districts may be revised by the municipal governing body natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, River Basis Commission, or other qualified agencies or individuals. However, prior to when the district bounds are to be changed, approval shall be obtained form the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and/or the River Basin Commission.

Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the Flood Plain Districts shall be made by the Zoning Officer. Where interpretation is needed concerning the exact location of any boundary of the Flood Plain Districts, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make the necessary determination after hearing all evidence presented by the person



70
 


or persons contesting the location of district boundaries. he burden of proof sha": be the responsibility of the appellant, and he shall provide any and all technical information to support his case.

SECTION 12.04 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. All uses, activities, construction, including manufactured homes, and other development occurring within the Approximated Flood Plain, Floodway, Flood Fringe or Special Flood Plain Districts shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and with all other applicable state and federal codes, ordinances and requirements, including but not limited to Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code and the South Lebanon Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

Under no circumstances shall any use, encroachment, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the stream channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.

No structures, including manufactured homes, or land shall hereinafter be used and no structures, including manufactured homes, shall be located, relocated, constructed and reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered or substantially improved except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this Ordinance and any applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance.

All permitted uses shall be regulated by the provisions of the nearest zoning district as shown on the Official Zoning Map. Where there happen to be conflicts between the provisions or requirements of the Approximated Flood Plain, Floodway, Flood Fringe, or Special Flood Plain Districts and the nearest zoning district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. In the event that any portion of the Flood Plain districts be declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial discretion, the nearest zoning district shall be deemed to be the district in which the Flood Plain Districts are located.

A.	APPROXIMATED FLOOD PLAIN (F-1) AND FLOODWAY (F-2) DISTRICTS.  In
the Approximated Flood Plain and Floodway District no development, including manufactured homes, shall be permitted except where it can be demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the effect of such development on flood heights is fully
offset by accompanying improvements which have been approved by all applicable local and/or state authorities.

Permitted Uses - In the Approximated Flood Plain and Floodway Districts, the following uses and activities are permitted provided that (1) the information required in Section 12.09 of this Ordinance is submitted as a part of the application, (2) they are in compliance with the provisions of the nearest zoning district, (3) they will not



71
 


result in any increase in the level of the Base Flood anywhere, (4) they are not prohibited by any other ordinance, (5) they do not require the placement or use of permanent on-lot sewage facilities within any of the Flood Plain Districts, and (6) they do not require manufactures homes, encroachments, storage of materials and equipment,	substantial  improvements,   fill,  vehicles,   or  parts  thereof,   or  other
development:

1. Agricultural uses such as general farming, horticulture, truck gardening, nurseries, pasturing, grazing, forestry, and sod farming and wild crop harvesting.

2.	Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks; picnic grounds; areas for short term camping or recreational vehicle uses; golf courses; boat launching and swimming areas; hiking, bicycling, and horseback riding trails; wildlife and nature preserves; game farms; fish hatcheries;	shooting ranges; and hunting  and  fishing  areas.  Open structures such as picnic pavilions consisting of  slab,  open  structural supports such as posts and pillars and· a roof, shall be permitted only if constructed in compliance with the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code.

3.	All uses and open structures customarily accessory to permitted uses in the nearest adjoining district such as yard areas,  garden,  play  areas,  signs, unroof	porches, patios, open porches or carports provided  that  said structures are not enclosed by screening, latticing,  studs,  or  structural supports less than eight (8) feet apart  which  would  be  in  any  manner restrict the flow of flood water and debris and are in compliance with the applicable requirements of the Lebanon  County  Floodproofing  Building Code; impervious parking and loading areas, and airport landing strips. Accessory structures  shall not  include  manufactured  homes,  vehicles  or parts thereof.

4. Utilities, public facilities and improvements such as railroads, streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipelines, water and sewage treatment plants, and other similar or related uses.

5. Water-related uses and activities such as marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc.

6.	Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials.

7.	Storage of materials and equipment provided that they are not buoyant; toxic to humans, animals, or vegetation; flammable or explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding; or provided that such material and



72
 


equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement; and/or can be readily removed from the area within the time available after flood warning.

B.	FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT <F-3). In the Flood Fringe District the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the nearest zoning district provided that all uses, activities and/or development shall be   undertaken in  strict  compliance  with  the  Lebanon  County  Floodproofing Building Code, and any other state or federal codes and ordinances.

C.	SPECIAL FLOOD PLAIN (F-4) DISTRICT  - In the Special Flood Plain District the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the nearest zoning district provided that (1)  all  uses,  activities and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code and any other applicable state or federal codes and ordinances, (2) any new constructions, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) will not increase the level of the Base Flood anywhere, (3) said uses are not prohibited by this or any other ordinance, and (4) the information required in Section 12.09 of this Ordinance is submitted as a part of the permit application.

D.	PROHIBITED USES. In the Floodway (F-2), Flood Fringe (F-3), Approximated Flood Plain Districts (F-1), and Special Flood Plain (F-4) the following uses and activities are strictly prohibited:

1.	Hospitals, sanitariums, sanatoriums, clinics, etc. whether public or private.

2.	Public or private nursing homes.

3.	Jails or prisons.

4.	Public or private schools or institutions of higher education.

5.	New manufactured home parks and mobile home subdivisions and substantial improvements to existing manufactured  home parks.

6.	A new or substantially improved  structure which will be used for the production or storage of any materials which  are  toxic, flammable or explosive or which will be used for any activities requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons of such materials or any amount of radioactive substances.

7.	Any other use, activity, or development not specifically permitted under the terms of this article.



73
 



SECTION 12.05	ADDITIONAL SAFEGUARDS

A.	No encroaGhments, including manufactured homes, new construction or development, shall be located within a designated floodway. Where the floodway has  not been specifically identified for a stream or waterway,  no encroachments shall be permitted within the stream channel (from top of bank to top of bank). Furthermore, encroachments outside the stream banks but within the Flood Plain District shall be permitted only when in compliance with this Ordinance and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection permit requirements.

B.	No part of any private on-lot sewage disposal system shall be constructed within any Flood Plain Districts.

C.	Community water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and located to preclude infiltration of flood water into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters.

D.	The municipality will endeavor to coordinate its flood plain management program with neighboring municipalities, particularly when the property (ies) in question is located near a municipal boundary.

E.	Filling or dumping of fill material is prohibited in the Flood Plain districts on vacant lots or on land not scheduled for approved construction activities. Fill may only be used in the Flood Plain districts to raise the finished surface of the lowest floor of a structure to an elevation of a minimum of two (2) feet above the Base Flood Elevation provided the following conditions are met:

1.	Use	of	fill	shall	be	in	compliance	with	the	Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code and any other applicable ordinances.

2. Use of fill shall be permitted only when the property owner or applicant provides a document acceptable by the Zoning Officer, certified by a registered professional engineer, stating  that  the  cumulative  effect  of the	proposed fill, in conjunction with the other  anticipated development, will not result in any increase in the water surface elevation of the Base Flood at an point.

F.	Prior to any stream or watercourse alteration and relocation, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of Environment Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterway	Management. Also, adjacent communities, the Department of Community and Economic Development, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) must be notified. Additionally, the municipality must be assured that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated watercourse will be maintained by the developer.



74
 


G.	The placement of any manufactured homes in the Floodway (F-2) or Approximated Flood Plain (F-1) districts is prohibited, except as are placement unit in existing manufactur d home park and existing manufactured home subdivision. Said replacement units shall comply with the Special Anchoring and Site Requirements of Section 1.5 of the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code.

SECTION  12.06	FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED BY THE ZONING HEARING BOARD  WHEN  REVIEWING	SPECIAL  EXCEPTIONS  AND  VARIANCES.	In
reviewing  applications  for  Special Exceptions  and Variances.  the  Zoning  Hearing Board shall consider and shall apply all relevant factors specified in this Ordinance. in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 as amended). and other state or federal ordinance and shall apply all of the following factors:

A.	The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.

B.	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others.

C.	The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.

D.	The susceptibility of the proposed structure or use and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners.

E.	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.

F.	The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.

G.	The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.

H.	The compatibility of the proposed use or structure with existing development anticipated in the foreseeable future.

I. The relationship of the proposed use or structure to the Comprehensive Plan and flood plain management programs of the area.

J. The safety of access to the property in times of flood by ordinary and emergency vehicles.


K. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.






75
 


L.	No variance shall be granted to allow either in whole or in part any prohibited use listed in Section 12.04 of this Ordinance.

M.	Where appr priate, variances may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of historical structures as defined herein.

N.	The granting of a variance shall provide relief only from the specific term(s) of the flood plain regulations requested not exemption from all flood place regulations or any	applicable insurance premiums, nor any state or federal  permitting requirements.

0. Variances shall not be granted which result in any increase in the Base Flood Elevation.

P.	Variances shall be granted only when and where the applicant demonstrates compliance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 as amended).

Q.	Variances shall be granted only when they are shown to be the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard.

R.	When variances are granted, written notification, signed by the appropriate local official, shall be given to the applicant indicated that:

1.	Increased insurance premium rates will result, and

2.	Construction occurring below the Base Flood Elevation is a risk to life and property.

S.	Other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this Ordinance.

SECTION 12.07	NONCONFORMITIES.	A structure, or use of a structure or land which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following:

A.	Existing nonconforming structures or uses located in the Floodway (F-2) or Approximated  Flood Plain (F-1) Districts:

1.	Shall not be moved, replaced or substantially improved, but may be modified, altered, or repaired to incorporate floodproofing measures as per the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code, provided that such measures and elevation techniques do not raise the level of the Base Flood.






76
 


2. May be expanded or enlarged, but not substantially improved, provided that said expansion or enlargement (a) does not exceed 25% of the area of the first floor of the structure existing at the effective date of a flood plain ma agement regulation adopted by the municipality, (b) is not constructed below the existing first floor election, and (c) complies with all  applicable  floodproofing  requirements	of the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code. Plans for the above mentioned expansion or enlargement shall be accompanied by a side profile of the existing and proposed structures and shall indicate existing grade, floor elevations, uses of fill, etc.

B.	Existing nonconforming structures or uses located in the Flood Fringe (F-3) and Special Flood Plain (F-4) District:

1.	May be substantially improved, moved, replaced, modified, altered, or repaired provided that such work is conducted in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code, and any other applicable codes or ordinances.

2. May be enlarged or expanded in a manner which is not a substantial improvement as defined by this Ordinance, and provided that said enlargement or expansion complies with the above requirements (a), (b), and (c) of Section 12.07-A2.

C. If any nonconforming structure or use, including manufactured homes, located in the Flood Plain Districts is demolished, removed, substantially damaged or destroyed by any means, including floods, to an extent of fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the structure, it shall not be reconstructed, replaced, or continued except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Lebanon County Floodproofing Building Code, and any other applicable ordinance.

SECTION 12.08	LOT AREA. YARD AND SIGN REQUIREMENTS.	The  lot  area,
yard, sign, and other district requirements of the land in question shall be the same as the district requirements of the nearest zoning district.

SECTION 12.09	ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS.

A.	To insure that all construction and development on property which contains identified flood plain areas will be conducted employing flood damage controls, the Zoning Officer shall require the following additional information to the included as part of an application for a permit

1.	A plan which accurately locates the proposed construction and/or development  with  respect  to  the  Flood  Plain  District  boundaries,




77
 


stream  channel,	existing flood plain development  and all proposed subdivision and land development to assure that:

a)	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; and

b)	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, telephone, electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and

c)	Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazard.

2.	Such plan shall also include existing and proposed contours (at intervals determined to be adequate by the Zoning Officer based upon site conditions) and elevation of the grounds, Base Flood Elevations, structure elevations, lowest floor elevations, size of structure, location and elevations of streets, water supply, sanitary sewage facilities, soil types and floodproofing measures. When proposed construction and/or development involves structures and/or fill to be located within the designated flood plain, such plan shall also include details of proposed fill, pile structures, retaining walls, foundations, erosion control measures, and the Zoning Officer may require more detailed contour and elevation data.

3.	A document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that adequate precautions against flood damage have been taken with respect to the design of any building or structure, and that the plans for the development of the site adhere to the restrictions cited in this Ordinance, the Lebanon  County  Floodproofing  Building  Code,  and other applicable ordinances.

B.	Review of Annlication by Others. A Zoning Officer may require that a copy of all plans and specifications for construction and/or development affecting identified flood plain areas to be submitted to other appropriate agencies and/or individuals
(e.g. County Conservation District, planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.)
for review and comment prior to the issuance of a building permit. When proposed construction and/or development involves structures and/or fill which will be located directly within the designated flood plain, the Zoning Officer shall submit said plans and specifications to the appropriate agencies and/or individuals as indicated above. Recommendations from these  sources shall be considered for possible incorporation into the proposed  plan and may be made a condition for approval of a Building and Zoning Permit.






78
 



C.	A record of all variances granted, including their justification, shall be maintained by the community as well as reported in the annual report to the Flood Insurance Administrator.

SECTION 12.10 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. Ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, or inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give the Flood Plain District full force and effect.

SECTION 12.11  STATEMENT OF DISCLAIMER.	The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study; however, larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such  as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the Flood Plain Districts or that land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damage. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of this municipality or any office or employee thereof for any flood damage that- results from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision made thereunder.

SECTION  12.12	BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.	Building permits shall be requires before any proposed construction, substantial improvements, placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured homes) or development is undertaken within any identified flood prone area of the municipality. Prior to issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning Officer copies of any other required State and Federal permits, including but not limited to the following permits when applicable: floodway, wetland, surface mining, water quality, earth  disturbance, sewage or State Fire Marshall. Copies of all requires permits s hall be maintained by the Zoning Officer as a part of the building permit file.

After the issuance if a building permit or site plan approval by the Zoning Officer, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit, or any of the plans, specifications  or  other  documents  submitted  within  the  application  without  the written consent or approval of the Zoning Officer.















79
 



ARTICLE 13

.   SUPPLEMENTARY   DISTRICT   REGULATIONS

SECTION 13.01 INTENT.  The Supplementary District Requirements  are designed to contain a list of complementary and general requirements which augment and clarify regulations listed elsewhere in this Ordinance. Where applicable, these regulations shall apply uniformly to every use, activity, building or structure hereafter erected, altered, established or expanded. These regulations apply to all zoning districts and are listed comprehensively herein to avoid duplication and repetition throughout the remainder of this Ordinance.

SECTION 13.02  ACCESSORY  BUILDINGS AND  STRUCTURES.   Any building or
structure attached to a principal building in any manner shall comply in all respects with the yard requirements of this Ordinance for a principal building. No separate or detached building or structure shall be permitted in any required front yard. Accessory buildings located in the R-2 District shall not be permitted within five (5) feet of any side or rear lot line; in all other residential or commercial districts, accessory buildings shall not be less than ten (10) feet from a side or rear lot line. In all districts, where the entrance to a garage abuts a public alley, said garage entrance shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way of such alley.

SECTION 13.03 ACCESSORY USES.

A.	Private,  non-commercial  swimming  pools  which  are  designed  to contain  a water depth of  twenty-four  (24)  inches  or  more,  regardless  of  whether  they  are permanently affixed or movable, shall be located on the  same lot  or tract  as the dwelling and shall be permitted  neither in the required  front yard nor closer to any street  line than  the  dwelling.  In all other yards,  a pool  shall not  be  closer  than fifteen (15) feet to any lot line, as measured from the water's edge.  All pools shall be  completely enclosed with  a  continuous  impenetrable  fence  or  barrier  no  less than  four (4) feet in height above the ground level and  shall be  equipped  with  a lockable  gate or retractable  ladder.   Any  deck, patio,  or impermeable  surface,  not under  roof  or  otherwise  enclosed,  which  surrounds,  is  attached  to,  or  associated with a pool shall be no closer than ten (10) feet to the side or rear lot line.

B.	Private  tennis courts shall be permitted  within side or rear yards provided  that such facility shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from side or rear lot lines.

C.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit other uses not mentioned so long as they are clearly accessory to the principal permitted use of the land and do not create a threat to the public health, safety, and/or welfare of the community.





80
 


SECTION 13.04 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS. The following projections shall be attached to a building, may be permitted in required yards and shall not be considered in th determination of yard size.

A.	Patios, paved terraces, decks, or open, unroofed porches shall be permitted in all yards provided that such structures shall be no closer than five (5) feet to any lot line and not greater than five (5) feet above finished grade.

B.	Projecting architectural features - bay windows, cornices,  eaves,  fireplaces, chimneys, window sills, or  other  architectural  features,  provided  they  do  not extend more than five (5) feet into any required yard nor closer than three (3) feet to any adjacent property lines; however, any canopies, porte cocheres or other roofs that extend more than five (5) feet from the building line as defined in Article 1of this Ordinance, shall be subject to the yard requirements applied from the lot line to the edge of the roof.

C.	Stairs, landings, and decks which are unroofed, provided that they are no closer than five (5) feet to any lot line.

D.	Open balconies or fire escapes provided such balconies or fire escapes are not supported on the ground and do not project more than five (5) feet into any required yard nor closer than three (3) feet to any adjacent property line.

SECTION  13.05	HOME OCCUPATION REGULATIONS.	A home occupation as defined in Article 1may be permitted in any district under the following conditions:

A.	The proprietor of the home occupation shall reside on the premises and shall be the property owner or a member of the immediate family of the property owner. The home occupation shall be incidental to the use of the property as a residence, and there shall be no exterior evidence of the occupation nor change to the appearance of the  dwelling to facilitate the operation of the occupation, other than one (1) small sign as provided in Article 16 of this Ordinance.

B.	The home occupation shall be conducted wholly within the dwelling and shall not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area nor more than 750 square feet. This area shall include all functions or activities of the home occupation.

C.	The proprietor may employ not more than one (1) assistant who does not reside within the dwelling used for the home occupation.

D.	In addition to the parking required for the residence, two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the home occupation plus one (1) additional space for any assistant. Off-street parking improvements shall comply with Article 15 of this Ordinance.




81
 


E.	Any home occupation or accessory function of a home occupation which may create objectionable noise, fumes, odor, dust, electrical interference, or substantially more than normal residential traffic shall be prohibited.

SECTION 13.06 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS. On a corner lot in any district a clear sight triangle shall be provided at all street intersections. Within  such triangles, no vision obstructing objects (other than utility poles) shall be permitted which obscure vision above the height of thirty (30) inches and below ten (10) feet as measured form the centerline grade of intersecting streets. Such triangles shall be established from a distance of:

A.	Seventy-five (75) feet from the point of intersection of  the  center  lines  of intersecting  streets,  except  that,

B.	Clear  sight  triangles  of  one  hundred   (100)  feet  shall  be  provided   for  all
intersections with arterial and major streets.

SECTION 13.07 FENCES. WALLS & HEDGES. Unless otherwise regulated, fences, walls, and hedges may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard. However, no fence, wall, or hedge along the sides or front edge of any front yard shall be over thirty (30) inches in height and shall not obstruct visibility.

SECTION 13.08 ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE (1) PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE
ON A LOT.	In any district, more than one (1) structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this Ordinance and the South Lebanon Township Subdivision Ordinance shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot.

SECTION  13.09	STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS.	Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved public or private street. All structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off­ street parking.

SECTION 13.10  WATER SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE  FACILITIES REQUIRED.   In
the interest of protecting the  public health, safety, and welfare, every building or structure hereafter erected, altered or moved upon any premises and used in whole or in part for dwelling, commercial or recreational business, or industrial purpose shall
be provided with both a safe and sanitary water supply and a safe and sanitary means of collection  and  disposal of residential,  commercial,  or industrial  sewage.    Such
facilities shall conform to minimum requirements set forth by the Department of Environmental Protection.






82
 


SECTION	13.11	MINIMUM   HABITABLE   FLOOR   AREA  AND   LOT  AREA
REQUIREMENTS.	Unless otherwise regulated in this Ordinance, every  dwelling unit  hereafter  designed, established,  or erected shall contain  a minimum  habitable
floor area of 700 square feet or a total of 175 square feet per person residing in the
dwelling, whichever is greater. Existing two-family or multi-family development shall only be expanded or enlarged provided that a minimum lot area of 3,000 square feet is
provided for each dwelling unit located on said property.

SECTION 13.12  CORNER LOT RESTRICTION.	In all districts, corner lots shall have no required rear yards, but shall have two (2) required front yards as measured from the road right-of-way line and two (2) required side yards as measured from the lot line.

SECTION 13.13 REQUIRED FRONT YARD EXCEPTIONS.	Where an unimproved lot of record is situated between two (2) improved lots, the front yard requirements for the district may be modified so that the front yard may be an average of the adjacent existing front yards. Where an unimproved lot of record is adjacent to one (1) improved lot which was developed prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, the front yard requirements of the unimproved lot may be reduced to the average  of  the existing improved lot setback and required front yard.

SECTION 13.14  ANIMALS.	Customary household pets shall be permitted in any district; however, novelty pet kennels, and uses involving animal husbandry shall be permitted only as indicated in the appropriate district regulations.

SECTION 13.15  DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.	Upon notification and request by the Zoning Administrator and directed by the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors, any building or structure which has deteriorated to the state where it is dangerous and/or unsafe for human occupancy, constitutes a fire hazard, endangers surrounding buildings, shelters rats or vermin, or endangers the safety of children playing thereabouts, shall be repaired, altered or removed to eliminate the dangerous conditions. Such improvements shall commence within thirty (30) days and be completed within ninety (90) days of notification by the Zoning Administrator or the South Lebanon Township Board of Supervisors.

SECTION  13.16   GASOLINE  PUMPS AND ALL  OTHER  SERVICE  EQUIPMENT.
Gasoline  pumps  and  all  other  service  equipment  shall be  set back  not  less than
twenty-five (25) feet from any lot line and/or street right-of-way and located so that vehicles stopped for service will not extend over  the  property  line.  Canopies  for pumps shall meet the same twenty-five (25) foot side and rear yard setbacks, but may be extended into the front yard, provided a minimum front yard setback of fifteen (15) feet is maintained  from the street right-of-way  line.






83
 


SECTION 13.17 PARKING AND STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES.  Auto ative
vehicles  or  trailers  of  any  kind  without  current,  valid  license  plates  and. 4tate
inspection shall not be parked or stored on any property other than in comi>letely enclosed buildings or properly approved junk yards. Additionally, such vehicles shall not be parked or stored along public streets in any zoning district.

SECTION  13.18	PARKING.  STORAGE.  OR  USE  OF  MAJOR  RECREATIONAL
EQUIPMENT.	For  purposes  of  these  regulations,  major  recreational  equipment
and/or tractor trailers, utility trailers, construction equipment,  construction  trailers, rigs, or cabs are defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers  or  coaches  (designed  to  be  mounted  on  automotive  vehicles),  motorized
dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. No major recreational equipm nt shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except in a carport, an enclosed building, in a rear yard or on that portion of a private residential driveway not within the road right-of-way. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. Additionally, no such equipment shall be parked  along public streets in any zoning district for a period of time exceeding twenty-four (24) hours.

SECTION  13.19   MOBILE  HOME  PARKS AND  MOBILE  HOME  SUBDIVISIONS.
All mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions hereafter erected, established, substantially altered, or expanded shall comply with the requirements of Section 8.02(0)(1)  of this  Ordinance.    However,  alterations  or  expansion  of  said parks  or
subdivisions shall not require Special Exception approval before the issuance of a Building and Zoning Permit.

SECTION	13.20	EXCEPTIONS  TO  HEIGHT  REGULATIONS.	The	height
limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to church spires; farm structures when permitted by other provisions of this Ordinance (e.g. silos, barns, etc.); belfries, cupolas, penthouses, and domes not used for human occupancy; chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads and similar features; utility poles and standards; and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof level. Such features, however shall be erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve and then only in accordance with any other governmental regulations.

SECTION  13.21	PUBLIC UTILITIES  EXEMPTIONS.	For the purposes of this Ordinance, public utilities exemptions to district requirements shall extend only to accessory support and maintenance structures and buildings not requiring human occupancy. Such uses and structures including fences shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line or road right-of-way line. Principal utility structures (e.g. sewage  treatment  plants,  electrical  power  plants,  etc.)  shall be  permitted  in  any



84
 


district but shall comply in all respects with the requirements for a principal use of the district in which it will be located. In either case, said utility corporation shall secure a Building and Zoning Permit from the Zoning Administrator prior to the start of construction: Said permit application shall include any and all approvals required by other agencies, for the use specified.

























































85
 



ARTICLE 14

ENVIRONMENTAL  IMPROVEMENTS AND ENERGY CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS




SECTION 14.01 INTENT. The environmental improvements and energy conserva­ tion requirements are designed to recognize the need for conservation of energy and natural resources and to facilitate the utilization of renewable resources. Environmental improvements are intended to moderate the effects of solar radiation, conserve energy, improve air quality, reduce glare and noise,  and control erosion, largely through the planting of trees, shrubs, and other vegetative cover. Energy conservation requirements are designed to allow the installation of renewable energy devices and provide the opportunity for individuals to reduce energy dependence by encouraging the productive use of solar and wind energy components.

SECTION 14.02 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are specifically defined for use within this Article:

A.	Active Solar Energy System - A solar energy system that requires external mechanical power to move collected heat.

B.	Dense Screen Planting - A landscaped barrier consisting of predominantly (80% or more) coniferous trees and shrubs,  hedges,  earth  mounding,  walls,  or  a combination thereof established at a minimum height of six (6) feet. Such environmental buffer shall provide a solid, visual, noise and pollutant  barrier between potentially incompatible uses. Dense screen plantings shall be at least five  (5) feet in width with irregularly spaced double or triple rows of plants and shrubs to obtain a dense, solid mass.

C.	Energy Storage Facility - Equipment  consisting of containers, heat exchangers, piping, and other transfer mechanisms (including fluids, gases or solids), controls, and related structural support for transporting and storing collected energy (from solar energy systems), including structural elements designed for use in passive solar energy systems.

D.	Interior Island Planting - A durable landscaped planting area located within a vehicular use area or parking lot. Design and location shall provide shade and visual separation of parking and pedestrian areas, improve air quality, and control storm water runoff from large paved areas. An island or strip shall be a minimum of fifty (50) square feet in area, at least five (5) feet in width and contain at least one (1) shade tree, per forty (40) lineal feet of island or fraction thereof. Islands of forty (40) feet or less in length shall contain at least one (1) shade tree.



86
 


The remaining area within the island or strip shall be appropriately  landscaped with grass, mulch, stones, plants, or other materials not exceeding three (3) feet in height.

E.	Passive Solar Energy System - A solar energy system that uses natural and architectural components to collect and store energy without using any external mechanical power.

F.	Perimeter Planting - A landscaped planting consisting of trees and shrubs established at less than three (3) feet or greater than six (6) feet in height, so shall not interfere  with any clear sight triangle. Such planting shall separate streets and vehicular use areas from parking lots, buildings, and other interior improvements.	Perimeter plantings shall consist of individual trees or shrubs spaced a maximum of fifty (50) feet apart to form a linear vegetative border, with grass or ground cover continuously thereunder.

G.	Screen Planting - A landscaped planting consisting of a mixture of coniferous trees or shrubs, shade trees, ornamental trees or shrubs, earth mounding, hedges or a combination thereof established at a minimum height of six (6) feet.  Such planting shall separate and protect uses from noise, odor and dust, as well as moderating the effects of winter winds and summer heat. Screen plantings shall be at least three (3) feet in width with regularly spaced trees and shrubs to obtain a pervious, moderately dense planting.

H.	Solar Collector - A freestanding or fixed device, or combination of devices, structures, or part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into thermal,	chemical or electrical energy that contributes significantly to  a structure's energy supply.

I.	Solar Energy - Radiant energy (direct, diffuse and reflected) received from the sun.

J.	Solar Energy System - A complete design or assembly consisting of a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where used), and components for the distribution of transformed energy.

K.	Skyspace - The open space between a solar or wind collector and the sum or prevailing wind which must be free of obstructions that may shade or impede the collector to an extent that would reduce its cost-effective operation.

L.	Wind Energy Conversion System - A device which converts wind energy  to mechanical or electrical supply; commonly referred  to as windmills.

M.	Wind Rotor - The blades, plus hub to which the blades are attached, that are used to capture wind for the purpose of energy conversion.  The wind rotor is used on a




87
 


pole or tower along with other generating and electrical storage equipment and forms a wind energy conversion system.

SECTION	14.03	REQUIREMENT	FOR	ENVIRONMENTAL	AND	ENERGY­
CONSERVING	IMPROVEMENTS.	Environmental	and	energy-conserving improvements shall be required for the following:

A.	All new subdivisions and developments.

B.	All new uses or buildings erected or established, including said uses or buildings which are to be located on previously subdivided lots or unsubdivided property.

C.	Expansion of all buildings or uses except single and two family dwellings.

D.	To  separate  commercial,  industrial,  institutional  and  other  non-residential  uses from adjoining residential uses or residential districts.

E.	Around parking lots with ten (10) or more parking spaces and within the interior of parking lots with twenty-five (25) or m:ore parking spaces, including parking lots expanded beyond these sizes.

F.	Areas between parking lots and buildings.

G.	Building  wall  expanses  in  excess  of  seventy-five  (75)  feet  which  are  exposed  to westerly winds, except single and two-family dwellings.

H.	New streets.

SECTION 14.04  ENVIRONMENTAL AND ENERGY CONSERVING STANDARDS.
Environmental improvements shall satisfy the following minimum standards:

A.	General Standards

1.	A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of each developed lot shall be landscaped with appropriate ground cover or planting.

2.	Land areas with slopes in excess of twenty percent (20%) shall be restricted to the removal of not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total vegetative cover of the lot.

3.	Existing plant materials shall be preserved, wherever possible, during development. Such existing plants shall be credited toward required plantings. Where topographic, vegetative or engineering features on or adjacent to the site may provide the desired conservation and environmental protection, the design plan may be




88
 


adjusted to credit use of the alternate protective features, provided the Planning Department Site Review Committee approves the desi  .

4.	All required trees shall be a minimum 1 %" caliper and trees, shrubs, and plants shall be disease resistant, saline tolerant, winter hardy and of a species suitable for this geographic region.

5.	All landscaping and plantings shall be installed using good planting procedures, utilizing quality plant material.

6.	Plantings should not be designed to interfere with southern exposures to solar radiation.

B.	Specific Standards

1.	Buffer areas - Dense screen plantings shall be required within all specified buffer areas. Said plantings shall be centered within the yard space to provide for growth without infringement upon the property line.

2.	Streets - Perimeter plantings shall be required along each side of all new streets, a maximum distance of ten (10) feet form the street right-of-way line. Planting strips of five (5) feet or more in width between the sidewalk and the street may be approved for perimeter plantings utilizing appropriate tree species. When divided streets are proposed, perimeter plantings shall also be required within the median strip.

3.	Parking Lots - Perimeter plantings shall be required around the border of all parking lots containing ten (10) or more  parking spaces. Said plantings shall be a maximum of ten (10) feet from the edge of the paved parking surface. Interior island plantings shall be required within all parking lots containing twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces. Interior island plantings shall be provided  1) at the ratio of five (5) square feet of planting area for each 100 square feet of paced parking and vehicular use area, and 2) in locations which will divide and separate the parking lot.

4.	Buildings - Screen plantings shall be required, except for single and two family dwellings, around and along buildings in accordance with the following:

a.	Parking  lots  of  ten  (10)  or  more  parking  spaces  shall  be  a minim um  of  twenty  (20)  feet  from  the  building  line  of  any


89
 


principal  building  or  structure.	The twenty  (20) foot setback shall contain appropriate screen plantings.

b. Building walls over seventy-five (75) feet in length which face westerly, southwesterly or northwesterly  shall be bordered by a parallel screen planting which is equal in length to the wall length and is located a maximum of fifty feet from the face of the wall.

SECTION 14.05  SOLAR. WIND AND ALTERNATE  ENERGY  STANDARDS.	The
use of solar, wind and alternate energy systems is encouraged within  these regulations and permitted within any zoning district. Although  the  installation  of such systems is not mandatory, where they are utilized, the following standards shall
apply:

A.	Active and passive solar systems, wind energy systems and similar alternate energy	systems, including customary energy storage accessories, shall be permitted for the production, collection, movement, distribution or storage of heated water, air or other medium which is intended for conveyance to a principal or   accessory building. Systems may include the following subject to  the requirements contained herein:

1.	Solar panels with a combined glazing area of 65 square feet or less, provided that:

a.	The solar panels shall not extend more than five (5) feet into any required yard when attached to a principal structure; and

b.	The solar panels shall be a minimum of three (3) feet from any property line, whether freestanding or attached.

2.	Solar panels with a combined glazing area in excess of 65 square feet, provided that:

a.	Solar panels attached to a principal structure shall comply with the zoning setbacks prescribed for a principal structure in the applicable zoning district;

b.	Solar panels which are freestanding or attached  to  any accessory structure shall comply with the accessory structure requirements of Section 13.02 of this Ordinance.

3.	Solar greenhouses attached to principal structures shall meet all yard requirements for a principal structure in the applicable zoning district.	Solar greenhouses attached to accessory structures shall



90
 


meet  all yard  requirements  specified  for  accessory  structures  in Section 13.02 of this Ordinance.

4.	Detached   solar  greenhouses  shall  meet   all  yard  requirements specified for accessory structures in Section 13.02 of this Ordinance.

5.	Wind energy conversion systems, provided that:

a.	The structure supporting the wind rotor unit shall be located a minimum distance of the tower height (measured  from  the ground to  the top of the rotor) plus fifteen (15) feet from any property line or road right-of-way. The height of such structure shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet.

b.	Towers may be ground or roof-mounted and shall be securely fastened as per manufacturer's specifications or a demonstrable equivalent to achieve maximum safety and prevent collapse or fall. Any propeller or turning device that reacts to wind velocity shall have governor to control the speed revolutions. Such governors may include a rudder that turns the propeller away from the winds, individually spring-mounted paddles that turn away from the wind, or other  suitable  manufacturer's  tested device.	Tower shall be locked or secured to prevent unauthorized	access, and in no case shall a permanently mounted ladder be affixed less than ten (10) feet from grade level.

SECTION	14.06	MAINTENANCE   AND  PROTECTION  ASSURANCES.	The
improvements required and permitted within this Article shall be maintained and protected to assure their environmental benefits. The following specific requirements shall apply:

A.	Maintenance

1.	Plantings - All required plantings shall be maintained in a good condition to present a health, neat and orderly appearance. Such plantings shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Plants damaged by insects, disease, vehicular traffic, acts of nature or vandalism shall be replaced by the next planting period.

2. Energy Systems - Energy systems  shall  be  maintained  in  a  safe manner.  Broken  glass  or other  potentially  hazardous  conditions  shall be  promptly  repaired.    A  disconnected  or  abandoned  energy  system





91
 


shall be  removed  from  the property  within  sixty  (60)  days  of  such abandonment.

B.	Protection

1.	Plantings - Required plantings shall not be removed except to facilitate the planting of acceptable replacement plants.  Property improvements shall  be  protected  at  all times  by  such environmental  plantings  and extensive trimming or pruning of the plantings  to reduce or eliminate the protection shall not be permitted.

2.	Energy Systems - Where a solar or wind energy system has been installed, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to secure any easements or restrictive covenants necessary to protect the skyspace affecting the solar or wind system. Such an agreement shall be negotiated between the owners of affected properties, but it is not a requirement for approval of a Building and Zoning Permit for the solar or wind energy systems.

SECTION 14.07 VARIANCES. The following factors shall be considered, in addition to those within Section 20.04 of this Ordinance, when reviewing petitions for Variances to the provisions of Article 14:

A.	Variances shall be granted only for minimum relief and not for purely financial reasons.

B.	Variances to planting requirements shall not request relief from planting height, quality or maintenance.

C.	Variances for energy systems shall allow for effective placement of energy systems, provided the skyspace of adjoining property owners is not restricted.

D.	Variances shall consider the resulting effect on the microclimate on the property.

E.	Variances shall consider possible damage to utilities. SECTION 14.08 PLANS AND PERMITS
A.	Plans	-  Plans	depicting   environmental	and   energy   improvements	shall  be submitted	at the time of application for a Building and Zoning  Permit. Information may be included on the required plot plan specified in Section 18.03 of this Ordinance or submitted on a separate plan. In addition to the  information required within Section 18.03 of this Ordinance, plans shall include:

1.	Locations, size, and species of existing plant material.



92
 


2.	Delineation of plants to be removed and plants to be retained.

3.	Location, planting size, mature size, and species of all plants within required plantings.

4.	Proposed treatment of all ground surfaces (e.g. paving, grass, gravel, mulch, stone).

B. Building and Zoning Permits - A Building and Zoning Permit shall be required for installation, expansion or alteration to any of the environmental improvements and energy systems described within this Article. Applicable procedures of Article 18 of this Ordinance shall apply during the processing of such permit applications. Where desired, the Zoning Administrator may refer plans to the Soil Conservation Service, the Planning Department Site Review Committee, or to other applicable agencies for review and comment prior to formal action on the permit application.












































93
 



ARTICLE 15

OFF-STREET PARKING




SECTION 15.01 INTENT. The regulations concerning off-street parking  are intended to insure that adequate, well-designed parking facilities are provided for all new, altered, or expanded buildings and uses. The general intent shall be to require off-street parking spaces, loading and unloading areas, driveway and access ways to
(1) satisfy the minimum standards contained within this Article and (2) be designed to prevent overcrowding and congestion and impairment of traffic circulation and access.

SECTION 15.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of determining accessory off-street parking requirements, definitions and standards shall be as follows:

A.	Parking Space - an open or enclosed area accessible from a street or alley for parking of motor vehicles for owners, occupants, employees, customers, or tenants of the principal structure or use. Each parking space shall be not less than ten (10) feet wide and not less than twenty (20) feet long, exclusive of all drives, curbs, and turning space.

B.	Floor Area - the total area of all the floors measured from the exterior faces of the structure or, where set forth in the schedule in Section 15.05, only the floor area used by a specific use.

C.	Seat - the number of seating units installed or indicated, or each twenty-four (24) lineal inches of benches, pews, or space for loose chairs or similar seating facilities; spacing of rows shall be thirty (30) inches on center.

SECTION   15.03	REQUIREMENT   FOR   OFF-STREET   PARKING   FACILITIES.
Accessory	off-street parking facilities, including access driveways and loading/unloading areas, shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this
Article as a condition precedent to the occupancy of such building or use. Facilities shall be provided for the entire building or use as follows:

A.	Whenever a structure is constructed or a new use established, or

B.	Whenever the use of an existing structure is changed to a use  requiring  more parking facilities, or

C.	Whenever an existing structure is altered or enlarged so as to increase the amount of parking spaces required under this Article.





94
 


SECTION 15.04 GENERAL STANDARDS.  Off-street parking facilities shall satisfy the following general requirements:

A.	Off-street parking areas shall have safe access to and from a street. However, no portion of any street or road right-of-way shall be utilized for off-street parking.

B.	Off-street parking spaces shall be designed to prevent maneuvering necessary to park a vehicle from intersecting any street, road right-of-way, alley or sidewalk. Parking spaces shall also be designed so that vehicles may have access to and from spaces without moving another vehicle.

C.	Off-street parking spaces shall be readily accessible to, and a reasonable distance from, the structures and uses served. Such spaces shall be on the same lot as the principal structure or use, except where  otherwise permitted in accordance with Section 15.06.

D.	All parking spaces shall be available to patrons, customers, or visitors throughout th  hours of operation of the structure or use for which the spaces are provided. Carnivals, displays, promotions or other events held on parking lots shall not utilize parking spaces required for customers. Adequate additional parking spaces shall be available for the supplemental use.

E.	Parking spaces shall be improved and individually delineated in accordance with Section	15.10. Additionally, special purpose spaces and areas such as "handicapped" parking, "visitor only" parking, "limited time" parking, and fire and police spaces shall be clearly labeled.

F.	Off-street parking requirements will be considered to be met only when actual spaces meeting the requirements of this Article are provided and improved in accordance with Section 15.10. Parking spaces may not thereafter be reduced below the minimum requirements as long as the principal structure  or  use remains, unless an equivalent number of spaces is provided for use in another approved location.

G.	Unless otherwise specifically regulated, improved, hard surface off-street parking for all uses shall be limited to portions of the lot as follows:

1.	Parking shall not be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of any street or  road right-of-way.  However,  provided  the  minimum  25  feet  is satisfied, up to 50% of the required front yard  may be  utilized  for parking.

2.	Required side and rear yards may be utilized for parking provided:





95
 


a.	A m1mm um setback of ten (10) feet from the property line is maintained in all cases where more prohibitive regulations do not appea;r herein.

b.	Minim um setbacks of forty (40) feet in all Commercial District and one hundred (100) feet in the Industrial District are maintained in all yards abutting a Residential District boundary.
3.	Loading and unloading areas shall not be permitted in the required front yard. SECTION  15.05	SCHEDULE OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for a specific use is listed in the following chart.  Where appropriate when computing the number of required
parking spaces, the Zoning Administrator  may exclude floor area of structures (e.g.
storage, employee  lounge, bathroom)  which  does not  bear  any relationship  to the parking needs of the use.




Structure or Use		Parking Spaces Required Institutional

 
1.	Civic and educational; primary and and secondary school, library places for public assembly

2.	Governmental; municipal building used for administrative functions
 
1space for each employee plus 1space for each 6 seats in assembly rooms

1space for each 200 sq. ft. of office floor area plus 1space for each 4 seats in assembly room
 

3.	Place of worship		1space for each 3 seats in principal assembly room

4.	Hospital		1space per 2 beds plus 1space for each employee

5.	Health Center	1space per 150 sq. ft. floor area

6.	Home for the aging, nursing home	1space for each 4 guest rooms or
apartment units plus 1space for
each employee






96
 


Residential

7.	One and two-family dwellings	2 spaces per dwelling unit; must
be off-street, but need not be
improved with hard surface

 
8.	Multi-family residence (including townhouses and garden apartments)
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit
 

9.	Group Family Dwelling		2 spaces plus those required for resident vehicles

IO.Guest Home                                              1space per guest room, plus 1 space for each employee plus 2 spaces for manager/owner(s)

Home Occupation

11.	Home Occupation	In addition to parking required for the residence, 2 spaces plus 1 additional space for any assistant; must be off-street, but need not be improved with hard surface

Day Care
12.	Day Care Home, Family	2 spaces plus those required for the residence

 
13.	Day Care Home, Group



14.	Day Care Center
 
2 spaces plus 1space for each assistant plus those required for the residence.

See Section 7.02L(9) Commercial
 
15.	Medical and dental offices, clinics, professional offices and banks

16.	Other offices
 
1space per 150 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1space for each doctor and dentist
1space per 200 sq. ft. of ground
floor area; 1space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area of upper floors
 

17.	Motel, hotel	1space per guest room or unit




97
 


 
18.	Mortuary or Funeral Home






19. Retail stores, service establishments and shopping centers



20.	Outdoor retail activities, Flea markets, etc.



21.	Eating places, bars, taverns




22.	Club, lodge, or other assembly halls

23.	Indoor theater

24.	Dance hall, skating rink, swimming pool




25.	Carnivals, racetracks and other outdoor amusement or recreation uses

26.	Bowling alley

27.	Service and storage establishments




28.	Gas station, repair garage



29.	Auto Body Shop



30.	Golf Course (Nine or Eighteen Hole Regulation)





98
 
1space per 30 sq. ft. of assembly rooms, or 1space for each 4 seats whichever requires the greater number, but in no case less than 20 spaces
1space per 200 sq. ft. of ground
floor area; 1space per 300 sq. ft.
of floor area of upper floors

1space for each 200 sq. ft. of stall space and customer circulation area

1space per 50 sq. ft. of floor area, or 1space per 4 seats whichever requires the greater number of spaces
1space per 4 seats in building 1space per 4 seats in building
1space per 100 sq. ft. of area used for dancing, skating, or sw1mm1ng

1space for each 4 seats or 4 visitors at maximum capacity
6 spaces per bowling lane 1space for every 2 employees on
the combined employment of the 2 largest successive shifts

1space per employee plus 1space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area

1space per employee plus 2 spaces per repair bay

4 spaces for each green plus 50% of the requirement for any associated uses
 



 
31.	Golf Course, Par Three or Miniature
 

25 spaces per 9 holes, plus 1 space for each employee
 

32.	Golf Driving Range		1space per tee, plus 1space for each employee

Manufacturing

 
33.	Service and storage establishments, laboratories, manufacturing plants, and other uses permitted in a manufacturing district
 
1space for every 2 employees on the largest shift
 

 
34.	Executive offices, sales offices and outlet  stores
 
1space per 200 sq. ft. of executive and sales office floor area in addition to parking requirements for manufacturing area
 

35.	Recycling Processing Facility	1space for each vehicle operated
by facility plus 1space for each
employee

36.	Recycling Collection Facility		1space for each vehicle operated by facility plus  1space for each employee plus 1space for each 500 sq. ft. of area used for collection area (minimum of 5 spaces required for collection area)

Other Structures or Uses

37.	For a specific structure or use not scheduled, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the unit or measurement of the  above  schedule  deemed  to be  most similar to the proposed structure or use.


SECTION  15.06   SEPARATE OR COMBINED USE OF FACILITIES.	A   structure
containing one use shall provide off-street parking spaces as required for the specific use.	A structure or group of structures containing two or more uses, operating normally during the same hours, and which have different off-street parking requirements, shall provide spaces for not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use.   Where  the  applicant  can  demonstrate  that  adequate  off-street  parking


99
 


capacity is not feasible on the same lot as the proposed non-residential use or structure, the new use or structure may be permitted if the applicant:

A.	Provides written authorization from an adjoining or nearby  property  owner  to allow establishment and/or use of parking facilities meeting the requirements of this Article on that property; and

B.	Obtains authorization on said other property to establish and use parking facilities which will be a maximum of six hundred (600) feet from the use or building proposed by the applicant.

SECTION  15.07	ACCESS  DRIVES  TO PARKING AREAS AND  CURBING.	The
location and width of entrance and exit driveways to paved, hard surface parking facilities shall be planned to interfere as little as possible with the use of nearby property and with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the nearest streets. The center
line of the access driveways on the frontage street shall be at least eighty (80) feet from the right-of-way line of the nearest intersecting street or any other driveway. Where there is more than one driveway to a parking area, the driveways, whenever possible, shall be limited to one-way travel, either as an entrance to or exit from the
parking area. Entrances and exists shall be limited to three lanes. The width of such
entrances and exits, measured at the street property line, shall conform with the
following schedule:

Width (feet)

Minimum	Maximum

One Lane	12	14
Two Lanes	20	28
Three Lanes	30	40

In all cases, the radius of the edge of the driveway apron shall be at least fifteen (15) feet so that a car entering or leaving may not obstruct vehicles in other traffic lanes in the driveway or street.

Whenever parking spaces are opposite each other and separated by a driveway or aisle, said area shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width.

SECTION  15.08	LOADING  AND  UNLOADING  SPACE.	Each Commercial or Industrial use shall provide off-street  loading and unloading  space  at the  side or rear of the principal  structure according to the following table.  Such space or spaces shall be not less than 660 square feet in area with dimension of 12' x 55' per space, which shall be located exclusive of any public right-of-way.   Each space shall have a vertical



100
 


clearance of not less than fifteen (15) feet. Additionally, any loading and unloading spaces necessitate by uses in other districts shall also comply with the specifics of this Section.

 
GROSS FLOOR AREA

0 to 2000 sq. ft.
 
LOADING/UNLOADING SPACES REQUIRED

0, provided all loading/unloading can be accomplished on-site without restricting

traffic flow or disrupting off-street parking access.
 
2001 to 10,000 sq. ft.

10,001 to 50,000 sq. ft.
 
One (1) space

Two (2) spaces
 

50,001 sq. ft. and over                Three (3) spaces plus one (1) additional space
for each 40,000 sq. ft. in excess of 50,000 sq. ft. SECTION 15.09  ILLUMINATION OF PARKING AND LOADING AREAS.   Parking
and  loading  areas  shall be  illuminated  whenever  necessary  to protect  the  public
safety. Such illumination shall be so designed and located that the light sources are shielded from adjoining residences and streets, shall not be of excessive brightness or cause a glare hazardous to pedestrians or drivers and must meet any other ordinance
dealing with illumination of building, parking, and loading areas.

SECTION  15.10	IMPROVEMENTS  TO PARKING AND  LOADING AREAS.	All
parking areas, loading areas, and access driveways, except for single and two-family dwellings and home occupations, shall have an asphalt, concrete, or other similar hard	surface, in accordance with ordinance requirements of the Township Supervisors.	Improved hard surface off-street parking areas for three (3) or more automobiles shall have individual spaces painted or marked. Surface water shall not be permitted to discharge over the public sidewalks or roadways or onto other premises.	The maximum grade of the public area shall not exceed two percent. Appropriate bumper guards or curbs shall be provided in order to define parking spaces or limits of paved areas and to prevent vehicles from projecting into required yards. The Zoning Administrator may require landscaping in accordance with Article 14 of this Ordinance. All curbs and bumper guards shall be constructed in accordance with standards established by the Township supervisors.

SECTION  15.11	APPROVAL  OF PARKING  AND  LOADING  PLANS.	Detailed,
scaled drawings of off-street parking and loading areas (except for single and two­ family dwellings) shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for approval prior to



101
 


their  construction.	The drawings shall show each space, dimensions of driveways, aisles and other features required under the provisions of this Ordinance.






























































102
 


ARTICLE 16

SIGNS AND ADVERTISING  STRUCTURES

SECTION 16.01 INTENT. The purpose of these regulations is to permit signs or advertising structures that will not, by reason of their size, location, construction, or manner of display, endanger the public safety of individuals, confuse, mislead, or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety or otherwise endanger public health, safety, and morals; and to permit and regulate signs in such a way as to support and complement land use objectives set forth in this Ordinance. Signs may be permitted only when in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and any and all ordinances and regulations relating to the erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, relocation, replacement, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar devices.

SECTION 16.02 AREA OF SIGN. The area of a sign shall be construed to include the entire display surface and background, whether open or enclosed, which encompasses lettering, wording, designs, and symbols, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which is incidental to the display itself. The area shall be determined using the larger visible sign or silhouette areas. When the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or printed on a surface, the area shall be considered to be the smallest rectangular shape or shapes which can be drawn together to encompass all of the letters and symbols.

All double face signs shall be considered as having one (1) sign area, except double­ faced "V'' signs that have interior angles greater than 45 degrees.

SECTION	16.03	GENERAL  REGULATIONS.	All	signs	and/or	advertising structures, where permitted under the terms of this Ordinance, are subject to the following:

A.	No signs shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, altered, removed for repair, enlarged, or relocated until a permit is obtained from the Zoning Administrator, except that no permit shall be required by this Ordinance for the following signs:

1.	Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and bearing only property numbers, postal box numbers or names of the occupants of the premises.

2. Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion.






103
 


C.	All signs not owned by the person, firm or organization advertising thereon shall carry a clearly legible imprint showing the owner's name.

D.	No sign shall be so illuminated as to have a glaring effect upon vehicular traffic.
No sign shall be illuminated so as to constitute a nuisance.  No sign shall contain moving parts or use flashing or intermittent illumination.  The source of the light
shall be steady, stationary, and shall be from the top down.

E.	No sign shall be higher than thirty-five (35) feet from the ground to the highest part of the sign.

F.	No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct entrance to or exit from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way.

G.	No sign shall be erected that screens traffic signals or signs or utilizes red, green or amber lights or reflectorized material that creates a flashing action and  is  so located as to render ineffective any traffic sign or signal. Any sign which resembles an official traffic sign or signal, by way of its appearance or content, shall be prohibited.

H.	Unless otherwise provided, no sign shall be painted, pasted, or otherwise affixed to any tree, rock, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, sidewalk, curb, or street.

I. Unless otherwise provided, no portion of any sign shall be erected within or placed on an existing structure in the road right-of-way. Additionally,  no portion of any sign shall be erected in the "clear sight triangle" as specified in Section 13.06.

J.	Unless otherwise specified, all signs shall be on-premises, and no sign shall be erected until a permit has been secured  from the Zoning Administrator and approval has been received from any other applicable state or local agencies.

K.	No sign shall contain obscene material.

SECTION 16.04 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS.  The following signs are permitted in any zoning district:

A.	Temporary signs which do not require a permit:

1.	Temporary signs of painters, mechanics, contractors, realtors, and the like not exceeding a total of sixteen (16) square feet in area, provided such signs are removed as soon as the work has been completed.

2.	Temporary signs and banners of a non-commercial nature across a public right-of-way are permitted provided (a) permission is obtained from the Township Supervisors, (b) they are erected in a location which



105
 


3.	Legal notices, official traffic signs, community facilities signs, municipality	identification signs, non-commercial historical or geographical identification information, or directional signs erected by government bodies. Such signs may be placed within the road right-of­ way.

4.	Geographical identification and greeting signs  erected by  civic  and service organizations provided that they do not exceed four (4) square feet in area and are comprised of the organization's standard emblem or seal.

5.	Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts, or moving lights.

6.	Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no advertising matter.

7.	Temporary signs as described in Section 16.04 of this Ordinance.

8.	Signs identifying farms, farm associations, and agricultural products, provided that no farm or association identification sign exceeds ten (10) square feet in area and no more than one (1) sign shall be erected per road frontage. Signs identifying agricultural products shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.

9.	Hunting, fishing, and trespassing signs and signs indicating private ownership of roadways or property, provided that such signs do not exceed two (2) square feet in area and when erected along street frontage the signs shall be spaced at intervals of not less than one hundred (100) feet.

10.	Signs up to four (4) square feet in area are necessary for the identification, protection, and operation of public utility facilities.

B.	Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all times, including the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of said sign. The Zoning Administrator shall require such maintenance, and in the event the sign owner fails to comply with said requirements, the Zoning Administrator shall proceed against him as provided in Section 18.01 of this Ordinance. Any sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies and has been abandoned, as specified in Section 17.03A of this Ordinance, shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises on which the sign is located.





104
 


will not cause a traffic hazard, (c) they meet safety standards and are maintained, and (d) they are removed when their temporary use is completec;l.

3. Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive, or event of civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization. Such signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after completion of the campaign, drive or event.

4.	Temporary signs directing patrons, members audience or customers to temporary exhibits, shows, events, or activities (e.g.) yard sales, fruit sales, conventions, etc.). Such signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after completion of the campaign, drive or event.

5.	Signs erected in conjunction with a political election provided that all signs are removed within forty-eight (48) hours after the date of the election.

B.	Off-premises directional signs which require issuance of a permit:

1.	Off-premises directional signs which are used to direct patrons, members, audience, customers, clients to service clubs, churches, commercial, industrial, institutional or other organizations may be erected subject to the following requirements:

a.	A sign shall indicate only the name of the  organization and the direction to the facility.

b.	Except at intersections, no sign shall be placed within two hundred
(200) feet of another sign associated with the same principal use.

c.	All signs shall be placed within two (2) miles of the use and nor more than six (6) signs for each principal use may be erected within the borders of the municipality.

d.	All signs shall consist of dark lettering on a light background, excluding standard issue signs. The signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area, and no moving parts,  flashing lights, or any type of illumination shall be permitted.

e.	At intersections of public streets, no more than one (1) sign post accommodating all  directional  signs  may  be  erected  per  corner. Said posts shall not exceed six (6) inches in width and shall not be less than  three  (3) feet nor  greater  than  eight  (8) feet in height



106
 


above ground. No more than one (1) sign per principal use may be attached to any sign post and no portion of any sign shall be erected within the "clear sight triangle" as specified in Section 13.06 of this Ordinance.

f.	Application for off-premises directional sign permits shall include a map indicating location of placement requests and the land owner's written approval, name to be placed on sign, and distances from the facility to each sign.

C.	One (1) name plate for a home occupation, provided that the sign does not exceed four (4) square feet in size and identifies only the name of the occupant and title of the occupation. If lighted, the sign shall be illuminated  without  objectionable glare.	No displays or change in facade shall indicate from the exterior that the building is being used for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.

D.	One (1) institutional sign and/or  one (1) bulletin  board, for places of worship, schools, hospitals, libraries, museums, s cial clubs, and similar uses, provided each sign or bulletin board does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and is located no closer to a road right-of-way than one-half (1/2) the depth of the existing front yard or fifteen (15) feet whichever is less. If lighted, it shall be illuminated without objectionable glare and shall be from the top down. Additionally, if such property fronts on more than one (1) street, each street frontage may contain the above mentioned signs.

E.	Subdivision Signs.

1.	Temporary - a sign advertising lots for sale, giving pieces, dimensions, services, etc., and which shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the sale date of the last lot.

2.	Permanent - a sign containing only the name of the development or subdivision and designed to be permanently affixed to the land.

One (1) sign per road frontage may be permitted provided the sign is placed at an entrance to the subdivision, is located on the property to be subdivided, and does not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. No portion of any sign shall be erected within the "clear sight triangle" as specified in Section 13.06.

SECTION  16.05	SIGNS  IN  RESIDENTIAL  AND  AGRICULTURAL  DISTRICTS.
The  following  types  of  on-premises  signs  may  be  permitted  in  residential  and agricultural districts unless otherwise prohibited:

A.	Signs for the advertisement of agricultural businesses as follows:




107
 


1.	For each property involved in agri-business, one sign may be erected, provided no sign or portion thereof shall be located closer to the road right-of-way than     the depth of the existing front yard or twenty-five
(25) feet; whichever is less.

a.	Wall, or projecting sign - maximum sign area shall not  exceed sixteen (16) square feet.

b.	Freestanding sign - maximum sign area shall not exceed twenty­ five (25) square feet.

B.	Signs for nonconforming  commercial or industrial uses as follows:

1.	For each property involved in a commercial  or  industrial  use,  a total sign area of thirty (30) square feet shall be permitted. No sign or portion thereof shall be located no closer to the road right-of-way than	the depth of the existing front yard of fifteen (15) feet, whichever  is less.

a.	Projecting sign - maximum sign area shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet.

b.	Freestanding sign - maximum sign size shall not exceed sixteen
(16) square feet.

c.	Wall or Window  sign - maximum  sign size  shall not  exceed twelve (12) square feet.

d.	Ground sign - maximum sign size shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet.

C.	Sighs as permitted in Section 16.04 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 16.06  SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.  Unless
otherwise specified, only on-premises signs may be permitted, provided the maximum sign area shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet per street frontage. All wall, ground, projecting, roof or freestanding signs must be erected in compliance with the following standards:

A.	Signs for the advertisement of agri-business as permitted in Section 16.05 of this Ordinance.

B.	Signs for commercial, office, institutional, and industrial uses as follows:






108
 


1.	One (1) wall sign for each road frontage provided it is attached to the wall of the principal building and projects horizontally not more than twelve (12) inches therefrom and occupies not more than fifteen (15) percent of the total area of the front of the principal building. It shall not project more than three (3) feet above the roof line or parapet wall.

2.	One (1) projecting or roof sign for each road frontage provided it shall not project beyond a vertical plane two (2) feet inside the road right-of­ way line and does not exceed  twenty  (20)  square  feet  in  area.  Said signs shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. ·

3.	One (1) freestanding sign for each road frontage, provided it does not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area. It shall not extend beyond a vertical plane two (2) feet inside the lot from the road right-of-way line and shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet.

4.	One (1) ground sign for each road frontage, provided it does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, nor pe located closer than fifteen (15) feet from any road right-of-way line. Additionally, it shall  not  be located within the clear sight triangle as specified in Section 13.06.

5.	General shopping district identification signs, provided they are separate and not attached to any building. Maximum of two (2) such signs for any one (1) general shopping district. The height of signs shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet measured from the ground, and the maxim um size of the sign portion itself shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.

C.	Off-premises billboard and advertising sign board may be erected and maintained, provided the total display area of all such signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet for each ten (10) feet of road frontage, and the total display area of any sign shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area. Said signs shall not be placed less than one hundred (100) feet apart nor within one hundred (100) feet of existing billboards or advertising sign boards. No sign or portion thereof shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the road right-of-way  and  shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.

D.	Signs as permitted in Section 16.04 of this Ordinance.

SECTION  16.07	NONCONFORMING  SIGNS.	Any sign erected, constructed, replaced, altered, enlarged, or relocated before the effective date of this Ordinance, that would not otherwise be permitted under the terms of this Ordinance, may remain and continue to be used, maintained and repaired provided:





109
 


A.	A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced, altered, relocated, or reconstruction except to bring the sign into total compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

B.	A  nonconforming  sign  may  be  used,  maintained  and  repaired  subject  to  the following requirements:

1.	Maintenance and repair of a nonconforming sign is permitted when said activities are necessary to maintain the sign in a presentable, functional condition.	Maintenance and repair activities shall not  include alterations, relocation or reconstruction but may include: replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the  maintenance of said sign.  Prior to the removal of a nonconforming sign  for maintenance, repair or message change,  a  permit  shall  be secured  from  the  Zoning  Administrator.    Said  permit  shall  allow  the applicant  to re-erect the repaired or re-messaged nonconforming sign within thirty  (30) days of issuance.   If the nonconforming  sign is not erected within  the specified time, it shall lose its nonconforming status and  any  successive  sign shall conform  with  all applicable  Ordinance requirements.

2.	Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the change in advertising, identifying, or directional message of a nonconforming sign so long as the change does not involve any alterations, relocation or reconstruction of the nonconforming sign. Message changes of a nonconforming sign that are a result of a transfer in ownership of the premises on which the principal use is located, excluding contract advertising signs, shall be prohibited and any successive sign shall conform to the Ordinance requirements.	If the message change requires removal of the sign, a permit shall be secured as in the above-subsection.

3.	A nonconforming sign, which has been damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, accident, or calamity, to an extent which is greater than fifty
(50) percent  of the sign or sign value,  may not be repaired  except in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.  A nonconforming sign
which has sustained less than fifty (50) percent  damage of the sign or sign value may be repaired provided:

a.	The repaired sign is virtually  unchanged,  except  for  building materials and message,  or is less nonconforming  than the original sign; and

b.	Repair is completed within sixty (60) days from the date of damage.
Failure to repair within sixty (60) days shall result in the loss of





110
 


nonconforming sign rights and any successive sign shall conform with all applicable Ordinance requirements.

4. When a ·nonconforming sign has been demolished or destroyed by deterioration or removal, or has been moved from its location for reasons other than for an approved repair, maintenance or a change in message, said sign shall not be reconstructed or replaced except in complete conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.

C.	A nonconforming sign which pertains to a time event, purpose or use which no longer applies, has been abandoned or changed, shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises on which the sign is located.

D.	Proposed signs that are associated with a nonconforming use shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the sign is located.












































111
 


ARTICLE 17 NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION 17.01 INTENT.  Within any zoning district established by this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereto there exists:

A.	Lots,

B.	Uses of land,

C.	Structures, or

D.	Uses of structures or land and structures in combination,

Which were lawful prior to the passage or amendment of this Ordinance, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendment, and are hereinafter referred to as nonconforming. It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit these nonconformities to remain or continue until they are brought into compliance. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities shall not be used as grounds for adding other structures or additional uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.

Nonconforming uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses within the same zoning district.  Any nonconforming use of a structure, of land, or structure and land in combination may be extended or enlarged only as provided within this Ordinance. Extension or enlargement of a nonconforming use by the addition of uses not normally accessory to the existing nonconforming use shall not be permitted.

To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual construction has been carried on diligently. Additionally, where excavation, demolition or removal of any existing building has begun preparatory to rebuilding, such activities shall be deemed actual construction provided that work is carried on diligently.

SECTION 17.02  NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.	Following the effective date of adoption of this Ordinance, a permitted principal structure and accessory structure(s) may be erected upon any single nonconforming lot of record. Said lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the



112
 

same ownership at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district. However, yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of any prescribed requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Zoning Hearing Board.

If two or more contiguous nonconforming lots held under single ownership have been duly approved by the Township Supervisors and are on record in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lebanon County for no more than three (3) years before the date of adoption of this Ordinance, such lots may be developed, as recorded, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lots are located.

If two or more contiguous nonconforming lots held under single ownership have been duly approved by the Township supervisors and are on record  in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lebanon County for more than three (3) years before the date of adoption of this Ordinance, such lots may be developed, provided that:

A.	The lot area and lot width of all lots is 75% or more of the required lot area and width; and

B.	All yard, lot coverage and other applicable requirements of the district can be satisfied; and

C.	Contiguous nonconforming lots which cannot satisfy requirements A and B of this subsection shall be combined, enlarged or resubdivided to satisfy requirements A andB.

No portion of a nonconforming lot shall be sold or used in a manner which further diminishes compliance with the lot area and lot width requirements of this Ordinance, nor shall a portion of a conforming lot be sold or used in a manner which creates a nonconforming lot.

SECTION 17.03  NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.	Where lawful use of land exists at the time of the passage of the Ordinance which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this Ordinance, and where such use involves no principal structure, the use may be continued, provided that:

A.	No such nonconforming use of land which is ceased, removed, discontinued or abandoned for a period of 180 consecutive dates shall thereafter be reestablished. This cessation, discontinuance or abandonment time limit may be extended by an additional	180 day time period where contracts or agreements are being negotiated,  provided  1) the  property  owner  makes  written  application  for  an




113
 


extension, citing the reasons necessary for the extension and the length of extension required and 2) the Zoning Administrator issues a Temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance to register the reasons for extension, the length of extension, and the nature of the nonconformity.

B.	No principal structures shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.

C.	Expansion of nonconforming uses shall be  limited to a maximum aggregate enlargement of 50% of the acre of land so used, as compared to the land in nonconforming use at the date of adoption of  this  Ordinance.  Contiguous  land owned at  the effective date of this Ordinance may be used for expansion of the nonconforming use. However, for purposes of this Ordinance,  approved  streets or road rights-of-way define the limit  expansion  of  any  nonconforming  use  of land, and such uses shall not extend across said streets or road rights-of-way.

SECTION 17.04 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES. A lawful structure existing at the effective date of adoption of this Ordinance that could not otherwise be built due to restrictions on lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, may remain, subject to the  following provisions:

A.	A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or altered  in  a  way  which increases its nonconformity, but a structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.

B.	A nonconforming structure or portion thereof may be extended along established, existing building lines provided:

1.	The extension meets all other applicable yard, lot coverage and height regulations; and

2.	Extensions or enlargements along the nonconforming setback shall be limited to a maximum 100% increase of the area of land covered by the portion of structure which is in a nonconforming status. Extension or enlargement in a conforming manner shall not be subject to the 100% limitation.	Any extension or enlargement shall be regulated by other applicable yard, lot coverage and height restrictions.

C.	A nonconforming structure which has been damaged or destroyed to any extent by fire, explosion, accident or calamity may be repaired or reconstructed provided:

1.	The rebuilt structure is unchanged  in its original size or location, or is less nonconforming than the original structure; and




114
 


2.	Repair or reconstruction is commenced within one (1) year from the date of damage or destruction. Failure to repair or reconstruct within one (1) year shall result  in loss of nonconforming rights and any successive structure· shall conform with all applicable Ordinance requirements.

D.	A nonconforming structure which has been demolished or destroyed to any extent by  deterioration or removal shall not be reconstructed or structurally replaced, except that:

1.	Any conforming portion of the nonconforming structure may  be reconstructed  or replaced; and

2.	Repairs and maintenance shall be permitted to maintain the nonconforming structure in a safe condition. However:

a.	Restoration and repairs shall be limited to protective exterior improvements; and

b.	A maximum aggregate of 50% of the structural or weight bearing components of the nonconforming structure may be replaced, during structural alterations, so that repairs  and  maintenance  do  not actually involve replacement of the old structure with a new one over any period of time.

E.	Should a nonconforming structure be moved for any reason then:

1.	Relocation on part of the same land area previously covered by the structu1·e shall equal or decrease the nonconformity; or

2.	Relocation to a previously unoccupied area shall conform to all applicable Ordinance requirements.

SECTION  17.05	NONCONFORMING  USES OF STRUCTURES  OR LAND AND
STRUCTURES IN COMBINATION.	If lawful use involving principal structures or land and structures in combination exists at the effective date of adoption of this Ordinance, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following:

A.	Abandonment of a nonconforming use of a structure (or land and structure in combination) shall remove the nonconforming status of the structure (or land and structure in combination) so that the nonconforming use may not thereafter be reestablished.	Furthermore, use of the structure (or structure and land in combination) shall thereafter conform with the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. Abandonment shall be deemed to have occurred when the nonconforming use is ceased, removed or discontinued for a period of one hundred



II5
 


eight (180) consecutive days. However, this cessation, discontinuance or abandonment time limit may be supplemented by an additional  one  hundred eighty (180). day time period where contracts or agreements are being negotiated, provided 1) the property owner makes written application for an extension, citing the reasons necessary for the extension and the length of extension requested and
2) the Zoning Administrator issues a Temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance
to register the reasons for extension, the length of extension, and the nature of the nonconformity.

B.	Extension or enlargement of 1) the structure containing the nonconforming use or
2) the area of land used for storage, display or sales of products or materials in
combination with the nonconforming use, shall be subject to the following:

1.	Expansion of the nonconforming use shall be limited to  a maximum aggregate enlargement of 50% of the area of land so used at the date of adoption of this Ordinance, subject to the requirements that:

a.	The structure containing the nonconforming use may be enlarged to cover 50% additional land area (lot coverage); and

b.	Expansion may include only the same number of stories existing on the structure at the effective date of this  Ordinance.  Additional stories shall not be permitted; and

c.	The area of land used for storage, display or sales of products or materials in combination with the nonconforming use  may  be enlarged to cover 50% additional land area.

d.	Contiguous land may be used for the maximum 50% expansion, provided the land so used was owned at the effective date of this Ordinance and expansion does not extend across any street or road right-of-way.

C.	Any nonconforming use of a structure (or land and structure in combination) may, as  a Special Exception,  be changed to another nonconforming  use provided the Zoning Hearing Board finds that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use.

D. Where the nonconformity applies to use of structure (or land and structure in combination), removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Removal or destruction, for the purposes of this subsection, shall include the removal or destruction of an aggregate of 75% or more of the structural or weight bearing components of the structure.





116
 


SECTION	17.06	USES   UNDER   SPECIAL   EXCEPTION   PROVISIONS   NOT
NONCONFORMING USES. Any existing use which is permitted as a Special Exception in a. district under the terms of this Ordinance (other than a  change through  Zoning  Hearing  Board  action  from  one  nonconforming  use  to  another
nonconforming  use  not  generally  permitted  in the  district)  shall not be  deemed  a
nonconforming use in such district. However, expansion, enlargement or change to that existing use shall be subject to the same criteria specified for Special Exception approval within the district and administrative sections of this Ordinance, although Zoning Hearing Board action shall not be required.

SECTION 17.07	NONCONFORMING  SIGNS.	Any sign erected, constructed, or placed before the effective date of this Ordinance which does not conform to the applicable provisions of Article 16 of this Ordinance is a nonconforming sign. No such sign shall be replaced, relocated or otherwise changed until approval is obtained in accordance with the requirements of Article 16 of this Ordinance.












































117
 



ARTICLE 18

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT BUILDING AND ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATION OF ZONING COMPLIANCE

SECTION   18.01	ADMINISTRATION.   ENFORCEMENT  AND  AUTHORITY.	A
Zoning Administrator  designated by the Township  Supervisors shall administer and enforce  this  Ordinance.	The  Zoning  Administrator	may  be  provided  with  the
assistance of such other persons as the Township Supervisors may direct.  The Zoning
Administrator  shall administer  the  Zoning  Ordinance  in accordance with  its literal terms and he  shall not  have  the power  to permit  any construction,  use  or change
which does not conform to the Zoning Ordinance.

If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall have the authority to order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings, signs or structures or illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work in process; or any other action provided by this Ordinance to ensure compliance with, or prevent violation of, its provisions.

SECTION  18.02	BUILDING  AND  ZONING  PERMITS  REQUIRED.	No  building,
structure, sign or land shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed,  altered, converted, removed, maintained, moved, added to, used or the use therein changed unless and
until a Building and Zoning Permit is obtained from the Zoning Administrator.	The permit requirements shall apply to all permanent, temporary, seasonal, part-time or movable buildings,  structures, signs or uses, unless exempted elsewhere in this Ordinance.	No  Building	and  Zoning  Permit	shall  be	issued  by  the  Zoning Administrator except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, unless he receives a written order from the Zoning Hearing Board in the form of an Appeal,
Special Exception or Variance as provided by this Ordinance.

SECTION   18.03	APPLICATION   FOR  A  BUILDING   AND   ZONING   PERMIT.
Applications for a Building and Zoning Permit shall be filed by the property owner, his authorized agent or an individual with a proprietary interest in the property, said individual to hereafter be known as the applicant. Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and contain the following:

A.	BUILDING AND ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION FORM. On a form supplied by the Zoning Administrator, the Applicant shall provide information to describe the size, location and nature of the proposed building, structure or use. The applicant shall sign the application form to verify the accuracy of the information.




118
 


the  size, location  and  nature  of the  proposed  building,  structure  or  use.	The applicant shall sign the application form to verify the accuracy of the information.

B.	PLOT PLAN. All applications for a Building and Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan in accordance with the following:

1.	Three (3) copies of the plot plan shall be submitted.  In lieu thereof, an 8
% x 11" plot plan is acceptable, provided it is suitable for photo copying.

2.	The plot plan shall show, where applicable, size, shape, and dimensions of  the lot; size and location of all existing buildings,  size, location, and use  of all proposed buildings, additions or alterations, parking lots, parking spaces, driveways, signs and other site improvements, and other information  as may be necessary  to determine conformance with this Ordinance.

3.	Engineering, architectural and surveyor's plans may be required by the Zoning Administrator where necessary to accurately depict the proposed work on a property.

4.	The Zoning Administrator may waive the plot plan requirement where the  applicant  satisfactorily  demonstrates  that  minimum  standards  are greatly exceeded.

C.	OTHER PERMIT PREREQUISITES. At the time of application, the applicant shall produce, where applicable, a valid sewage permit, road encroachment permit, Labor and Industry approval, subdivision approval or other approval preliminary to issuance of the Building and Zoning Permit.

D.	APPLICATION FEE. All applications for a Building and Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the current schedule of fees resolution adopted by the Township Supervisors.

SECTION 18.04	INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS.	When an applicant fails to: 1) complete and sign the Building and Zoning Permit application form, 2) submit a plot plan, 3) pay the required application fee, 4) secure and produce other permit prerequisites, or 5) submit other information required by the Zoning Administrator, the application for a Building and Zoning Permit shall be deemed incomplete. The Zoning Administrator may notify the applicant to request supplemental information to complete the application. Such notice shall prescribe a time period, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for completion of the application by submission of the supplementary information.  Failure to complete the application shall result in written disapproval, in accordance with Section 18.05 of this Ordinance.





119
 


SECTION  18.05  ISSUANCE  OF A BUILDING AND  ZONING  PERMIT.	After  an
application has been determined to be complete, the Zoning Administrator sha!l take official action to approve or disapprove the permit application in accordance with the
following:

A.	APPROVAL. When a completed application is found to conform  with  the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator, within twenty (20) days of application completion, shall issue  an  approved  Building  and  Zoning Permit.		Issuance of the permit shall be accompanied by an approved plot plan, where	applicable, and a placard for display on the  premises  during  the construction	or  alteration  period.  Building  and  Zoning  Permits  are nontransferable and are valid for work authorized therein only for the owner and property so designated.

B.	DISAPPROVAL.	When a completed application is found not to conform with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator, within twenty (20) days of application completion, shall disapprove the application for a Building and Zoning Permit. Plot plans submitted with the application shall  also  be disapproved.	The disapproval shall be in writing, citing the deficiencies of the application.	Appeals from  a disapproval by the Zoning Administrator shall be taken in the manner set forth in Articles 19 through 22 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 18.06  REVOCATION OF A BUILDING AND ZONING PERMIT.  Building
and Zoning Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans. A Building and Zoning Permit shall be revoked, in writing, by the Zoning Administrator for any of the following reasons:

A.	When use, alteration or construction does not comply with or exceeds the scope of that authorized by the Building and Zoning Permit; or

B.	When information pertinent  to the application for a Building and Zoning Permit has been falsified or misrepresented; or

C.	When other provisions of this Ordinance are violated in conjunction with the use, alteration or construction authorized by the Building and Zoning Permit; or

D.	When the original decision of the Zoning Administrator did not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance.

Written revocation shall be provided to the applicant and shall indicate the reasons for such action. Additionally, the revocable offenses shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and subject the violator to the penalties provided by Article 27 of this Ordinance.




120
 



SECTION  18.07    EXPIRATION  OF A  BUILDING  AND  ZONING  PERMIT.    An
approved Building and Zoning Permit shall expire:

A. If the work described therein has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance; or

B. If the work described therein has not been completed within two (2) years from the date of issuance.

Upon expiration of a Building and Zoning Permit work shall cease and shall not thereafter be commenced unless and until a new Building and Zoning  Permit is obtained.

SECTION 18.08  CERTIFICATE  OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.   The Zoning Admini­
strator shall maintain Certificate of Zoning Compliance forms which shall be utilized
to record the following:

A.	NONCONFORMITIES.	Owners and occupants of nonconforming uses of land or structures and land in combination shall obtain a Certificate of Zoning Compliance to document wherein the use differs from the provisions of this Ordinance. Authorization to renew, change, extend,  enlarge  or  alter  the  nonconformity  shall not be granted unless and until the specifics of the nonconformity are first recorded on a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and the change or alteration  is  found  to comply with Article 17 of this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may require written documentation to verify the characteristics of the use and the dates of establishment.

B.	APPROVED  USES AND  STRUCTURES.	Owners or occupants of uses or structures authorized by approved Building and Zoning Permits may request a Certificate of Zoning Compliance to verify that the use or construction completed is in  compliance with the approved permit and the provisions of this Ordinance. Similarly, owners or occupants of pre-existing conforming uses or structures may request a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Upon receipt of such a request, the Zoning Administrator shall inspect the premises and approve or disapprove a Certificate of Zoning Compliance.

Nothing contained herein shall preclude the Zoning Administrator from conducting routine inspections and investigations to determine zoning compliance,  nor shall it prevent him from responding to complaints on zoning violations. Furthermore, violations of the conditions, uses or construction approved within a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be a violation of this Ordinance, punishable in accordance with Article 27 of this Ordinance.






121
 



ARTICLE 19

ZONING ·HEARING BOARD: ESTABLISHMENT  AND PROCEDURE

A Zoning Hearing Board shall be established. The membership of the board shall upon the determination of the Township Supervisors, consist of either three or five residents of the municipality appointed by the Township Supervisors. The terms of office of a three-member board shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The terms of office of a five-member board shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of no more than two members of a five-member board shall expire each year and of the initial appointments of the two additional members, one shall be appointed for a one year term and one shall be appointed for a two year term. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed from office by the Township Supervisors for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by the Township Supervisors for the unexpired term of the member affected. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other office in the municipality.

SECTION 19.01 PROCEEDINGS  OF THE ZONING HEARING BOARD.

A.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs, in keeping with the provisions of this Ordinance and the PMPC.

B.	Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Zoning Hearing Board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths  and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.

C.	The Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for and fix the compensation of legal counsel, as the need arises. The legal counsel shall be an attorney other than the municipal solicitor. The board may also employ or contract for and fix the compensation of experts and other staff and may contract for services as it shall deem necessary. The compensation of legal counsel, experts and staff and the sums expended for services shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the Township for this use.

SECTION 19.02  HEARINGS. APPEALS. AND NOTICE

A.	Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board concerning interpretation or administration of this Ordinance may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any office or bureau of  the governing body  of the Township affected by  any decision  of the Zoning Officer.  Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty
(60) days or such lesser period as may be provided by the rules of the Board, by
filing with the  Zoning  Officer  and with the  Zoning Hearing Board  a notice  of



122
 


appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record from which the action appealed was taken.

B.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within 45 days after the hearing.  However, where a hearing has been continued (e.g. scheduling further testimony, conducting a site inspection or accepting briefs), the decision shall be rendered within 45 days of the final hearing on the case.

C.	Conduct of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be in accordance with Article IX of the PMPC. The concurring vote of two (2) members on a three (3) member Board or the concurring vote of three (3) members of a five (5) member Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or determination of the Zoning Officer, or to decide in favor of the petitioner on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application of this Ordinance.

SECTION 19.03	STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.	An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the Zoning Officer from whorn the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Hearing Board after notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by a court of record on application, or notice to the Zoning Officer from whom the appeal is taken and due cause shown.



























123
 



ARTICLE  20

ZONING HEARING BOARD: POWERS AND DUTIES

SECTION 20.01	AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURES.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the authority to hear and decide petitions of appeal, where applicable for Administrative Review, Special Exceptions, Variance and Ordinance Challenges. Petitions for appeal and subsequent hearings shall be in accordance with the provisions of the PMPC, and the following:

A.	A written petition shall be submitted by the petitioner on the form provided by the Zoning Officer. The petition shall, in addition to information pertaining to the petitioner and property location, specify the type of appeal being taken and the grounds for the appeal.   The petition  shall be considered complete when,  along with the above information, a fee is submitted in the  amount  set  forth  by resolution by the Township Supervisors.

B.	Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to all interested parties, all property owners adjoining the affected property, and all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the affected property. Furthermore, notice of said hearing shall be advertised according to the PMPC, and conspicuously posted on the affected property at least one (1) week prior to the hearing. Continued or reconvened hearings shall not require notice and advertising in accordance with this subsection, provided the time and date of the subsequent hearing is announced at the original hearing.

C.	The public hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days from the date of the petitioner's request unless the applicant has agreed to an extension of time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.

D.	The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by the petition who has made a timely appearance of record before the Board, and any other person, including civic or community organizations. The board may supply forms and require persons to enter appearances, in writing, in order to become parties.

E.	The hearing shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint any member as a Hearing Officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board; however, the applicant, in addition to the municipality, may, prior to the decision, waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the Hearing Officer as final.

F.	The Chairman, Acting Chairman or Hearing Officer presiding shall  have  the power  to  administer  oaths  and  issue  subpoenas  to  compel  the  attendance  of



124
 


witnesses	and  the  production	of  relevant	documents  and  papers,	including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.

G.	Parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and have the right to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on  relevant issues. Formal rules  of  evidence  shall  not  apply,  but  irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.

H.	The Board or the Hearing Officer shall keep a taped recording, or a stenographic record, if requested, of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the petitioner and the Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid either by the Board, if the Board or Hearing Officer orders the transcript; the person appealing the decision of the Board; or the party requesting the original transcript. The cost of additional copies of the original shall be paid by the person requesting such copies.

I.	The Board or the Hearing Officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issues involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not take notice of any communications, reports, staff memoranda or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded the opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his representatives unless all parties are given opportunity to be present.

J.	The Board or the Hearing Officer shall render a written decision or findings, if no decision is called for, within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer. Where the petition is contested or denied, the decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact, related conclusions with reference to the provisions of law relied upon and the appropriate reasons for arriving at those conclusion. If the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations available within forty-five (45) days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings. The Board's decision shall be entered no later than thirty (30) days after the report of the Hearing Officer. Where the Board fails to render the decision within the period named above or fails to hold the hearing within sixty (60) days from the date of the petitioner's request, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing or on the record, to an extension of time. When a decision has been deemed to be rendered in favor of an applicant because of the Board's failure to meet or render a decision on time, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within ten (10) days of the last day it could have met to so act. If the Board  fails to provide  such notice,  the  applicant  may  do so.   Nothing  in this



125
 

Ordinance shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the petition to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.

K.	A copy of the· decision or findings, where no decision is called for, shall be delivered to  the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its date.	To all other persons who have filed their names and addresses with the Board not later than the day of the last hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.

L.	The procedures described herein shall apply to all Zoning Hearing Board hearings, and the following sections shall further explain when the Zoning Hearing Board has jurisdiction in legal matters and the specific powers and duties of the Zoning Hearing Board for the various appeals permitted by this Ordinance and the PMPC.

SECTION  20.02	JURISDICTION  OF ZONING  HEARING  BOARD.	The  Zoning
Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:

A.	Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those brought before Township Supervisors as curative amendments.

B.	Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleging defects in the process in enactment or adoption, such challenges to be appealed within thirty (30) days of the effective date of said Ordinance.

C.	Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer (classified as Administrative Reviews), including but not limited to granting, denial or failure to act upon an application for a permit; the issuance of a cease and desist order;  permit revocation; or the registration or refusal to register a nonconforming use, structure or lot.

D.	Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of flood plain regulations contained in this or other Township ordinances affecting land use.

E.	Petitions for Variances from the terms of this Ordinance or from a flood hazard ordinance regulating land use, should such regulations ever be enacted separately, following the guidelines enumerated in Article 20 of this Ordinance.

F.	Petitions for Special Exceptions under this Ordinance or flood hazard ordinance regulating land use, should such regulation be enacted separately, following the guidelines enumerated in Article 20 of this Ordinance.





126
 

G.	Appeals from the determination  of the Zoning Officer or that officer or agency which	shall be charged with the responsibility to  administer  transfers  of development rights or performance density provisions under this Ordinance.

H.	Appeals from the determination of the Township Engineer or Zoning Officer in the determination of land use regulations with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management when such regulations are not within the scope of the reviews conducted for subdivisions and land development plans or planned residential developments, as enacted. When such regulations are within the  scope of those reviews, appeal is taken to Township Supervisors pursuant to the  enumerated jurisdictions of the Township Supervisor in Article 20 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 20.03  JURISDICTION OF TOWNSHIP SUPERVISORS.	The Township
Supervisors shall have exclusive jurisdiction  to hear and render final adjudication in the following matters:

A.	Establish a schedule of fees and charges for activities required by this Ordinance.

B.	Applications for approval of subdivisions and land development plans.

C.	Applications for curative amendments.

D.	Applications for amendments to the Zoning Ordinance.

E.	Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the Township Engineer in the administration of provisions of law with reference to sedimentation and erosion control  and stormwater management insofar as those provisions are within the scope of applications under the subdivision and land development regulations, as enacted.   When not within such scope, the appeal is taken to the Zoning Hearing Board  pursuant to the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board enumerated in Article 20 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 20.04  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEWS.

A.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide appeals, to be classified as Administrative Review procedures, where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures, has misinterpreted or misapplied a provision of this Ordinance, or has otherwise made an error in any order,	requirements, decision or determination in the enforcement of this Ordinance. An Administrative  Review shall also be utilized by an appellant who desires a determination or interpretation of the meaning or intent of a requirement of this Ordinance with has inconclusive or unclear language.





127
 

B.	After the public hearing on an appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall have the authority, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this Ordinance, to reverse, affirm, or modify, wholly or partly, the order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Officer.

SECTION 20.05 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide petitions for Special Exceptions specifically authorized in this Ordinance. Decisions to grant or deny the petition shall be subject to the following:

A.  Such use shall be specifically authorized as a Special Exception in this Ordinance.

B.	The Special Exception use shall satisfy all requirements and conditions specified within this Ordinance.

C.	Where it is deemed necessary to implement the purpose and intent of this Ordinance, reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, may be required by the Board in granting the Special Exception.

D. The Special Exception shall be compatible with adjacent and nearby properties and shall not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.

E.	The Special Exception use shall be designed to provide satisfactory arrangement for:

1.	Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon, with particular	reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and conveniences, traffic flow and control, and the access in case of fire or catastrophe.

2.	Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in #1 above, the requirements of Article 15 of this Ordinance, and the economic, noise, glare, or odor effects of the Special Exception on adjoining properties in the district.

3.	Refuse and service areas to be located and maintained in a safe and sanitary manner, well screened on three sides. Trash and rubbish shall be stored in covered vermin proof containers.

4.	Utilities to be located underground where possible and to be compatible with the surrounding area. Availability, ease of access and safety precautions shall be considered.

5.	Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character, in accordance with Article 14 of this Ordinance.




128
 

6.	Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties	in the district and compliance with Article 16 of this Ordinance.

7.	Required yards and other open spaces as specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.

SECTION 20.06  VARIANCES.

A.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide petitions for Variances from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. A Variance may be granted provided that all of the following findings are made, where relevant, in a given case:

1.	That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,	narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally granted by the provisions of this Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located; and

2.	That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and that the authorization of a Variance is, therefore, necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property, and

3.	That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the petitioner; and

4.	That the Variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and

5.	That the Variance  if authorized,  will represent  the  minimum  variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue; and

6.	That the Variance, if authorized, will not confer on the petitioner any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to the owners of other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district; and




129
 

7.	That nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the	same district and permitted or nonconforming  use  of  lands, structures and buildings in other zoning districts shall not be considered grounds for the granting of a Variance; and

8. That a Variance shall not be granted solely for financial reasons or to facilitate financial gain.

B. In granting a Variance, reasonable conditions and safeguards  may be attached where it is deemed necessary to implement the purposes and intent of this Ordinance.

SECTION 20.07	ORDINANCE CHALLENGES.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear challenges to the validity of the zoning ordinance or map, except as provided by the PMPC. In all such challenges, the Zoning Hearing Board shall take evidence and make a record thereon. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall decide all contested questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact.

SECTION  20.08	EXPIRATION OR REVOCATION OF A ZONING HEARING BOARD DECISION.

A.	The granting or approval of a Special Exception or Variance shall be valid only for the petitioner and the property specified in the petition. Alterations or changes to the use or building authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board shall require re­ application to the Board. If the Special Exception or Variance has not been implemented within two (2) years of the date of the Zoning Hearing Board decision, said approval shall expire and become null and void. If the property affected by the Variance or Special Exception is transferred in ownership prior to the implementation of the Variance or Special Exception, said approval shall immediately become invalid upon such transfer of ownership.

B.	The Zoning Hearing Board may revoke approval of a Variance or Special Exception where:

1.	The petitioner repeatedly violates conditions or safeguards specified in the Board's decision, or

2.	The petitioner initiates use or construction contrary to the  Board's decision, or

3.	The petitioner is found to have misrepresented or falsified information pertinent to the Board's decision, or





130
 

4. The Board's original decision was in error and the revocation is instituted within thirty (30) days of the original decision or prior to substantial reliance thereon by the petitioner.

C.	Violation of the conditions or safeguards or use or construction contrary to that specified by the Zoning Hearing Board decision shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, punishable under Article  27  of this  Ordinance.  Revocation  of the Zoning Hearing Board approval shall not preclude the Zoning Officer from instituting civil enforcement procedures or the  Township  from proceeding  in a court of law or equity to prevent or remedy violations of this Ordinance.



















































131
 





ARTICLE 21

APPEALS FROM THE ZONING HEARING BOARD

Any person or persons or agent of the Township aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas. Appeal shall be taken in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Planning Code, and other prevailing laws of the state of Pennsylvania.



















































132
 





ARTICLE 22

DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE  OFFICIAL, ZONING HEARING BOARD. TOWNSHIP  SUPERVISORS AND  COURTS ON MATTERS  OF APPEAL

It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator and then the Zoning Hearing Board. Recourse from the decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be to the courts as provided in Article 21.

It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the duties of the Township Supervisors in connection with this Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this Ordinance. Under this Ordinance the Township Supervisors shall have only the duties (1) of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this Ordinance, as provided by law, (2) of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Article 23, and (3) those duties specifically noted in other articles of this Ordinance.





































133
 


ARTICLE 23

SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES

The Township Supervisors shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for Building and Zoning Permits, Certificates of Zoning Compliance, appeals, petitions and other matters pertaining to this Ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and may be altered or amended only by the Township Supervisors.

Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or petition, and said application or petition shall be considered incomplete.















































134
 


ARTICLE  24 AMENDMENTS
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. However, no such action may be taken until after a public hearing is held by the Township Supervisors, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.

Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation once each week for two (2) successive weeks. The first publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing. If the proposed amendment includes a change to the Official Zoning Map, notice of the public hearing shall be conspicuously posted at sufficient points along the tract to notify potentially interested parties. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one (1) week prior to the date of the hearing.

If the amendment is initiated by any parties other than the Township Planning Commission, the Township Supervisors shall submit each such amendment to the Township Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Township Planning Commission with an opportunity to submit recommendations. In all cases, the proposed amendment shall be submitted to the Lebanon County Planning Department at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing for review and comment. If after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is revised, or further revised, to include land previously not affected by it, the Township Supervisors shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.

Within thirty (30) days after  enactment, a signed copy of the amendment to this Ordinance shall be forwarded to the Lebanon County Planning Department.





















135
 


ARTICLE 25

PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM
.	REQUIREMENTS

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adoptive rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.

















































136
 


ARTICLE 26

COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS

SECTION 26.01 Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a formal complaint in writing. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. They shall record properly such complaint, investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this Ordinance. Any person may also report a complaint orally, but such complaint shall not mandate formal investigation on the part of the Zoning Officer.

SECTION 26.02 If it appears that a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance has occurred, the Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice in the following manner:

A.	The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record:

B.	An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:

1.	The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the municipality intends to take action.

2.	The location of the property in violation.

3.	The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not  been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the ordinance.

4.	The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before which the steps must be completed.

5.	That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in this Ordinance.

6.	That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.








137
 


ARTICLE 27 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding pay a judgment of not more than $500.00 per day plus all costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, South Lebanon Township shall enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a  violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation  continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable  attorney fees collected for the violation of the South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance shall be paid over to South Lebanon Township.

The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, building, contractor, agent, or other persons who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found liable of a separate office and suffer the penalties provided herein.

Nothing herein contained is intended to prevent the Township from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
























138
 





ARTICLE 28 SEPARABILITY  CLAUSE
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



















































139
 







ARTICLE 29

REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES EFFECTIVE DATE
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect.
Ordained  and  enacted  into  law  this	q/:h	day of	, 200.!j., to
become effective five (5) days from the date hereof.


EBANON TOWNSHIP F SUPERVISORS








 		(SEAL) VICE-CHAIRMAN
/?	1
1
 
_£_ -· r.-...,   P   ,·
 
,.,:;....R-VI- -0.........	;;....	--(SEAL)
 






















140
 
...







DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS

LOT REQUIREMENTS	YARD REQUIREMENTS

MIN LOT	MIN
LOT	MAX
LOT		

ONE	

TOTAL	
USE	AREA	WIDTH	COVERAGE	FRONT	SIDE	SIDES	REAR

MON-RESIDENTIAL							
BUILDING	3 acre	250'	20%	100•	20·	40•	75'

   SINGLE FAMILY 							
 "DETACHED 								
No Public.							
Utilities	1acre	1501	25%	40'	20·	40'	30'

Public Water   ··
or Sewer	20,000	125'	30%	so·	20'	ao·
sq. ft.	ID
Public Water



No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 )stories or thirty-five {35) feet in.
height unless authorized as a Special Exception.

SECTION 7.04	MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.  ·Qff­
street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article 15 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 7.05	SIGNS AND ADVERTISING  STRUCTURES. · Signs shall be
permitted in accordance with Article 16 of this Ordinance.

SECTION	7.06	SUPPLE1\1ENTARY  DISTRICT  REGULATIONS.	The
Supplementary District Regulations in Article 13 shall apply, where applicable,
as additional requirements for this diStrict.
.

SECTION	7.07	ENVIRON.MENTAL	IMPROVEMENTS    AND    ENERGY
CONSERVATION	REQUIREMENTS.	The	environmental	and	energy requirements in Article 14 shall apply, where applicable, as  additional reqtiirements for this district.






40


 
 




DISTRICT REQIDREMENTS

LOT  EQUIREMENTS	YARD REQIDREMENTS



MIN.	WN.
LOT	LOT	ONE	TOT.AL
USE	AREA	WIDTH	FRONT	SIDE.	SIDES	REAR

NOH-RESIDENTIAL
BUILDIHG	Sacre	250'	100·	20·	40•	75•

RESmEmIAL
No Public utilities
Single Family
Detached	1acre	150'	40'	20'	40"	30'



RESIDENTIAL
Public water or sewer Single Family
Detached	15,000	120'	30'	10'	20·	ao·
sq. feet


RESIDENTIAL
Public water and sewer	

Single Family Detached	
12,500
sq. ft.	
100·	ao·	
10'	
20'	
30'

S   leFamily Semi-Detached	
8,000
sq. ft.	ao•	
30'	
10'*	
20·•	
25'

Two-family Semi-Detached	a.ooo.
sq. ft.	
30'	
30'	
10'*	
20·•	
20'

Two Family	
4,000	
50'	
30'	
10·	
20'	
20'
Detached	sq. ft.					
Town House		
(SEE SECTION 8.02)				

Garden Apartment	(SEE SECTION 8.02) 	
*Yard requirements apply to unattached sides of buildings.

No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 Y2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height unless authorized by a Special Exception.

48
 
I  I




SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSIDP ORDINANCE NUMBER 288



AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 1.os OF ORDIN CE	• NUMBER 278 ( OUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ZONING	.	. ORDINANCE), BY INCREASING THE MINIMUM LOT AREA;
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH, AND SIDE YARD REQUIREMENTS IN AN R- 1LOW DENSITY.RESIDENTIAL  DISTRICT, FOR ALL SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS WHERE THERE IS
AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC WATER OR THE AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC WATER OR AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER AND AMENDING SECTION 8.08 OF ORDINANCE NUMBER 278 BYINCREASING  THE·MINIMUM LOT AREA, l\fiNIMUM  LOT WIDTH, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS IN AN R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT FOR SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENXIAL DWELLINGS WHERE THERE ARE NO· UBLIC UTILITIE  FOR  SINGLE   AMILY DETACHED  RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS, WHERE THERE IS AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC
WATER OR SEWER, AND FOR SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED	. RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS WHERE THERE IS AVAILABILITY OF
PUBLIC WArER AND SEWER.

. BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:

SECTION ONE. The District requirements as set forth inSection
7.03 of Ordinance Number 278 regarding minimum lot area, minimum lot width, and side yard requirements for single family detached dwellings with the availability of public water or sewer or the availability of water and sewer is hereby amended to read as set forth on Exhibit "A:' which is attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference as jf fully set forth.
..
SECTION TWO. The District requirements as set forth in Section
8.3	of Ordinance Number 278 regarding minimum lot area, minfrnum lot
width, and side yard_ requirements for single family detached residential
dwellings where no public utilities are available, single family detached	•
residential units where public water or sewer are available, and single family
detached residential units where public water and sewer are available is
hereby amended to read as set forth on Exhibit "B" which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth.
 
..	. .·







 


days.
 
SECTION THREE. This Ordinance shall become effective in five (5)
 

Adopted this 27th day of July, 2004.








BY: "Ji_ twi.§fa




Member	·	·
 

SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 295


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 703 OF ORDINANCE NUMBER 283 (SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE) BY AMENDING THE SIDE YARD REQUIREMENTS TO TEN (10) FEET IN
AN R·l LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL  DISTRICT FOR ALL SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS WHERE THERE IS AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC WATER OR THE AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC SEWER OR THE AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER.

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION ONE. The district requirements as set forth in Section 7.03 of Ordinance Number 283 regarding side yard requirements in an R-1 Low Density Residential District for all single family detached dwellings wbere there is availability of public water or the availability of public sewer or the availability of public sewer and water is hereby amended to read ten (10) feet.
SECTION TWO. This Ordinance shall become effective in five (5)

days.

ADOPTED this 22nd day of February, 2006.

ATTEST:
!Lltfv
 
•'








SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 302

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NUMBER 278 (SOUTH LEBANON			TOWNSIDP		ZONING		ORDINANCE)			ARTICLE		I (DEFINITIONS) BY AMENDING THE DEFINITION OF LOT, THROUGH PROVIDING FOR ONE FRONT YARD AND ONE REAR YARD AND THE AREA	PROVIDING		PRIMARY	ACCESS		TO		THE		LOT	BEING DESIGNATED			AS		THE		FRONT		YARD,		AND		PERMITTING ACCESSORARY  USES IN THE REAR YARD; AMENDING ARTICLE  1 (DEFINITIONS) BY PROVIDING FOR A DEFINITION OF WOOD FIRED BOILERS	WlllCH		CONTAIN		A	FIRE	BOX		WITH		WATER	PIPES RUNNING TO AN ATTACHED/UNATTACHED BUILDING TO TRANSFER HEAT  FOR  SPACE AND  WATER		HEATING; AMENDING ARTICLE THIRTEEN (SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS) BY ADDING SECTION 13.22 PROHIBITING WOOD-FIRED BOILERS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS EXCEPT THE A-AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT; AMENDING ARTICLE		SIX		(A-AGRICULTURAL		DISTRICT)	SECTION		6.02. (PERMITTED USES) BY RENUMBERING SUBSECTION MAS N AND BY ADDING	A		NEW		SUBSECTION		M	PERMITTING		WOOD-FIRED BOILERS;		AMENDING		ARTICLE		8		(R-2		MEDIUM	DENSITY RESIDENTIAL		DISTRICT)		SECTION	8.02		(PERMITTED		USES), SUBSECTION D (TOWNHOUSES) SUBSECTION 7 BY ADDING A NEW SUBSECTION 12 BY PROVIDING THAT ALL ACCESSORY BUILDINGS APPROVED PURSUANT TO A SUBDIVISION PLAN AFTER DECEMBER 31, 2007 SHALL BE ATTACHED TO THE PRINCIPLE STRUCTURE, BE CONSTRUCTED OF THE SAME MATERIAL AS THE STRUCTURE, AND THE EIGHTY (80) SQUARE FOOT REQUIREMENT NOT BE INCLUDED IN THE SQUARE FOOTAGE FOR ANY GARAGE; BY ADDING A NEW PARAGRAPH		D		TO		SUBSECTION		7		PROVIDING		THAT	ALL TOWNHOUSES CONSTRUCTED AFTER DECEMBER  31, 2007 SHALL HAVE A TEN FOOT EASEMENT ALONG THE EDGE  OF THE REAR YARD  FOR  INGRESS AND  EGRESS TO THE  REAR  YARD  OF THE ATTACHED TOWNHOUSES AND PROHIBITING ANY FENCES, SHEDS, TREES OR OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS IN THE EASEMENT; AMENDING ORDINANCE			ER			164			(SOUTH		LEBANON		TOWNSHIP SUBDVISION LAND USE ORDINANCE) CHAPTER 2		(DEFINITIONS) SECTION 2.01 (GENERAL TERMS) BY ADDING A PARAGRAPH TO THE




1
 

I:

I   '



DEFINITION OF SUBDIVISION BY PERMITING A SUBDIVISION FOR THE PURPOSE OF ERECTING A BUILDING AND/OR DWELLING ONLY ALONG AN APPROVED PUBLIC STREET OR A PRIVATE STREET IMPROVED TO SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP'S STREET SPECIFICATIONS.

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authorities of the same as follows:

SECTION ONE: Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article One (Definitions) Lot, Through is hereby amended to add the following to the definition:

a.	LOT THROUGH -The through lot shall have one (1) front yard and one (1) rear yard. The area of frontage providing primary access to the lot shall be designated as the front yard. Fences, hedges, walls, sheds, swimming pools, and any other accessory uses are permitted in the rear yard at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township;

SECTION TWO: Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article One (Definitions) is hereby amended to add the following definition:

b.	WOOD-FIRED BOILERS - Wood fired or coal-fired boilers containing a fire box with water pipes running to an attached or unattached building to transfer heat for both space and water heating.


SECTION THREE. Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article Thirteen (Supplemental District Regulations) is hereby amended to add a new section 13.22 as follows:


SECTION 13.22 - Wood Fired Boilers. Wood Fired Boilers are prohibited in all zoning districts except in the A-Agricultural District.

SECTION FOUR. Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article Six (A-Agricultural District) Section 6.02 (Permitted Uses) is hereby amended to renumber Subsection M as N and adding a new Section M as follows:

M. Wood-Fired Boilers provided the boiler be 200 feet from an adjoining residential building and contain a smoke stack a minimum of 15 feet from ground level.





2
 
·	SECTION FIVE: Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article Eight (R-2 Medium Density Residential District) Section 8.02 (Permitted Uses) Subsection D (7) is hereby amended to read as follows:

Detached accessory buildings or structures used for storage only shall be permitted on individual lots provided the size of the structure does not exceed eighty (80) square feet and the height is no more than eight feet six inches. This provision shall apply to townhouses which were approved pursuant to a subdivision plan as of December 31, 2007. Detached accessory buildings or structures are prohibited for all townhouses approved pursuant to a subdivision plan after December 31, 2007. All townhouses which were approved pursuant  to a subdivision plan after December 31, 2007 shall provide for storage areas of 80 square feet and the height be no more than eight feet six inches which shall be attached to the structure, provided the exterior of the attached structure is constructed of the same material as the structure and provided all requirements of this ordinance are met. The eighty square feet of storage area is in excess of any square footage calculated for a garage. Garages and other normal accessory structures may be attached to the structure of each individual lot provided all of the requirements of this Ordinance are met. Detached accessory buildings and structures for common use by the entire development shall be permitted on common areas as per Article 13of this Ordinance.

SECTION SIX. Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article Eight (R-2 Medium Density Residential District) Section 8.02 (Permitted Uses) Subsection D (7) is hereby amended a new Subsection 12 as follows:

12. All Townhouses approved pursuant to a subdivision plan after December 31, 2007 shall have a ten foot easement along the edge of the rear yard for purposes of an ingress and egress to other rear yards of the attached  townhouses.  No fences, sheds, trees, shrubs or other obstructions shall be placed within the ten foot easement.

SECTION SEVEN. The definition of  Subdivision  set  forth  in Ordinance Number 164  (South  Lebanon  Subdivision  Land  Ordinance, Chapter 2 (Definitions), Section 2.02 (Specific Terms) is hereby amended to add the following paragraph:




3
 
•'




The Subdivision to create a lot for purpose of erecting a building and/or dwelling must be along an approved public street or a private street improved to South Lebanon Township's street specifications.

SECTION  EIGHT.	All  other  Ordinances  inconsistent	with   this Ordinance are hereby repealed.

 


days.
 
SECTION  NINE.	This  Ordinance  shall become  effective  in five  (5)
 

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 14th day of May, 2008. ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 
BY:

SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NUMBER 305


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NUMBER 278 (SOUTH LEBANON TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE) BY AMENDING ARTICLE THIRTEEN   (SUPPLEMENTAL   DISTRICT   REGULATIONS)   SECTION
13.18 (PARKING, STORAGE, OR USE OF MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT) TO INCLUDE MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT AND/OR TRACTOR TRAILERS, TRUCKS, RIGS, OR CABS, UTILITY TRAILERS,  CONSTRUCTION  EQUIPMENT,  CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS, INCLUDING BOATS AND BOAT TRAILERS, TRAVEL TRAILERS, PICK UP CAMPERS OR  COACHES,  MOTORIZED DWELLING, TENT TRAILERS, AND THE LIKE.

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of South Lebanon Township, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authorities of the same as follows:

SECTION ONE: Ordinance Number 278 (South Lebanon Township Zoning Ordinance) Article Thirteen (Supplemental District Regulations) Section 13.18 (Parking, St01·age, or Use of Major Recreational Equipment) is hereby amended to read as follows:

SECTION 13.18.  PARKING.  STORAGE. OR USE OF MAJOR
RECREATIONAL  EQUIPMENT.	For purposes  of these  regulations,  major
recreational  equipment  shall include major recreational  equipment, tractor trailers,	trucks,	rigs,	cabs,	utilities	trailers,	construction	equipment,
.  construction trailers, boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or  coaches  (designed  to  be  mounted  on  automotive  vehicles),  motorized
·dwellings, tent trailers, and the like and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not.	Such major recreatiOnal equipment as set forth above shall not be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except in a carport, an enclosed building, in a rear yard or on that portion of a private residential driveway not within the road right-of-way.	No such equipment shall be used for living, .sleeping, or housekeeping purposes nor shall such equipment be hooked up to.any type of generator or mechanical equipment which emits a noise or odor of any kind when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for




1
 
such use.  Additionally, no such equipment shall be parked on public streets in any· zoning district for a period of time exceeding 24 hours.

SECTION	TWO.	All	other	Ordinances	inconsistent	with	this Ordinance are hereby repealed.

 


days.
 
SECTION THREE.	This Ordinance shall become effective in five (5)
 

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 24th day of June, -2008. ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS





BY:	_
Vice-Chairman,

 