BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL
ZONING ORDINANCE
PREPARED BY: Community Programs, Inc.
Allentown, Pennsylvania
THIS PROJECT WAS FINANCED BY A GRANT FROM THE FEDERAL DEPAR'IMENT OF HUD UNDER
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA DEPAR'IMENT OF CCMMONITY
AFFAIRS.
.. •I
" \":\ 11J ... "s w!.1L
;. • 1.11 .. s
.'\ l'
~It.Ii:,->.;.;,.-.&. h!li Li;..;.i,I..;: :ov11ln
i:.c.cu..J..:.t.;.1 .:,1,1i:11 ..i :ini.i1
COMMUNITY PROGRAMS, INc".-=":'"~-•--·:-:-r.::,_-.,0'.''."'"~=~-'-'N" ·- ...~...;::-~.z=-~..:....:.:: ... :=~,-=¢:.·;;, ... ~ -
; ~ • I :
c;c.;':t."l.·~.:;.; t"l :·:: • • :=-....,.;.r:-=:=·-··. -.~.r . ·
CUitlC...,11.- 1f.TLi1iA1- ::1
1 • .;.T1U1 • .:.1. CiC:OD~l1C' vEicloC'J.J.. r:
1 .... c 1,1.,,. 1•1,,,.;.1.r• ,.,,., , __ ,.·
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ORDAINING CLAUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS ..................................... 9
101 Title ................................................... 9
102 Short Title ............................................. 9
103 Purpose ....•..•........................................ 10
104 Interpretation .....•.....•............................. 10
105 Validity ................................................ 11
106 Repealer .......... · ..................................... 12
107 Effective Date ......................................... 12
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS .......•.................................. 13
201 Application and Interpretation ......................... 14
202 Definition of Terms ...•......•.•....................... 14
ARTICLE 3 ESTABLISHMENT .••..................................... 33
301 Names of Zoning Districts .............................. 34
3 02 Zoning Map ..••.....•................•.................. 34
303 Interpretation of Boundaries ........................... 34
304 District Boundaries ........•........................•.• 34
iTICLE 4 DISTRicr REGUI.ATIONS ................................. 36
TABLE I Schedule of District Regulations .................. 36(a) (b)
TABLE II Bulk and Coverage Control •........................ 36(c)
Map Zoning Map ••.•...•..........•..................... 3 6 ( d)
District Regulations .......•.......•............•............ 3 7
ARTICLE 5 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES ....•...........•...•••...•••.• 38
501 Purpose . • . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 9
502 General Provisions ..................................... 39
ARTICLE 6 CONDITIONAL USES ............•.............•.. ." ....... 42
601 Purpose ...•......•..................................... 43
602 General Provisions ..................................... 43
ARTICLE 7 SUPPLEMENTARY REGUI.ATIONS .........•.................. 46
701 Supplementary Use Regulations .......................... 47
702 Supplementary Area Regulations ......................... 61
703 Supplementary Yard Regulations ..........•.............. 62
704 Supplementary Height Regulations ....................... 64
ARTICLE 8 ADMINIS'IRATION & ENFORCEMENT .......................... 65
801 'Ihe Zoning Officer ..................................... 66
802 Permits ................................................ 68
803 Certificates of Zoning Compliance ...................... 69
804 Enforcement, causes.of Action and Remedy ............... 70
805 Payment of Fees .................. , ..................... 73
ARTICLE 9 ZONING HEARING BOARD & OTHER ADMINISTRATION PROCEEDINGS 74
901 Zoning Hearing Board Membership, Organization,
Operation .............................................. 75
902 Hearings ................................................ 76
903 Mediation Option ....................................... 79
904 Jurisdiction ........................................... 80
905 Applicability of Judicial Remedies ...................... 82
906 Zoning Hearing Boards Functions: Variances ............ 82
907 Zoning Hearing Boards Functions: Special Exception
Uses ................................................... 83
908 Parties Appellant Before the Board ..................... 83
909 Time Limitations ....................................... 83
910 Stay of Proceedings .................................... 84
911 Validity of Ordinance: Substantive Questions ........... 85
912 Procedure to Obtain Premliminary Opinion ............... 89
ARTICLE 10 APPEALS TO COURT ..................................... 91
1001 Land Use Appeals ....................................... 92
1002 Jurisdiction and Venue on Appeal; Time for Appeal ...... 92
1003 Appeals to Court; Conmencement; Stay of Proceedings ... 92
1004 Intervention ........................................... 94
(
1005 Hearing and Argument of Land Use Appeal ................ 94
1006 Judicial Relief ........................................ 94
ARTICLE 11 AMENDMENTS ........................................... 96
1101 Purpose ................................................ 97
1102 Citizen Request for Amendment to Text or Map ........... 97
1103 Planning Commission Request for Amendment to Text or
Map .........•.......................................... 98
1104 Procedures of the Borough Council ...................... 98
1105 Procedures of the Planning Commission .................. 99
1106 Procedures for Landowner Curative Amendments ........... 99
1107 Procedures Upon Municipal Curative Amendments ......... 101
1108 Public notice and Hearings ............................ 102
1109 Publication, Advertisement and Availability of
Ordinance ... ~ ......................................... 103
ORDAINING CLAUSE
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
101 Title
102 Short Title
103 Purpose
104 Interpretation
105 Validity
106 Repealer
107 Effective Date
ORDINANCE NO.
THE BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL ZONING ORDINANCE
ORDAINING CLAUSE
BE IT HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACI'ED by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Summit Hill, County of carbon, by authority of and
pursuant to the provisions of Act 247 of the General Assembly of the
Corrmonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved July 30, 1968, lmown and cited
as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code", and any
amendments and supplements thereto, as follows:
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
101 TITLE
An Ordinance pennitting, prohibiting, regulating, restricting,
· and detennining the use of land, watercourses, and other bodies
of water; size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction,
repair, maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of
structures; the areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water
to be occupied by uses and structures as well as areas, courts,
yards, and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied
by uses and structures; the density of population and intensity
of use; and providing for the administration of such Ordinance.
102 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the Borough of Summit Hill
Zoning Ordinance.
9
103 PURPOSE
This Ordinance is enacted for the following purposes:
1. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the
following: public health, safety, morals and the general
welfare; coordinated and practical corranunity development
and proper density of population; emergency management
preparedness and operations, airports, and national defense
facilities, the provisions of adequate.light and air,
access to incident solar energy, police protection, vehicle
parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, recreational facilities, public grounds, the
provision of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for
domestic, c0tm1ercial, agricultural or industrial use, and
other public requirements; as well as the preservation of
the natural, scenic and historic values in the environment
and preservation of forests, wetlands, aquifers and flood
plains.
2. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of
land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and
transportation, loss of health, life or property from· fire,
flood, panic or other dangers.
3. To preserve prime agricultural and farmland considering
topography, soil type and classification, and present use.
4. To ~rovide for the use of land within the nrunicipality for
residential housing of various dwelling types encompassing
all basic forms of housing, including single-family and
two-family dwellings, and a reasonable range of l!Rllti-.
family dwellings in various arrangements, mobile homes and
mobile home parks, provided, however, that the zoning
ordinance shall not be deemed invalid for the failure to
provide for any other specific dwelling type and
nonresidential uses.
5. To accommodate reasonable overall cormnunity growth,
including population and employment growth, and
opportunities for development of a variety of residential
dwelling types and nonresidential use.
104 Inte:i:::pretation
1. Inte:i:::pretation: In their interpretation and application,
the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the
minil!Rlffi requirements for the promotion of the public
safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, property and
general welfare of the residents of the Borough.
10
Where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the
language written in the Zoning Ordinance the language shall
be inte:i:preted in favor of the property owner and against
any implied extension of the regulation.
2. Conflict with Public and Private Provisions
105 Validity
a. Public Provisions: These regulations are not
intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul
any other Ordinance, rules or regulations
previously adopted or ~reviously issued by the
Borough which are not in conflict with any
provisions of this Ordinance. Where this
Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the
use of the buildings or premises or upon the
height of the building, or requires a larger open
space than imposed or re~ired by such Ordinance,
rule, regulation or permit, or by easements,
covenants, building restrictions or agreements the
provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
b. Private Provisions: These regulations are not
intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the provisions of this Ordinance impose
greater restriction, the requirements of this
Ordinance shall govern. Where the provisions of
the easement, covenant, or private agreement or
restriction impose duties and obligations more
restrictive or higher standards than the
requirements of this Ordinance, and such private
provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements of this Ordinance, then such private
provisions shall be operative and supplemental to
these requirements.
Severance: If cuiy article, section, subsection, provision,
regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase,
or word in the Zoning Ordinance is, for any reason, declared to
be illegal, unconstitutional or invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect or
impair the validity of the Zoning Ordinance as a whole, or any
other article, section, subsection, provision, regulation,
limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, word or
remaining portion of the Zoning Ordinance. The Borough Council
of the Borough of Sununit Hill, carbon County, Pennsylvania,
hereby declares that it would have adq>ted the Zoning Ordinance
11
and each article, section, subsection, provision, regulation,
,limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, and work
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the
sections, subsection, provisions, regulations, limitations,
restrictions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words may be
declared illegal, unconstitutional or invalid.
106 Repealer
Inconsistent Ordinances: Any resolution, ordinance or part of
any ordinance or resolution inconsistent herewith and
amendments thereof are hereby expressly repealed.
107 Effective Date
This Zoning Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days
after the adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Summit Hill, carbon County, Pennsylvania.
The Borough Council of Summit Hill
Summit Hill Borough
carbon County, Pennsylvania
I, carlo Collevechio , do hereby certify that the foregoing is
a true copy of an Ordinance adopted by the Borough Council of Summit
Hill Borough, carbon County, Pennsylvania on ~,94u'~'~~7.~~'7..._~~~~-
, 1995. (/
9£,-~-:('9~~=~/.~s
carlo Collevechio
President Borough Council
12
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS
201 Application and Interpretation
202 Definition of Terms
13
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS
201 Ap_plication and Inte:i;:pretation
It is not intended that these definitions include only words
used or referred to in this Ordinance. The words are included
in order to facilitate the interpretation of the Ordinance for
administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties by
appropriate officers and by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Unless othexwise expressly stated, the following shall, for
the purposes of this Ordinance, have the meaning herein
stated:
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the
future tense.
2 . The word "person" shall include a company, partnership,
individual or association.
3. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land
or building shall include the words "intended",
"arranged", or "designed" to be used or oceupied.
4. The word "building" shall include "part thereof" and
"structure".
5 . The word "lot" shall include "plot" or "parcel" .
6 . The word "shall" is always mandatory.
7. The singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular,
8. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
9. The word "street" shall include "road", "highway" and
"lane".
202 Definition of TetmS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following words,
tenns, and phrases have the meaning herein indicated.
14
Abandon: To desert, surrender, forsake or cede. To
relinquish or give up with intent of never again resuming
one's right or interest. To give up or cease to use. To give
up absolutely; to forsake entirely; to renounce utterly; to
relinquish all connection with or concern in; to desert. It
includes the intention and also the external act by which it
is carried into effect.
Abut: To touch at the end; be contiguous; join at a border or
boundary. The term "abutting" iTTII?lies a closer proximity than
the term "adjacent". No intervening land.
Access: A means of approach or entry to or exit from
property.
Accessory Building: A subordinate building or a portion of
the main building on a lot, the use of which is customary to
that of the main or principal.
Addition: An extension or increase of floor area or height of
a building or structure.
Adjacent: Lying near or close to; sometimes, contiguous;
neighboring. "Adjacent" implies that the two objects are not
widely separated, though they may not actually touch.
Adult Entertainment Establishments: These include adult
bookstores, adult cabarets, adult drive-in theaters, adult
massage businesses, adult mini-motion picture theaters, and
adult motion picture theaters, which exclude minors by virtue
of age.
1. Adult Bookstore: An establishment which has a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade, books, magazines, or other periodicals and which
excludes minors by virtue of age.
2. Adult Caba.rets: A cabaret which features go-go
dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male and female
impersonators, or similar entertainers and which
exclude minors by virtue of age.
3. Adult Drive-In Theater: An establishment showing
motion picture films to patrons, designed to permit
patrons to remain in their automobiles or similar
vehicles, and which exclude minors by virtue of age.
4. Adult Massage Business: An establishment where
massages are administered for pay, including but not
liraj.ted to massage parlors, health clubs, sauna baths
and steam baths, and which exclude minors by virtue of
age.
15
!
\
5 . Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building
used for showing motion picture films to patrons and
which excludes minors by virtue of age.
6. Adult Video cassette Rentals and Sales: An
establishment which has a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in.trade, video cassettes for rent
or sale and which excludes minors by virtue of age.
Alley: A public or private way affording only secondary means
of access to abutting property. Alleys may also be known as
courts, places or lanes.
Alteration: As applied toa building or structure, means a
change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the
existing facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending
on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one
location or position to another.
Alteration. Structural: Any change in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders.
Amendment: A change in the regulations or district boundaries
or classifications of property established by this Zoning
Ordinance and according to procedures provided by law and
exercised by the Borough Council.
Animal Hospital: A building used for the treatment, housing
or boarding incidental to hospital use of small domestic
animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and birds or fowl by a
veterinarian.
Animal Kennel: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more
dogs, cats or both, at least six. (6) months of age, are kept,
boarded or trained, whether in special buildings, runways, or
not.
Appeal: A means for obtaining review of a decision,
determination, order, or failure to act pursuant to the terms
of this Ordinance.
Area. Building: (See Building Area.)
Area. Lot: (See Lot Area.)
Attic: That part of a building which is irrmediately below,
and wholly or partly within the roof framing.
Auto, Trailer or Boat Sales Areas: An open area, other than a
street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used
motor vehicles, trailers or boats in operable condition.
16
Automobile Service Stations and Repair Garages: A garage,
,other than a private garage, used for gasoline refueling and
for the storage, equipping for operation, repairing,
maintaining, keeping for remuneration, hiring or selling of
motor vehicles.
Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or
completely below grade.
Bed & Breakfast: A private home which take in no more than
two (2) couples for the purpose of providing overnight
accommodations.
Board. or Zoning Hearing Board: The Zoning Hearing Board of ·
Sumnit Hill Borough.
Buffer Area: An area of land, with plantings as specified by·
this Ordinance, and any structures which may be required
between land uses to eliminate or minimize conflicts between
them.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by walls and
intended for.shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property. ·
Building Area: The total area taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all
accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces,
patios and steps.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front
of the building to the highest point of the roof.
Building Line: A line formed by the intersection of a
horizontal place at average grade level and a vertical plane
that coincides with the exterior surface of the building on
any side. In case of a conjectured or projected section of a
building, the vertical place will coincide with the most
projected surface. All yard requirements are measured to the
building line.
Building. Principal: A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
ca:r::port: An open space for the storage of one or more
vehicles in the same manner as a private garage, which may be
covered by a roof supported by columns or posts except that
one or more of the walls may be the walls of the main building
to which the carport is an accessory building or extension.
Certificate of Zoning CoUIDliance: The certificate (sometimes
call "occupancy permit") issued by the Zoning Officer after
17
amendment to the map or text to correct a prohibition or
restriction on the use or development of land in which he has
an interest.
Curative Amendment. Municipal: A declaration by the
llll.lllicipal governing body that its Zoning Ordinance or portions
thereof are substantially invalid and that such invalidities
are proposed to be corrected by an amendment to the text
and/or map.
Deck: A platform with or without railings but without a roof,
projecting out from the main wall of a dwelling and intended
to be used as an area for seating, dining or recreation.
Density: A measure of the number of dwelling units which
occupy, or may occupy an area of land.
Density. Gross: The maximum density that shall be permitted
in any zoning district. It is calculated by dividing the
total number of dwelling units by the total site area. This
density is illustrative only; net density is controlling.
Density. Net: The maximum density permitted on the buildable
portion of the site. Net density is calculated by dividing
the total number of dwelling units by the net buildable site
area, that is, not including roads, recreation areas, or any
other area not intended for dwellings. This density controls
actual site capacity.
Determination: Final action by an officer, body or agency
charged with the administration of any land use ordinance or
application thereunder, except the following:
1. the governing body
2 . the zoning hearing board
Determinations.shall be appealable only to the boards
designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
District or Zone: A portion of the area of the Borough of
Surrnnit Hill as shown on the Zoning Map containing a uniform
class of uses of structures or land, and to which regulations
described in the Zoning Ordinance text apply.
Dlm1P= A site used primarily for the disposal by abandonment,
dumping, burial, burning, or other means and for whatever
purpose of garbage, trash, junk, vehicles or parts thereof, or
waste material of any kind.
Dwelling: A building designed or used as the living quarters
for one or more households, but not intended to include
tourist homes, motels or hotels.
19
Dwelling ~es:
1. Multi-Family Houses: Three or more dwelling units
accorranodating three or more households which are located
one over the other and are attached by the use of coomon
party walls. Each dwelling unit is accessible by a coomon
stairwell. The building is built to a height of up to four
(4) stories.
2 . Residential Conversion Units: To be a conversion, any
proposed alteration must be confined to the interior of an
already existing structural shell. Any proposal to extend
the sides or increase the height of art existing structure
shall not be considered a conversion.
3. Single-Family Houses: A dwelling unit accorranodating a
single household and having two (2) side yards. This
includes a mobile home on a permanent foundation.
4. Townhouses (Rowhousesl : Three or more dwelling units
accorranodating three or more households which are attached
side by side through the use of comrron party walls and
which have side yards adjacent to each end unit. Each
dwelling unit is two (2) stories in height.
5. Two-Family Houses (Duplexes and Flats): Two dwelling
units accorranodating two households which are attached
side by side through the use of a party wall and having (
one side yard adjacent to each dwelling unit (duplex),
or which are attached one over the other and having two
(2) side yards for the lower dwelling unit (flat).
Dwelling Unit: A building or portion thereof providing
complete housekeeping facilities for one family or .
household.
Earth Station (TVRL) : Receiving antenna or satellite,
parabolic antenna used to receive satellite signals.
Easement: A limited right to use granted in private land
for public or quasi-public pw::poses. ·
Essential Services for Public Utilities: The erection,
construction, alteration or maintenance, by public
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of
underground or overhead gas, electrical, communication,
steam or water transmission or distribution boxes, police
call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith,
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service
by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies or for the public health or safety or general
welfare, but not including buildings.
20
Excavation: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled,
transported or moved.
Family: One (1) or more persons who live together in one
(1) dwelling unit and maintain a common household. A
family may consist of a single person·or two (2) or more
persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or
adoption. Family may also include domestic servants and
gratuitous guests.
Flood.. One Hundred Year: 'Ihe flood having one percent
chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year.
Flood. Plain: A relatively flat or low land area which is·
subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining
or nearby stream, river, or watercourse; and/or any area
subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface
water from any source.
Flood Plain Develqpment: Any man-made change to improved
or unimproved real estate in the flood plain, including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
Floor Area: For the purpose of applying the requirements
for off street parking and loading, "floor area" in the
case of offices, merchandising or service types of uses,
shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used
by tenants, or for service to the public as customers,
patrons, clients, or patients as measured by the outside
dimensions of the building or portion thereof.
Fqrest:r.:y Production: 'Ihe production of forest products
through the cultivating, maintaining, and developing of
forests.
Garage. Private: A garage for four (4) or less passenger
motor vehicles without provision for repairing or servicing
such vehicles for profit.
Garage Sale (Yard Sale or. Flea Ma.rketl : Not to exceed more
than three (3) consecutive days and not more than three
times per year.
Hazardous Material: A material or combination of
materials, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may (a)
cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or
incapacitating reversible, illness, or (b) pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored,
21
transported or disposed of, or otherwise managed, or (c)
make the land unfit or undesirable for nonna.1 use. This
definition is intended to include radioactive substances.
Holding Tank: A watertight receptacle which receives and
retains sewage and is designed and constructed to
facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site .
. Home Gardening: The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers
or vegetables on a piece of ground adjoining the dwelling,
excluding the keeping of livestock.
Home Nurseries and Greenhouses: The cultivating of plants
either outdoors or in a glass enclosed structure on the
same lot as a dwelling and not for sale cormnercia11y.
Home Qccupation: A business, profession, occupation or
trade of a service nature conducted for ~ain or support and
located entirely within a residential building, or a
structure accessory thereto, which use is accessory,
incidental and secondary to the use of the building for
dwelling puJ:IJOses and does not change the essential
residential character or appearance of such building.
Impervious Surface: Those surfaces which do not absorb
water are considered impervious. They consist of all
buildings, parking areas, driveways, road, sidewalks and
any areas of concrete or asphalt.
Junk:: Junk shall include scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap
brass, scrap copper, scrap lead or scrap zinc and all other
scrap metals and their alloys, and bones, rags, used cloth,
used rubber, used machinery, used tools, used appliances,
used fixtures, used utensils, used lumber, used boxes or
crates, used pipe or pipe fittings, used tires and other
manufactured goods, any of which are so worn, deteriorated
or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing
condition, but which are subject to being dismantled or
processed for reclamation, salvage or recycling.
Junk Yard: A junk yard shall consist of buildings,
structures or premises where junk, waste, discarded or
salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored,
baled, packed disassembled or handled, including automobile
wrecking yards, house wrecking and structural steel
materials and equipment yards, but not including the
purchase or storage of used furniture and household
equipment.
Land Development: any of the following activities:
1. The improvement of one lot or two (2) or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
22
a. a group of two (2) or more residential or
nonresidential buildings whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure;
or
b. the division or allocation of land or space, .
whether initially or cumulatively; between or.
among two (2) or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
r,;mgqwner: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase
(whether or not such option or contract is subject to any
condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to
exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person
having a proprietary interest in the land.
Land Use Ord.inarice: Any ordinance or map adopted pursuant
to the authority granted in Articles DJ, V, VI and VII of
the Pennsy 1 vania Municipalities Planning Code (ACT 2 4 7 OF
1968) as amended.
Livestock: Fann animal such as cattle, horses, sheep, hogs
goats, etc.
Loading Space: A space or area, accessible from a street
or way, in a buildin~ or on a lot, for the temporary use of
vehicles, while loading or unloading people, merchandise or
materials. Required off street loading space is not tq be
included as off street parking space in computation of
required off street parking.
I..pdge: The meeting hall of a social or fraternal
organization.
lQt_;_ Land occupied or.to be occupied by a building and its
accessory buildings, or by a building group and its
accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are
required under the provisions of this Ordinance, having not
less than the mininrum area and width required by this
Ordinance for a lot in the district in which such land is
situated.
Lot Area: The total area within the lot lines, excluding
any area within a street right-of-way, but including the
area of any easement.
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front
and rear lot line. Measurement shall be from the street of
highway right-of-way line to the opposite or rear line.
23
Lot Frontage:
right of way,
lot.
That side of a lot abutting on a street
and ordinarily regarded as the front of the
I.Qt Line: Any boundary line of a lot.
Lot of Record: Any lot which individually, or as part of a
subdivision, has been recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder of Deeds.
Lot Width: The distance between the straight lines
connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the
lot, measured across the rear of the r~ired front yard,
provided, however, that width between side lot lines at
their foremost points (where they intersect with the street
line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the
required lot width except in the case of lots on the
ttuning circle of cul-de-sacs, where the eighty percent
requirement shall not apply.
Mediation: A voluntary negotiating process in which
parties in a dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to
assist them in jointly exploring and settling their
differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable
Mobile Home: A transportable, single family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or
in two or more units designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated
towing, which arrives at a site corrplete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used
without a permanent foundation.
Mobile Home Lot: A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a
single mobile home.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
which has been so designated and improved that it contains
two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of
mobile homes.
Mod.el Home or Apartment: A dwelling unit used initially
for display purposes which typifies the type of units that
will be constructed in a subdivision, land development,
planned residential development or a multi-family dwelling
structure.
24
' -
Modular Home: A non-transportable, single family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one or more
units designed to be joined into one integral unit not
capable of again being separated.
Motel or Hotel: A building or group of buildings used, or
intended to be used, for the lodging of more than six guest
rooms for compensation.
Municipality: The Borough of Summit Hill, carbon County,
Pennsylvania.
Non-Conforming Lot: A lot the area or dimension of which
was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a Zoning
Ordinance, but which fails to confonn to the requirements
of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption or amendment.
Non-Conforming Structure: A structure or part of a
structure manifestly not desi~ed to comply with the
applicable set- back or dimensional provisions in the Zoning
Ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the
application of such ordinance or amendment to its location
by reason of annexation. Such non-confonning structures
include, but are not limited to, non-conforming signs.
Non-Conforming Use: A use, whether of land or of a
structure, which does not comply with the applicable use
provisions in the Zoning Ordinance or amendments heretofore
or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or
amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation. · -
Non-Profit: Something owned, operated or supported by
private individuals or a co:i:poration, without seeking
profit, for the use or benefit of the general public or for
some part of the general public.
Nursing or Convalescent Harne: Any commercial I?remises
providing sleeping rooms where patients or residents are
lodged and furnished with meals and long term nursing care,
including personal care homes.
Nursecy (Plants): An enterprise which conducts the retail
and wholesale of plants grown on the site, as well as
accessory items such as clay pots, potting soil,
fertilizers, etc., directly related to their care and
maintenance.
25
Outdoor Advertisement: An advertisement used outdoors,
including painted walls or rock faces, of a product or
service unrelated to the use of the land or structure on
which it is located, but not including official notices or
directional road signs of a goven::unental body.
Parking Garage:
stored of short
_parking.
A building where passenger vehicles may be
term, daily or overnight off street
Parking Space. Off Street: A reasonable level of space,
available for parking one (1) motor vehicle, and having
dimensions of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet
in depth, or two hundred (200) square feet, exclusive of
passageways, driveways or other means of circulation of
access.
Patio: A courtyard with or without railings and without a
roof or awning,. adjacent to or near a dwelling, but not a
part of the dwelling, and intended to be used as an area
for seating, dining or recreation outdoors. ·
Permanent Foundation: Support for a building or structure
consisting of either poured concrete, concrete blocks,
cinder blocks, brick, pressurized wood or stone to form a
horizontal pad or vertical wall on which the building or
structure is placed and is intended to remain indefinitely.
In the case of mobile homes, permanent placement on such a
foundation is intended to first require the removal of the
wheels and chassis from the mobile home. ·
Place of Religious Worship: A building used for religious
services, including churches, synagogues, mosques, and
similar edifices.
Planned Residential Development: An area of land
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single
entity for a number of dwelling units, the development plan
for which does not correspond in lot, size, bulk or type of
dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space to
the regulations established in any one residential district
created, from time to time, under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Planning Commission: The Planning Commission of the
Borough of Sunmit Hill.
Porch: A covered area in excess of four (4) feet by five
(5) feet or twenty (20) square feet in area at a front,
side or rear door.
Poultry: Domestic fowls, such as chickens, turkeys, ducks
or geese, raised for flesh or eggs.
26
Private: Something owned, operated and supported by
private individuals or a corporation, rather than by
government and not available for public use.
Public: Something owned, operated and supported by the
colll!lUlility or the people for the use or benefit of the
general public.
Public Hearing: A fonnal meeting held pursuant to public
notice by the governing body or planning agency, intended
to inform and obtain public conment, prior to taking action
in accordance with this Ordinance.
Public Meeting: A forum held pursuant to notice under the
act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84) known as the
"Sunshine Act".
Public Notice: Notice published once each week for two (2)
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in
the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and
place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. 'Ihe first
publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the
second publication shall not be less than seven ( 7) days
from the date of the hearing.
Report: Any letter, review, memorandum, corrpilation or
similar writing made by any body, board, officer or .
consultant for the purpose of assisting the recipient of
such report in the rendering of any decision or
determination. All reports shall be deemed recormnendatory
and advisory only and shall not be binding upon the
recipient, board, officer, body or agency. Any report
used, received or considered.by the bod:y, board, officer or
agency rendering a determination or decision shall be made
available for inspection to the applicant and all other
parties to any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof
shall be provided at cost of reproduction.
Rooming and· Boarding House: Any dwelling in which more
than three (3) but not more than twenty (20) persons,
either individually or as families, are housed or lod~ed
for hire with or without meals. A rooming house furnished
room house shall be deemed a boarding house.
Sanitary Sewage Disposal
1. Public: A sanitary sewage collection system in which
sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of
pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant, the
total system being operated by a llRlilicipal agency or
authority.
27
2. Centralized: A sanitary sewage collection system in
which sewage is carried from individual lots by a
system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal
plant, generally serving a neighborhood area or
subdivision.
3. Individual or On-lot: Any structure designed to
biochemically treat sewage within the boundaries of an
individual lot.
Screen Planting: A vegetative material of sufficient
height and density to conceal from the view of property
owners on adjoining residential lots the structures and
uses on the premises on which the screen planting is
located.
Sh.Qpping Center (Mall or Plaza) : A group of stores planned
and designed for the site on which it is built, functioning
as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property
as an integral part of the unit.
Sign: An advertisement displayed outside a buildin~,
pertaining to a product, service or name, related directly
to the permitted activity carried on and use of the lot on
which it is ~laced, including painted walls and structures.
'!his definition does not include flags or pennants or other
insignia of any government or government agency or any
civic, charitable, religious, fraternal, or similar I.
organization.
Sign Area: '!he area defined by a frame or edge of a sign.
Where there is no frame or edge to the sign, the area shall
be defined by a projected, enclosed, four sided (straight
sides).geometric shape which mest closely outlines the said
sign.
Sign. Business: A sign directing attention to a business
or profession conducted on the same lot, or as incidental
to a business, to products sold upon the same lot.
Sign. Directional: A sign which is for directing patrons
or attendants to an establishment off the main traveled
highway or to service clubs, churches or other non-profit
organizations. ·
Sign. Freestanding: A sign supported by uprights or braces
placed upon the ground and not attached to a building.
Sign. Projecting: A sign which is attached to a building
or other structure and extended beyond the line of a
building or structure or beyond the surface of that portion
of the building or structure which it is attached.
Site Plan: A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is
shown topography, location of all buildings, structures,
28
roads, right-of-way, boundaries, all essential dimensions
and bearing of any other information deemed necessary by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
Social Hall: A room or building used for friendly or
convivial gatherings.
Special Exception: Any uses considered to have special
· requirements in certain zones or districts where the
conditions described for permitting each such use have been
enumerated in the Zoning Ordinance and where permission for
such use can only be given by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Story: A story is that part of a building between the
surface of any floor and the next floor above it, or in its
absence, then the finished ceiling or roof above it. A
s~lit-level is six (6) feet or more above the level of the
line of the finished floor next below it. Any floor under
a sloping roof at the top of a building which is more than
four (4) feet below the top plate shall be counted as a
story; and if less than four (4) feet below the top plate,
it shall be counted as a half-story. A basement shall be
counted as a story if it averages more than five (5) feet
above grade.
Street: Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways
used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or
pedestrians whether public or private. This strip of land
includes the entire right-of-way, not just the cart-way.
Streets are further classified according to the functions
they perform
1 .. Arterial: A major street located and designed for the
· continuous movement of heavy volumes of all types of·
comparatively short-haul vehicular traffic between
cOlll!tn.lllities and for collecting and distributing traffic
to and from expressways.
2. Cul-de-sac: A local street intersecting another street
at one end and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at
the other. ·
3. MaJ;:ginal Access: A local street, parallel and adjacent
to a major street (but separated from it by a reserve
strip), which provides access to abutting properties
and control of intersections with the major street.
4. Minor: A street providing local access to residences
and other uses along its sides.
5. Perimeter: Any existing street to which the parcel of
land to be subdivided abuts on only one (1) side.
6. Collector: A street located and designed for all types
29
of intracomrrn.inity vehicular traffic, and functioning to
carry traffic to the arterials.
Street Right-of-Way Line: The line dividing a lot from the
full street right-of-way, not just the cartway. The word
"street" shall be defined as above.
Structure: Structure means any man-made object having an
.ascertainable, stationary location on or in land or water,
whether or not affixed to the land and includes, among
other things, buildings, stadiums, platfonns, radio towers,
sheds, ca:qiorts, storage bins, fences and display signs.
Subdivision: The division or redivision of a lot, tract or
parcel of land by any means into two (2) or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including
changes in existing lot lines for the puzpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devises, transfer of ownership or
building or lot development: Provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural puzposes into
parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling,
shall be exempted.
Swimming Pool:
1. Private: Any private swimming pool permanently
attached to or temporarily erected on or in the ground,
not located within a completely enclosed building, and
containing, or normally capable of containing, water to
a depth at any point greater than one and one half (1~)
feet.
Comrrn.inity or Club (Public or Semi-Public): Any public·or
semi-public swimming pool shall be construed to mean any
outdoor pool constructed by a unit of government for use by
residents of the Borough or region and their guests or by
an association of property owners or by a private club
solely for the use and enjoyment of members of the
association or clubs and their families.
Terrace: A raised level or platform of earth, support on
one or more faces by a wall, a bank of turf, or the like,
or a series of such raised levels or platf onns arranged one
above the other on a slope.
Travel Trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreational, and vacation use, permanently
30
identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer on the
trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, having a
body width not exceeding eight (8) feet, and being of any
length, provided its gross weight does not exceed 4,500
pounds, or being of any weight, provided its body length
does not exceed twenty nine (29) feet.
~ The specific purpose for which land or a structure or
building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it
is or ma:y be occupied or maintained. The tenn "pennitted
use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
non-confonning use.
Use. Principal:
Use. Tel!i'Ora:ry:
located on a lot
Ordinance.
The main use on a lot.
The use of land or structure of building
for a limited time as regulated by this
Variances: The pennission granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following a public hearing that has been properly
advertised as required by the provisions of this Ordinance
for an adjustment the application to a specific piece of
property of some regulation which, if strictly adhered to,
would result in an unnecessary hardship, and where the
permission granted would not be contrary to the public
interest, and would maintain the spirit and original intent
of the Ordinance.
Water Supply and Distribu.tion Systems:
1. Public: A system for supplying and distributing water
from a common source to dwellings and other buildings,
·generally not confined to one neighborhood and operated
by a municipal agency, authority or public utility.
2. Centralized: A system for supplying and distributing
water from a cormnon source to two or more dwellings
and/or other buildings within a single neighborhood or
subdivision.
3. Individual or On-Lot (Wells): A system for supplying
and distributing water to a single dwelling or other
building from a source located on the same lot.
Yard: An unoccupied space open to the sky, on the same lot
with a building or structure, but not intended to mean
"court".
Yard. Front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot
with a main building, extending the full width of the
building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth
of the front yard shall be measured between the front line
of the building and the street right-of-way line. Covered
31
porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be
considered as part of the main building and shall not
project into a required front yard.
Yard. Rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with
a main building, extending the full width of the lot and
situated between the rear line of the.lot and the rear line
of the building projected to the side lines of the lot.
'Ihe depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the
rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building. A ·
building shall not extend in to the required rear yard.
Zoning: 'Ihe designation of specified districts or zones
within the rrrunici~ality, reserving them for certain uses,
together with limitations on lot area and size, heights of
structures and other stipulated requirements.
Zoning Hearing Board: See Board, or Zoning Hearing Board.
Zoning Map: 'Ihe officially adopted Zoning Map of the
Borou~h of Surrrnit Hill, Carbon County, Pennsylvania,
containing zoning districts, together with all amendments
subsequently adopted.
Zoning Officer: 'Ihe Zoning Officer or his authorized
representative appointed by the Surrrnit Hill Borough
Council.
Zoning Ordinance: 'Ihe Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Surrrnit Hill.
Zoning Permit:
Zoning Officer
structures.
'Ihe written authorization issued by the
for the use of land or buildings or other
32
ARTICLE 3
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DIS'.IRICI'S
301 Names of Zoning Districts
302 Zoning Map
303 InterJ?retation of Boundaries
304 District Boundaries
33
301 Names of Zoning Districts
For the ~ses of this Ordinance, the Borough of Summit
Hill is divided into the following districts:
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Residential
C-1 Corrmercial
C-2 Commercial
M-1 Industrial
o-s Open Space, Special Use
302 Zoning Map
The boundaries of the above districts are delineated on a
map entitled Borough of Summit Hill "Zoning Map", which
accompanies and which, with all explanato:ry matter thereon,
is hereby made a part of this Ordinance.
303 Inte:r::pretation of Boundaries
If uncertainty exists as to the bounda:ry of any district
shown on the Zoning Map, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
detennine the location of such bounda:ry according to the
guidelines set forth below.
304 District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district
as shown on the Zoning Map, the following guidelines shall
apply in detennining the location of such bounda:ry:
1. District bounda:ry lines are intended to follow or
parallel the center line of streets, streams and
railroad; and lot or property lines as they exist on a
recorded deed or plan in the County Recorder of Deeds
Office at the time of adoption of this Ordinance,
unless such district bounda:ry lines are fixed by
dimensions as shown on the Zoning Map.
34
2 . Where a district bounda:r:y line is not fixed by
dimensions and where it approximately follows lot
lines, and where it does not scale more than ten (10)
feet therefrom, such lot lines shall be const:r:ued to be
such boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
3 . If uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any
district shown on the ZOning Map, the Borough Engineer
shall determine the location of such bounda:r:y, paid for
by the property owner questioning or contesting the
bounda:r:y location.
35
(
ARTICLE 4
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
TABLE I
TABLE II
MAP
Schedule of District Regulations
Bulk and Coverage Control
Zoning Map
36
ARTICLE 4
DISTRICI' REGULATIONS
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Residential
C-1 Commercial
C-2 Commercial
M-1 Industrial
0-S Open Space, Special Use
37
TABLE 1 SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
DISTRICT
R-1
Low Density
Residential
District
R-2
Medium
Density
Residential
District
R-3
District
High
Density
Residential
District
o-s
open Space
Special
uses
PURPOSE
To delineate those areas
in the Borough where predominantly
low density
Residential development
has taken place and will
be encouraged in accordance
with the Comprehensive
Plan
To delineate those areas
which have developed with
one and two family strucures
To protect the areas from
the intrusion of incompatible
development
To designate an area of
the Community for high
density residential development
which might
also be utilized for
Housing for the Elderly
and Low Rent Public Housing
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Single-family detached dwellings
Public & Parochial schools
Public Parks & Playgrounds
Agricultu~al, Horticultural
greenhouses
Single-family detached dwellings
Two and Three family dwellings
All uses permitted in the R-2
plus multiple family dwellings
including garden apartments
To designate those areas Public Recreation activities
of the Community for Special
consideration due to
their existing use and
need for protection
(1) Mobile homes shall be located in established mobile home parks
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
Customary home occupations
Customary farm buildings
Private garage & parking
areas
Signs
Any other accessory use
customarily appurtenant
to a principal permitted
use
Home gardening, but not
the raising of livestock,
poultry or other similar
objectional activity
All accessory uses permitted
in R-1
All accessory uses permitted
in R-1
Accessory uses associated
with permitted principal
uses
SPECIAL USES
Golf courses
Agricultural service
establishments
Farm supplies equipment
Self storage facilities
Church & Places of
Worship
Essential services and
uses of ail educational -....·
and/or religious nature
Large scale residential
development
Essential services and
uses of an educational
and/or religious natu~e
Social halls, lodges,
fraternal organizations
and other similar uses;
town or row houses, offstreet
parking facilities
Bed and Breakfast·
Nurseries for the da~ care
of young children
Private outdoor recreation
activities such as horseback
riding, petting zoo,
etc-.
Camping facilities
CONDITIONAL USES
Large scale residential
development
Large scale commercial
development
Mobile home parks(!)
Kennels, stables for
horses
Extraction of stone
sand and gravel
Health Care Facilities,
Nursing and Convalesant
Homes
Camps
Multi-family dwellings
Mobile Home Parks{!)
Stractures associated
with outdoor recreation
facilities
DISTRICT
C-1
Commercial
District
C-2
Commerical
District
M-1
TABLE 1
PURPOSE
To delineate an area for retail
commercial activity to
serve the needs of the residents
of the Borough
To delineate areas along
major thoroughfares for
commercial activity
To delineate those areas in
the Borough best suited for
industrial development because
of location, topography,
existing facilities
and the relationship to
other land uses
uses not compatible with industry
are not to be permitted
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
Banks and other financial institutions,
barbershops and
beauty parlors, book and stationery
stores, drugstores,
dry goods and variety stores,
dry cleaning establishments,
eating and drinking places,
florists, food stores, furniture
stores, gasoline service
stations, hardware stores, indoor
amusement enterprises,
laundries, automobile dealers,
offices, state liquor stores,
paint and wallpaper stores,
radio/television repair, shoe
repair, tailors and apparel
stores.
Gasoline service stations, car
wash, lumber yard 1 vehicle
sales and service
All C-1 uses
Includes general industrial
uses; the manufacture, assembly,
packing, storage or treating
of merchandise, lumberyard,
coal yard, fuel supply depot,
builders supply yard, wholesale
and storage facilities
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
Signs
Off-street parking and
loading
Accessory uses and buildings
customarily appurtenant
to a principal permitted
use, such as incidental
storage
Same as C-1
Signs
Customary accessory uses
incidental to a permitted
use
Storage of materials,
goods or supplies outside
of a building as an accesso~
y to a pe~mitted use,
provided that no storage
space shall be located
within· the front yard or
within twenty-five (25)
feet of a side or rear
lot line, and further
that no such outside
storage shall be for
the primary purpose of
displaying for sale or
advertising benefit
SPECIAL USES
Limited light industrial
uses when conducted 'within
an eclosed building
such as manufacturing of
apparel, toys, novelties,
photo processing, printing
and laboratories
Apartments above stores
Bed and Breakfast facilities
CONDITIONAL USES
Adult book stores
Adult entertainment
establishments
Multi-family dwellings
Automobile repairs
Public and Semi-Public uses Fast food establishments
Self-storage facilities
bulk fuel storage facilities
Nursing Homes
Shopping Centers
Light manufacturing
Autom6bile repairs
Coal mining and coal
reclaimation activities
TABLE II
BULK AND COVERAGE CONTROLS
Minimum Lot Dimensions {2)
(Square Feet)
Area for Lots HaVing
Minimum Yard Dimensions
District
Minimum Lot Size
Minium Lot Size without sewer
Width Depth Front Rear Side
Maximum Height Feet
Maximum Percentage Lot Coverage
R-1 Single Family 1 acre 1 acre 75 120 35 50 20 2.5 35 25
R-2 Single Family 6,000 n/a 40 120 20 35 8 2.5 35 50 
R-2 Two Family 8,000 n/a 60 120 20 35 8 2.5 35 n/a
R-3 Single Family 6,000 n/a 30 120 4 5 2 2.5 35 50 
R-3 Two Family 8,000 n/a 15 120 4 2 2.5 50 80
R-3 Multi-Family 12,000 n/a 15 120 4 5 2 4 50 60
C-1 Commercial None None None None 1 3 40 100
C-2 Highway Commercial 20,000 n/a 100 200 20 30 15 2 20 50 
M-1 Industrial 20,000 n/a 100 120 25 30 15 3 40 50 
O-S Special  4 acres 200 400 50 50 25 2.5 35 15


N/A Not appl~cable
(1) None required, but at least 10 feet if provided
(2) In an R-3 district, the side yard requirement
for an accessory structure (garage) is waived
if the structure is built on the property line.
If a side yard set back is provided, it shall
be a minimum of 2 1 •
200
120
400
Front Rear
Feet Feet
3S so
20 3S
20 3S
4 ;5 4
4
None
Required
20 30
2S 30
so so
'·,,
)
Each Maximum Height Maximum Percent
Side of Buildings of Lot Coverage
Feet Stories Feet
20 2~ 3S 2S
• 2~ 3S so
8 2~ 3S N/A
2 2~ 3S so
2 2~ so 80
2 4 so 60
(1) 3 40 100
lS 2 20 so
lS 3 40 so
25 2~ 35 15
·,
ARTICLE 5
SPECIAL EXCEPI'ION USES
501 Purpose
502 General Provisions
38
ARTICLE 5
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
501 ~se: The purpose of special use is to provide
additional standards for controlling the unique or special
characteristics of certain uses which otherwise conform to
uses permitted in their respective districts.
502 General Provisions: Decisions for granting or denying
special use permits shall be made by the Zoning Hearing
Board as provided for in Article 8.
1. Decisions: Decisions of the Board shall be made
pursuant to standards and criteria expressed in this
Article, to regulations for the respective districts in
which the uses are located, and to all other
requirements of the Ordinance.
The board shall grant an approval for a special use
only if it finds adequate evidence that the proposed
use meets both the general and specific requirements
for such use.
2. Effect of Ordinance Changes on N;lPlication: When an
application for a special exception has been filed with
the Zoning Hearing Board and the subject matter of such
application would ultimately constitute either a land
development or a subdivision as defined in Article 2,
no change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plans shall effect the
decision on such application adversely to the
applicant, and the applicant shall be entitled to a
decision in.accordance with the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time
the application was duly filed.
Provided, further, should such an application be
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant
shall be entitled to proceed with the submission of
either land development or subdivision plans within
a period of six ( 6) months or as may be approved by the
Zoning Hearing Board, following the date of such
approval in accordance with the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time
the application was duly filed before the Zoning
Hearing Board.
If either a land development or subdivision plan is so
filed within said period, such plan shall be subject to
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (act 247, as Amended),Section 508, (1)
39
through(4), and specifically to the time limitation of
Section 508, (4) which shall commence as of the date of
filing such land development or subdivision plan.
3. Site Plan: A plan for the proposed development of a
site for a special use shall be submitted with the
application for a special permit to the Zoning Officer.
Such plan shall show the location of all buildings,
o~en spaces, parking areas, traffic access and
circulation, landscaping and any other infonna.tion
required for determining the confonna.nce of the special
use with the regulations for that use and the survey
shall be prepared by a Pennsylvania registered engineer
or registered surveyor and contain their raised seal.
4. General Standards: Decisions for granting all special
uses shall be guided by the following general
standards:
a. The proposed use shall not jeopardize the
objectives of the Conprehensive Plan;
b. Public and semi-public se:i:vices and facilities
such as streets, sewers, water,
police and fire protection shall be
adequate for the proposed use;
c. Existing and future streets and access to the site (
shall be adequate for emergency se:i:vices, for
avoiding undue congestion and for providing for
the safety and convenience of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic;
d. The relationship of the proposed use to other
activities existing or plapned in the vicinity
shall be harmonious in terms of the location and
size of the site relative to the proposed
operation and the nature and intensity of the
operation involved;
e. The relationship of the proposed use to other
activities existing or planned in the vicinity
shall be harmonious in terms of the character and
height of buildings, walls and fences so that
property is not ill'!Paired;
40
t
\
f. 'Ihe proposed use shall not be more objectionable
in its operation in terms of noise, fumes,
vibrations, smoke, fly ash, or lights (such as
flashing, neon, flood, spot, etc.) than would be
the operations of any permitted use in the
district;
g. Any other reasonable conditions and safeguards, ih
addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, may
be imposed by the Board, if the Board deems it
necessary for i~lementing the purposes of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act
247, an amended) and this Ordinance.
41
·ARTICLE 6
CONDITIONAL USES
601 Plllpose
602 General Provisions
42
ARTICLE 6
CQNDITIONAI. USES
601 Pul:J;>ase: The purpose of conditional use regulations is to
permit certain uses in particular zones or districts when
the conditions described for each use have been fulfilled,
as determined by the SUrrmit Hill Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
602 General Provisions: Decisions for granting or denying
conditional use permits shall be ma.de by the Borough
Council according to the following procedures:
1. Decisions: Decisions for granting or denying
conditional use permits shall be ma.de by the Borough
Council after its receiJi>t and review of the Planning
Commissions recommendation and after it has held the
required public hearing in order to hear evidence from
involved parties for the purpose of better gauging the
potential implications of the proposed use.
The Borough Council shall submit the application for
the proposed conditional use to the Plannin~ Commission
at least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing
on the proposed use to provide the Planning Commission
with an opportunity to submit a nonbinding
recommendation.
The Borough Council shall render a final decision on
the application within forty five (45) days after the
last public hearing. Where the Borough Council fails
to make its decision within the period required, the
decision shall be deemed in favor of the applicant.
2. Effect of Ordinance Changes on Ap,plication: When an
application for conditional use has been filed with the
Borough Council and the subject matter of such would
ultimately constitute either a land development or a
subdivision as defined in Article 2, no change or
amendment of the Zoning, Subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plans shall affect the decision on such
application adversely to the applicant, and the
applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or
plans as they stood at the time the application was
filed.
43
Provided, further, should such application be approved
by the Borough Council, the applicant shall be entitled
to proceed with the submission of either land
development or subdivision plans within a period of six
( 6) months or longer or as may be approved by the
Borough Council f ollowin!iJ the date of such approval in
accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the
application was duly filed before the Borough Council.
If either a land development or subdivision plan is so
filed within said period, such plan shall be subject to
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act 247, as Amended), Section 508 (1)
through (4), and specifically to the time limitations
of Section 508 (4), which shall corranence as of the date
of filing such land development or subdivision plan.
3. Site Plan: A plan for the proposed development of a
site for a conditional use shall be submitted with the
application for a conditional use permit to the Zoning
Officer. Such plan shall show the location of all
buildings, open space, parking areas, traffic access
and circulation, landscaping and any other conditional
use with the regulations for that use.
4. General Standards: Decisions for granting all
conditional uses shall be guided by the following
general standards:
a. The proposed use shall not jeopardize the
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
b. Public services and facilities such as streets,
sewers, water, police, and fire protection shall
be adequate for the proposed use.
c. Existing and future streets and access to the site
shall be adequate for emergency services, for
avoiding undue.congestion and for providing for
the safety and convenience of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
d. The relationship of the proposed use to other
activities existing or planned in the vicinity
shall be harmonious in terms of the location and
size of the site relative to the proposed
operation, and the nature and intensity of the
operation involved.
44
e.
f.
g.
The relationship of the proposed use to other
activities existing or planned in the vicinity
shall be harmonious in terms of the character and
height of buildings, walls, and fences so that
property is not impaired.
The proposed use shall not be more objectionable
in its operations in terms of noise, fumes,
vibrations, smoke, fly ash, or lights (such as
flashing, neon, flood, spot, etc. ) than would be
the operations of any pennitted use in the
district.
Any other reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, may
be implemented by the Borough Council if it deems
it necessary for implementing the purpose of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act
247, as amended) and this Ordinance.
45
ARTICLE 7
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
701 Supplementary Use Regulations
1. Excavation and Removal of Top Soil
2. Flood Plains
3. Home Gardening, Nurseries and Greenhouses
4. Non- Confo~ Structures and Uses
5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
6. Swimming Pools (Private)
7. Signs
8. Principal Buildings and Uses
702 Supplementary Area Regulations
1. Non- confo:r:ming Lots of Record
2. Reduced Lot Area
3. Residential Habitable Floor Area
4. Required Minil!UlIIl Lot Areas
703 Supplementary Yard Regulations
1. Fences and Walls
2. Fire Escapes
3. Front Yards and "Comer" Lots
4. Front Yards and "Through" Lots
5. Patios and Terraces
6. Porches and Decks
7. Projecting Architectural Features
8 . Structures, Attached Accessory
9. Structures, unattached Accessory
10. Visibility at Intersections
704 Supplementary Height Regulations
1. Height Exceptions
2. Ornamental Features
46
ARTICLE 7
SUPPLEMENTARY REGU1ATIONS
701 Supplementary Use Regulations
1. Excavation and Removal of Tqp Soil: Excavation of top
soil for the PUJ:POSe of ~ding a site or preparing for
the const:i:uction of a building foundation shall be
allowed in all districts. Removal of tOJ? soil shall be
allowed in all but the residential district, where it
shall remain on the site. Excavation and removal
activities shall comply with the following:
a. Drainage: Any excavations for the removal of top
soil or other earth products must be adequately
drained to prevent the formation of pools of water
and shall not create drainage problems for adjacent
properties or public streets.
b. Storage Piles: Unless specifically permitted, open
excavations shall not be maintained except for those
excavations made for the erection of a building or
st:i:ucture for which a permit has been issued. All
soil so stripped or othe:i:wise excavated shall not be
stored on a property for more than one (1) year
before being redistributed and graded on the
property or removed from the property.
c. ~: Dust problems shall be mipimized during the
excavation, storage, removal, and hauling of
excavated materials.
2. Flood. Plains (See Summit Hill Borough Flood Plain
Ordinance . )
3 . Home Gardening Nurseries and Greenhouses: Home
gardening and accessory st:i:uctures used for nurseries
and greenhouses are permitted in residential areas
provided that they shall not be located in any front
yard and shall not include the outdoor storage of
equipment and supplies.
4. Home Occypations: Home Occupations shall be conducted
only by residents of the dwelling unit who may not
employ more than one additional non resident person;
that the only external evidence of the home occupation
shall be a sign not exceeding one and one half (1 1/2)
square feet in area. The home occupation shall not
occupy more than twenty five (25) percent of the total
floor area of such dwelling unit or five hundred (500)
square feet, whichever is less. Such home occupations
47
shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling unit for residential purposes.
Horne occupations shall be considered an Accessory Use
and shall be restricted to professional offices, the
training and tutoring of up to four (4) adults, nursery
school classes limited to no more than ten (10)
children, custom dress making, millinery or tailoring,
women's beauty salons and the rooming or boarding of not
more than two (2) persons.
5. Non-Conforming Structures and Uses:
a. Continuation of Use: Any lawful use of any
dwelling, building, structure or lot existing at the
effective date of this Ordinance may be continued
even though such use does not conform to the
provisions of this Ordinance, except as otherwise
provided.
A "certificate of non-conformance" may be issued by
the Zoning Officer for all structures, lots and uses
which do not conform to the provisions of this
Ordinance and shall provide the reasons why they are
identified as nonconformities, The Zoning Officer
may maintain a map and register showing the
registration, identity, and location of nonconforming
structures, lots, and uses which may be
reviewed periodically to determine that they do not
expand beyond the limitations prescribed in this
Ordinance.
b. Chall$e of Use: The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a
special exception for a change from one nonconforming
use to another non-conforming use if it
finds that all of the following standards are met:
i) no structural alterations are made, ii) the
proposed change will be less objectionable in
external effects than the previous non-conforming
use and will be more consistent physically with its
surroundings; iii) no increases in traffic
generation or congestion, including both vehicular
and pedestrian traffic, will result from the change;
iv) no glare, vibration, or electrical disturbances
will result from the change; and v) no increased
threat to health by reason of rodent infestation or
otherwise will result from the change.
c. Extension of Use: The Zoning Hearing Board may grant
a special exception for and extension of a nonconforming
use if it finds that all of the following
standards are met: i) the yard and coverage
requirements for the district in which it is located
are not violated; ii) all off street parking and
48
loading requirements applicable to the use are
retained; iii) no more than one enlargement of a
non-conforming use or structure is made; and iv) the
extension is not more than thirty-three percent(33%)
of the floor or land area as it existed at the time
the structure or use first became.non-conforming.
d. Abandonment of Use: If a non-conforming structure or
use is abandoned for a continuous period of one cir
year, it shall not again be used except· in
conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
e. Structures Condemned: A non-conforming structure
which has been legally conderrned shall not be
rebuilt or used except in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
f. Restoration of Structure or uae: A non-conforming
building or other structure which has been damaged
or destr~d by fire, explosion, windstorm, flood or
other similar active cause to the extent of more
than sixty percent (60%) of its reproduction value
at the time of the damage shall not be restored
except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
When damage is less than sixty percent (60%) of its
reproduction value, a nonconforming building or
other structure may be repaired reconstructed and
used as before the time of damage, provided such
repairs or reconstruction are completed within one
(1) year of the date of such-damage.
For residential structures non-conforming only as to
yard spaces, in districts where residences are
permitted and where most of the residential
structures nearby are similarly non-conforming, the
structures may be rebuilt similar to the yard spaces
of the adjoining.lots or of the majority of the lots
in the particular area.
The determination· of the extent of damage in terms
of percent replacement value due to damage or
destruction shall be made by averaging three (3)
estimates made by two(2) certified appraisers
al?l\"'inted by the Borough and one (1) insurance
adJuster. The cost of such appraisals shall be
borne by the property owner of the affected
property.
g. Non- conforming Use of Qpen Land: All non-conforming
signs, billboards, junk storage areas, storage areas,
and similar non-conforming use of open land, when
49
discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days or damaged
to an extent of sixty percent (60%) or more of
replacement costs, shall not be continued, repaired or
reconstructed.
6. Off-Street Parking and Loading
a. Size of Off-Street Parking Spaces: Each off-street
parking space shall have an area of not less than
two hundred (200) square feet and have dimensions of
ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth,
exclusive of access drives or aisles. All such
spaces shall be kept in usable shape and condition.
Except in cases of dwellings, no parking area shall
contain fewer than three (3) spaces. Open parking
areas shall be calculated as yard area.
b. Garages and ca:i;:ports : A gara!;Je or carport may be
located wholly or partly inside the walls of the
principal building, attached to the outer walls of
the principal building, or completely separated from
the principal building. If connected to the ·
principal building, it shall be considered part of
the principal building in calculating yard
re~irements. If separated from the principal
building, it shall be considered an accessory
building.
c. Location of Parkin~ Spaces: Required parking spaces
shall be located either:
on the same lot as the use to which they are
accessory, or
on another lot zoned the same, under the same .
· ownership, and within four hundred (400) feet to the ·
boundary of the property of the principal use.
If the spaces are on another lot, such spaces shall
be subject to deed restrictions filed in the County
Office of the Recorder of Deeds binding the owner of
such lot and his heirs or assigns to maintain the
required number of spaces throughout the life of
such use.
d. Coomercial Vehicles in Residential Areas: Only one
(1) commercial vehicle may be kept on any lot used
for residential purposes in a residential district.
e. Size of Off-Street Loading Spaces: Each off-street
loading space shall be a minimum of seventy (70)
feet in length, twelve (12) feet in width, and have
an overhead clearance of at least fourteen (14)
feet.
50
/
\
f. Access to Off-Street parking and Loading AreaS:
g.
There shall be adequate ingress and egress to all
parking and loading areas. There shall be provided
an access drive leading to the parking or storage
areas or loading spaces. Such access drive shall be
not less than ten(lO) feet in width in the case of a
.dwelling and not less than twenty (20) feet in width
in all other cases and shall not exceed forty (40)
feet in width. Access to off-street parking and ·
loading areas shall be limited to several welldefined,
separate or common access points which
shall comply with the following:
(l)Access drive shall not open upon any right-of-way
within sixty (60) feet of the nearest right-ofway
line of any intersecting street of highway.
(2)Access drives shall not open upon any right-ofway
where the sight distance in either direction
along the thorough fare would be less than five
hundred· (500) feet when the posted speed limit is
35 miles per hour or more; however, when the
posted speed limit is less than 35 miles per
hour, the sight distance requirement may be
reduced to two hundred fifty (250) feet.
(3)In no case shall there be unrestricted access
along the length of a street or alley.
Parking Lot Screening and Landscaping: the purpose
for ~roviding such landscaping are: to protect the
public safety, to allow precipitation to return to
the underground aquifers, to provide for natural
drainage and, hence, fldod protection, to reduce the
level of carbon dioxide and to return oxygen to . the
air, to provide shade and reduce the blighting
effects of parking lots, to preserve property values
of adjacent properties, and to irrprove the
appearance of the community.
(1) Off-street parking areas for more than five (5)
vehicles and all off-street loading areas shall
be effectively screened by a planting strip at
least five(5) feet in depth along all abutting
~roperty lines. The planting strip shall
include a solid wall or a substantial,
attractive, tight fence, and evergreen hedges a
minirrrurn of five (5) feet in height, and
shrubbery, vines flowers, grass, an other
foliage. The evergreens shall be of such
height at the time of planting that they will
attain a height of five (5) feet within five
(5) years.
51
(2) A planting strip at least ten (10) feet in
depth shall be located between the parking lot
and abutting right-of-way except for accessways
crossing the strip. Such a strip shall contain
one(l) shade tree for each forty (40) linear
feet of the strip, an no tree shall be less
than eight (8)feet in hei~ht at the time of
planting. The planting strip shall also contain
shrubbery, vines, flowers, grass an other
foliage.
(3) The interior area of a parking lot, in addition
to all border planting strips, shall contain
planting areas dispersed throughout with not
less than five percent (5%) of such interior
area in landscaping. Such planting areas shall
contain shade trees, with no tree less than
eight (8) feet in height at the time of
planting. The plantingstrip shall also contain
shrubbery, vines, flowers, grass and other
foliage.
(4) All screening and landscaping areas shall be
maintained in good condition, free of paper and
rubbish, and free from all advertising signs.
All trees, shrubbery and other landscaping
materials shall be maintained in a healthy and
growing condition, with dead material replaced
as necessary.
(5) Any parking lot or loading area which qualifies
as a non-conforming use upon enactment of this
Ordinance shall corrply with the requirements
for screening and landscaping upon any · .
enlargement, extension, reconstruction or
structural alteration.·
h. Parking lot lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate
off-street parking or loading areas shall be
arranged so as to reflect the light away from
adjoining premises and public right-of-way.
i. Parking Spaces Reqμired: Any structure or building
hereafter erected, converted, or enlarged for any of the
following uses,or any open area hereafter used for
conmercial or industrial purposes, shall be provided
with not less than the minimum spaces, as set forth
below in table III, and such spaces shall be readily
accessible to the uses served thereby.
52
TYPE OF USE
Residential Uses
1. Single-family houses & mobile
homes two family houses multifamily
houses townhouses and
low rise apartments multifamily
homes
NUMBER OF SPACES
REQUIRED
2. Dwelling above or in combination
with a commercial establishment 1/conmercial establishment
3. Rooming or boarding houses 1/guest room
2 for manager
4. Dormitories & group living facil- 1 space/5 residents
ities 1 employee
P\lblic and Semi- Public Uses
1. Places for worship & cemetery
chapels school auditoriums,
Stadium, assembly or meeting
meeting rooms, etc.
Elementary & secondary public and
parochial schools
3. Social halls, clubs & lodges
4. Nursing & convalescent homes
5. Clinic & medical, osteopathic,
chiropractor or dental off ices
6. Commercial schools (art, music,
etc.)
7. Nursery and daycare centers
8. Community centers, nrunicipal
administration buildings,fire
halls & library
1 space/lOOsq.ft. of floor
area
1 space/ 3 beds; ·
1 space/employee
5 patient spaces/doctor;
1 space/employee
1 space/ 5 classroom
seats
1 space/employee;
1 off-street loading space
/6 children cared for at
center
1 space/lOOsq. ft. of
public floor area
53
9. Public utility buildings &
structures
Commercial Uses
1. Retail stores or shops
2. Supennarkets, grocery stores
mini-marts & dairy stores
3. Shopping centers
4. Eating & drinking establishments
5. Drive-in & fast food restuarants
6. Bowling Alleys
7. Skating rinks
8. Billiard & pool rooms
9. Golf driving ranges
10.Miniature golf ranges
11.Golf courses
12.Animal hospitals
13.Animal kennels
14.0ffice buildings, professional
offices & banks
15.Model homes & model apartments
16.Funeral homes & crematories
17.Motels and hotels
18.Tourist homes
19.Barber & Beauty shops
20.Self-service dry cleaning
& laundromats
54
2 spaces/facility
1 space/200 sq.ft. of floor
sales space and 1/ employee
1 space7200sq.ft. of floor
sales space
l/employee
1 space7350sq.ft. of gross
floor area
1 space/2 1/2 seats;
l/employee
1 space750sq.ft.floor area
l/employee
5 spaces/pair of lanes;
l/employee
1 space7lOOsq.ft. of
skating area; 1/ employee
2 spaces/ billiard table;
l/employee
1 space7tee;
1 space/employee
1 space/hole;
1 space/employee
6 spaces/hole;
1 space/employee
5 spaces/vet; l/employee
1 space/3 kennel runs;
l/employee
1 space./lOOsq.ft. of floor
area
5 spaces for patrons
15 spaces/viewing parlor;
l/employee
1 space7guest room;
1/ manager;
l/employee (see also
restaurants)
1 space/guest room;
l/manager
l/employee (see also
restaurants)
2 spaces/shop plus 2/chair;
l/employee
1 space72 washing,drying,
cleaning machine
21.Home occupations
22.Appliance repair, shoe repair,
tailoring & dressmaking shops
23.Vehicular sales, body repair,
& se:r:vice garage
24.Gasoline se:r:vice station &
car wash
25.0ther commercial buildings
Industrial Uses
1.Industrial, wholesale,
warehouses, truck tenninals
manufacturing plants, research
& testing labs, etc.
2 spaces/dwelling unit; 1
space/non-resident,
employee
1 space/200sq.ft. of
interior
1 exterior space/200sq.ft.
of interior floor area;
1/employee
1 space/ employee.
1 space/300sq.ft.of floor
area
1 space/2 employees on
maxirm.un shift, plus
1 space/1,000sq.ft. of
gross floor area.
7. Swimming Pools (Private): Private swirraning pools in
districts where pennitted shall c~ly with the following
conditions and requirements:
a. '!he pool shall be intended and shall be used solely for
the enjoyment of the occupants and their guests of the
principal use of the property on which it is located.
b. '!he pool, shall be located in either the rear or side yard
of the property on which it is an accessory use.
c. '!he pool, including any walks or paved areas or accessory
structure adjacent thereto, shall not be located closer·
than two (2) feet to any property line of the property on
which it is located.
d. For all pools, the pool area or entire property on which
the pool is located shall be so walled or fenced or
otherwise protected so as to prevent uncontrolled access
by children from the street or from adjacent properties.
Said barrier shall not be less that four (4) feet in
height, and it shall be maintained in good condition.
e. Repair or replacement of fencing on existing pools shall
conform to these requirements.
8. Signs: Signs may be erected and maintained only when in
compliance with the provisions of this Article and any and all
other ordinances and regulations relating to the erection,
alteration, or maintenance of signs and similar devices. Signs
55
shall comply with both the regulations for the district in
which they are located and the regulations generally pertaining
to signs.
a. General Regulations
(1) Signs shall be constructed of durable material, maintained
in good condition, and not allowed to become
dilapidated.
(2) No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will
cause danger to traffic on a street by obscuring the sight
distance or by causing confusion with traffic signs or
signals.
(3) No sign, other than an official traffic sign, shall be
erected within the right-of-way lines of any street,
unless authorized by municipal officials for a special
pu:r:pose.
(4) Overhead signs shall be at least nine (9) feet high
measured from the ground or pavement to the bottom most
part of the sign.
(5) No sign shall exceed twenty (20) feet in height in any
residential district, and no sign shall exceed thirty (30)
feet in height being measured from the ground to the upper
most part of the sign.
(6) Permits shall be required for the erection or alteration
of any sign.
(7) Advertising painted upon or displayed upon a building,
structure or wall shall be regarded as an outdoor .
advertising sign, and the regulations pertaining thereto
shall apply unless the sign applies to services or
products sold on the premises.
(8) Each sign shall be removed by the property owner within
fifteen (15) days after the circumstances leading to its
erection no longer apply.
(9) No animated, sequential, flashing, or oscillating signs
shall be permitted in any district. Any sign by reason of
its intensity, color, location, or movement that may
interfere with traffic lights, signals or other controls,
or abrogate public safety shall not be permitted in any
district.
(10) Signs which emit objectionable or excessive noise created
by electric current or air movement shall not be
permitted.
56
(11) Signs for which illumination is permitted shall have
the light confined to the surface of the sign an
directed so as to avoid glare or reflection which could
endanger highway or street traffic and which could
create a nuisance for adjacent land uses.
(12) Signs surfaces shall include the entire face or faces
and, if composed of individual letters, figures, or
designs, the space between and around such-letters,
figures, or designs, but should not include the
supports.
(13) A temporary sign made of paper, cardboard, or similar
material and intended to attract public attention shall
not be attached to any lamp post, utility pole, shade
trees in the public right-of-way,or public structure or
building except as authorized by permit from the Zoning
Officer. Such signs shall include political posters and
notices of bazaars, picnics, and other such functions
conducted by charitable and non-profit groups. When
such signs are permitted, they shall not be posted
sooner than forty-five (45) days before the date of the
· event advertised, and they shall not remain posted for
more than ten (10) days after the date of the event is
advertised.
(14) In all districts, only those residential s~gns and
commercial and industrial identification signs
referring directly to services provided or materials or
products made, sold or displayed.on the premises shall
be permitted, excepted as otherwise noted. Such signs
shall comply with all other requirements, as stated
herein; for the district in which they are erected.
b. Signs in Residential District
(1) "For sale" and "for rent" signs relating to the
promises on which they are erected may be erected
and maintained, provided:
(i) the size of such sign is not in excess of six
(6) square· feet;
(ii) not more than one (1) such sign is placed
upon any property in single an separate
ownership, unless such property fronts upon
more than one street, in which case one (l)
such sign may be erected on each frontage;and
(iii)the signs shall be set back at least ten (10)
feet from any public or private street rightof-
way line.
57
(2) rand development and model homes signs indicating
the direction to the site or model available for
inspection, but not erected upon such premises, may
be erected and maintained, provided:
(i) the size of any such sign shall not be in
excess of six (6) square feet and not in excess
of four (4) feet in length."
(ii) not more than one (1) such sign shall be
erected on each five hundred (500) feet of
street frontage;
(iii) the signs shall be set back at least ten (10)
feet from any public or private street rightof-
way line; and
(iv) the sign shall contain thereon the name of the
owner, developer, builder or agent.
(3) "Lots for-sale" signs may be erected and maintained
in the subdivision in which the sign is to be
located, provided:
(i) the size of the sign shall not be in excess of
sixty (60) square feet in area;
(ii) not more than one (1) such sign shall be
erected in any subdivision; and
(iii) the sign shall be set back at least thirty
five (35) feet from any public or private
right-of-way line.
·(4) "Sold" or "rented" signs with ·the name of the
persons effecting the sale or rental may be erected
and maintained provided the conditions in subsection
(1) above are complied with.
(5) Signs of contractors. mechanics, painters and
artisans may be erected and maintained on the
premises during the time the work is being performed
on the premises, provided:
(i) the size of the sign shall not be in excess of
twelve (12) square feet; and
(ii) not more than one (1) such sign shall be
allowed on any property.
(iii) all such signs shall be removed upon fifteen
(15) says of completion of work.
58
f
\
(6) Trespassing signs and signs indicating private
ownership of a driveway or property may be erected
and maintained on the property to which they refer,
provided:
(i) the size of any signs shall not exceed two (2)
square feet; and
(ii) signs shall be spaced at intervals of not less
than fifty (50) feet of street frontage.
(7) Identification signs for schools, places of worship,
clinics. day-care centers. or institutions of a
similar nature may be erected and maintained,
provided:
(i) the size of any such sign shall not be in
excess of forty (40) square feet;
(ii) not more than one (1) such sign shall be placed
on a property in single and separate ownership,
linless such property fronts upon more than one
street, in which case one (1) such sign may be
erected on each frontage; and
(iii) the signs shall be set back at least ten (10)
feet from any public or private street rightof-
way.
(8) Signs indicating professional offices or home
occupations of the occupants of dwellings may be
erected and maintained, provided:
(i) · the size of any such sign shall not be in
excess of four (4) square feet;
(ii) such sign shall be limited to one (1) sign per
dwelling;
(iii) the sign may contain thereon the name,
occupation, address, logotype and trade mark of
the office or occupation; and
(iv) the sign shall be set back at least ten (10)
feet from any public or private street rightof-
way line .
(9) Official traffic or street name signs may be erected
only by, or with the written approval of the
municipal officials.
59
(10) Public utility and municipal government signs
necessary for the identification, operation or
protection of their facilities and uses may be
erected an maintained, provided:
(i) the size of the sign shall not be in excess of
thirty two (32) square feet:
(ii) the sign shall be loaded on the same premises
as the use to which it refers; and
(iii) the sign shall be set back at least ten (10)
feet from any public or private street rightof-
way line.
(11) Signs iodicating the residents' name or house or lot
number. or the oome of the premises itself. may be
erected and maintained, provided:
(i) the size of the sign shall not be in excess of
two ,(2) square feet;
(ii) not more than one (1) such sign shall be placed
on any single residence; and
(iii) the sign shall be set back at least ten (10)
feet from any public or private street rightof-
way line.
(12) Temporary signs shall be permitted as provided for
in Subsection (a) (13) above.
c. Signs in Commercial and Industrial Districts
(1) Any sign permitted in any Residential District, shall
also be permitted in any Commercial and Industrial
District.
(2) Signs in Commercial and Industrial Districts may be
erected and maintained, provided:
(i) the sign shall be on the same premises to which
it refers (except for outdoor advertising
signs);
(ii) the size of any such sign shall not exceed
sixty four (64) square feet;
(iii) not more than one (1) such sign shall be
erected on any one street frontage of the lot
on which the activity is located;
60
(iv) the sign shall be set back at least fifteen
(15) feet from any public or private street
right-of-way line; and ·
(v) each business or industry located on one lot or
in one building may have its own identification
sign, provided such sign is· attached to the
building in which the activity is located and
is no larger than eight (8) square·feet.
(3) Shopping Center signs shall be pennitted, with each
such center having one (1) sign indicating the name of
the center and establishments located therein, in
addition to signs permitted for individual
establishments, provided:
(i) such signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet per face;
(ii) such sign shall not be located within one
hundred (100) feet of any existing principal
building on an adjoining residential premises;
(iii) the sign shall be set back at least fifteen
(15) feet from any public or private street
right-of-way line; and
(iv) each establishment located in the shopping
center may have its own identification sign,
i;>rovided such si~ is attached to the building
in which the activity is located and is no
larger than thirty five (35) square feet.
(4.) Signs within display windows shall not be considered
a part of the pennitted sign area unless such signs·
are illuminated, in which case the area shall be
considered part of the permitted sign area.
9. Principal building And Uses: In any "R" Residential
District, no lot used for a residential purpose shall
contain more than one principal building or use.
702 SuJ2Plementa:ry Area Regulations
1. Non-Conforming Lots of Record: In any district in which
single-family residences are permitted, a singlefamily
house and customary accessory buildings and
uses may be erect.ed as a permitted use, on any lot
record in existence at the effective date of this
Ordinance even though the lot area and width are less
than the minimum requirements set forth herein.
61
However, the front side, and rear yards shall conform
to the requirements of the district in which the lot is
located.
Where two or more adjacent lots with less than the
required area and width are held bY one owner, the
request for a zoning permit shall be ref erred to the
Zoning Hearing Board, which may require. the owner of
said lots to resubdivide or realign the existing lots
or lot line of said non-conforming lots in such a
manner so as to create a lot or lots that conform, or
conform as nearly as possible (where total conformance
is impossible), with the minimum applicable
requirements for lot dimensions and area as set forth
in this Ordinance; provided, however, that the Zoning
Hearing Board shall not require any such action on the
part of the owner until the Board has reviewed and
considered the advisability and- feasibility of
compelling such action by the owner.
2. Reduced Lot Area: No lot shall be so reduced in area so
that any yard or area requirements will be smaller than
that prescribed in the regulations for the district in
which the lot is located.
3. Residential Habitable Floor Area: All dwelling units
hereafter created shall have a minimum floor area of
eight hundred (BOO) square feet, but dwellings having
more than two (2) bedrooms shall have two hundred (200)
additional square feet for every additional bedroom.
703 Supplementa:ry Yard Regulations
1. Fences and Walls: A fence or wall a maximum of-six (6)
feet in height - or higher if a retaining wall - may be
erected within the limits of any yard not extending
beyond the front set back line. Within the front yard
a fence or wall a maximum of thirty six (36) inches in
height shall be permitted, except as provided in
Section 703 .10 below. A fence intended to mark a
boundary shall be located either on the boundary line
itself or within six (6) inches thereof.
2. Fire Escapes: Open fire escapes shall not extend into
any required yard more tha:il four and one half (4 1/2)
feet.
3 . .Front Yards and "Corner" Lots: In any district a lot
which abuts on and at the intersection of two or more
streets or upon two parts of the same street shall have
the required front yard for the district in which it is
located for the frontage on both streets.
62
4. Front Yards and "'I'hrough" Lots: In any district a lot
which runs through a block from street to street shall
have the required front yard for the district in which
it is located for the frontage on both streets.
5. Patios and Terraces: A paved patio or terrace shall not
be considered in the determination of yard sizes or lot
coverage if such patio or terrace is unroofed and
without walls, para~ets, or other form of enclosure and
does not encroach within ten (10) feet of any property
line. Such patio or terrace may have a fence or
railing a maxinrum of three (3) feet in height.
6. Porches and Decks: Any porch or deck shall be
considered a part of the building in the determination
of the size of yards or lot coverage.
7. Projecting Architectural Features: Chirrneys, cornices,
eaves, gutters, and bay windows and similar
architectural features may extend not more than two (2)
feet into any required yard.
8. Structures. Attached Accessory: Accessory structures,
such as garages or carports, which are attached to the
principal building shall be considered a part of the
building in the determination of the size of the yards
or lot coverage.
9. Structures. Una.ttach.ed AccessC+::(: Unattached accessory
structures on residential lots in any district may be
erected within the rear or side yards provided that the
maxinrum height of such structure be limited to one and
one half (1 1/2) stories no more than eighteen (18)
feet. For structures greater than 125 square feet in
floor area, the mininrum distance of such structure from
the rear and side property lines shall be as required
for the district in which the structure is located;
however, in no case shall an unattached accessory
structure be permitted closer than ten (10) feet to a
property line.
10. Visibility at Intersections: On any corner lot in any
district, no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or
planting more than thirty (30) inches higher than the
road surface shall be erected or maintained within
fifty (SO) feet of the "corner" so as not to interfere
with traffic visibility across the corner.
11. In all Districts: No principal buildin~ or sewage
system drainfield shall be permitted within 100 feet of
any watercourse drainage ditch or any other natural
drainage area.
63
704 Supplementary Height Regulations
1. Hei$ht Exc~ions: The height limitations of this
Ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries,
cupolas, and domes not used for human occupancy, nor to
chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, fire
towers, bulk heads, and similar features; nor to silos
and other farm buildings and structures; not to any
accessory mechanical appurtenances usually carried
above the roof level.
2. Ornamental Features: The provisions of this Ordinance
shall not apply to ~revent the erection above the
building height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for
ornament (and without windows) extending above such
height limit not more than five (5) feet.
64
.ARTICLE 8
A[MINISTRATION AND ENFORC'RMENT
801 The Zoning Officer
802 Permits
803 Certificates of Zoning Compliance
804 Enforcement, causes of Action and Remedy
805 Payment of Fees
65
ARTICLE 8
APMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
801 The Zoning Officer
1. The Zoning Officer: The provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be enforced by an agent appointed by the
borough council who shall be known as the Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer shall not hold any elective office in
the Borough. In accordance with Section 614 of the MPC,
the Zoning Officer shall meet qualifications extablished
by the Municipality and shall be able to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Borough a working knowledge of
Zoning.
2. Compensation: The compensation for the Zoning Officer
shall be determined by the Borough Council.
3. Duties and Respmsibilities: The Zoning Officer shall
have all the duties and powers conferred qr he Zoning
Ordinance in addition to those reasonably implied for
that pw:pose. He/she shall not issue a permit in
connection with any contemplated erection, construction,
alteration, repair, extension, replacement and/or use of
any building, structure, sign, and/or land unless it
first conforms to the literal requirements of this Zoning
Ordinance, all other ordinances of the Borough, and with
the laws of the Corrrrnonwealth of Pennsylvania. The zoning
Officer is authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within
the scope of his/her employment.
He/she shall:
a. Receive and check all applications for zoning
permits and certificates of zoning compliance and
make notations as to special conditions attached
thereto.
b. Issue zoning permits and certificates of zoning
compliance only for construction and uses which are
in accordance with the regulations of the Zoning
Ordinance and subsequent amendments; or through the
Zoning Hearing Board; or through court approval.
Zoning permits and certificates of zoning compliance
shall not be issued where the request concerns a
lot", parcel or tract in a subdivision required to be
approved under applicable Subdivision and land
66
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
Development regulations, which subdivision or
development has not had the required approval.
Record and file all applications for zoning pennits
and certificates of zoning compliance together with
accompanying plans and documents. All records shall
be open to public inspection.
Be responsible for maintaining the Zoning map
showing the current zonin~ classifications of all
land and the Zoning Text including all amendments
thereto.
Participate in all proceedings before the Zoning
Hearing board and the Planning Commission at their
request and furnish such facts, records, and similar
information which will assist such bodies in
reaching their decisions.
When the Zoning Hearing Board, schedules a public
hearing on any application over which it has
jurisdiction, the Zoning Officer shall conspicuously
post a notice of said hearing on the affected
property.
When a proposed amendment to the zoning mal? is to be
considered by the Borough Council, the Zoning
Officer shall conspicuously post notice of said
public hearing along the perimeter of the tract not
more than 100 feet apart an at least one (1) week
prior to the date of the hearing to notify
potentially interested citizens.
Issue an enforcement notice in writing to the owner.
of record of the parcel on which the violation of
the Ordinance has occurred, to any person who has
filed written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding the parcel, and to any other person
requested in writing by the owner of record. Such
written notification may be served personally or by
certified mail and shall contain all information
required by this Article.
i. Institute legal proceedings before the District
Justice for the Enforcement of the provisions of
this Ordinance.
j . Submit a monthly report to the borough Council of
all pennits and certificates of zoning compliance
issued and violations and stop work orders
recommended or promulgated.
67
(
802 Permits
1. Reqμiremen.ts: It shall be unlawful to commence the
excavation for or the construction or erection of any
building, or to cormnence the moving or alteration of any
building, including an accessory building, until the
Zoning Officer has issued a zoning permit for such work.
No zoning permit shall be required for the repair,
maintenance, or interior remodeling of any.building,
structure, or grounds provided such repairs, maintenance,
or remodeling do not change the use or otherwise violate
the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Form or .Application: The application for a J?ermit shall
be submitted in such form as the Zoning Officer may
prescribe and shall be acconpanied by the .required fee.
Application shall be made by the Owner or Lessee of Any
land, building or structure. or the agent of either;
provided, however, that if the application is made by a
person other than the Owner or Lessee, it shall be
accorrpanied by a written authorization of the Owner or
the qualified person making an application, that the
proposed work is authorized by this Owner. The full
names and addresses of the Owner, Lessee. Applicant, and
to the responsible officers, if the Owner or Lessee is a
co:qiorate body, shall be stated in the application.
3. Description of Work: The application shall contain a
general description of the proposed work, use, and
occupancy of all parts of the Building, Structure, land
or sign and such additional information as may be
required by the Zoning Officer. The application for the
permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan of the
proposed building,structure, use or sign drawn to scale
with sufficient clarity to show the nature and character
of the work to be performed, including off street
parking and loading space. if required, the location of
new and existing construction, and the distances of the
same from the existing lot lines.
4. Issuance of Zoning Permit: Upon receiving the
application, the Zoning Officer shall examine the same
within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application or plans do not conform to the provisions of
all pertinent local laws, he shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. He
shall inform the applicant of his right of appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board in the event such application is
rejected. If satisfied that the proposed work and/or use
conforms to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and
all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, he shall
issue a permit therefor as soon as practical.
68
5. Notice of Starting Work: The zoning Officer shall be
given at least twenty four (24) hours notice by owner or
applicant prior to commencement of work at the site,
which will have a zoning pe:rmit properly posted.
6. &g;>iration of Pe:rmit: The permit shall expire after
one(l) year from the date of issuance unless work at the
site has commenced within such period, but in any case,
all work lmlSt be completed within two (2) years. If the
work for which the pe:rmit has been granted has not been
started within one (1) year from the granting of such
pe:rmit or if the work has not been conpleted within two
(2) years, the Zoning Officer shall cancel the pe:rmit and
shall have written notice thereof to the applicant
stating that further work shall not proceed unless and
until a new zoning pe:rmit has been obtained.
7. Completion of Work: Upon completion of the constrnction,
erection, or alteration of any building, strncture or
J?Ortion thereof, authorized by any zoning pe:rmit obtained
in compliance with this Ordinance, and prior to the use
or occupancy, the holder of such pe:rmit shall notify the
Zoning Officer of such completion. Use and occupancy
shall not be authorized until the Zoning Officer has
certified that the work has been inspected and approved
as being in confo:rmity with this and other applicable
ordinances, and has issued a certificate of zoning
compliance as provided below.
8. Revocation of Pe:rmits: The Zoning Officer may revoke a
pe:rmit approval issued under the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance in case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the
plans on which the pe:rmit or approval was based or for ·
any other cause set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
9. Posting of Pe:rmit: A trne copy of the pe:rmit shall be
kept on the site of operations open to public inspection
during the entire time of prosecution of the work or use
and until the conpletion of the same as defined on the
application.
803 Certificate of Zoning Compliance
1. Requirements: It shall be unlawful to use and/ or occupy
any strncture, building, sign, and/or land.or portion
thereof for which a pe:rmit is required herein until a
certificate of zoning conpliance for such strncture,
building, sign, and/or land or portion thereof has been
issued by the Zoning Officer.
2. Time Of .Application: When the use of premises involves a
new building or strncture or additions to an existing
building or strncture, the application for zoning
69
compliance shall be made at the same time application is
made for a zoning permit. When no constrnction or
alteration is involved, application to occupy and use
land may be made at any time.
3. Form of Application: The application for a certificate
of zoning compliance shall be in such.form as the Zoning
Officer may prescribe. The application shall contain the
intended use and/or occupancy of any structure, building,
sign, and/or land or portion thereof for which a permit
is required herein.
4. Issuance of Certificate of Zoning ComPliance: The Zoning
Officer shall inspect any structure, building, sign,
and/or use of land within ten (10) days upon
notification that the proposed work that was listed under
the permit has been completed and if satisfied that the
work is in conformity and compliance with the work listed
in the issued permit and all other pertinent laws, he
shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance for the
intended use listed in the original application. The
certificate of zoning compliance or a true copy thereof
shall be kept available from official inspection at all
times.
804 Enforcement. Causes of Action. and Remedy
1. Enforcement: The construction, erection, replacement,
alteration. repair, extension, and/or use of a structure,
building, sign, and/or land or the change of use, area of
use, percentage of use or extension or displacement of
the use of any structure, building, sign, and/or land
without first obtaining a permit; or the use of any
. building, structure, sign, and/or land without receipt of
a certificate of zoning compliance; or the failure·to
·comply with any other provisions of this Ordinance are
hereby declared to be. violations of this zoning
Ordinance.
2. Enforcement Notice:
a. If it appears to the Borough that a violation of the
zoning has occurred, the Borough shall initiate
enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement
notice as provided in this section.
b. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of
record of the parcel on which the violation has
occurred, to any person who has written request to
receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel to
any other person requested in writing by the owner
of record.
70
c. An enforcement notice shall state at least the
following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other
person against whom the Borough intends to take
action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of
the requirements which have not been met,
citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of the ordinance.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance
ImlSt be coomenced and the date before which the
steps ImlSt be completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right
to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a
prescribed period of time in accordance with
procedures set forth in the Zoning Ordinance,
Article 9.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within
the time specified, unless extended by appeal
to the Zanin$ Hearing Board, constitutes a
violation, with possible sanction clearly
described.
3 . cause of Action: · In case any building, structure,
landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered
converted, maintained or used in violation of the
Zoning Ordinance, the Borough Council or, with the
approval of the Borough Council, an officer of the
Borough or any aggrieved owner or tenant or real
property who shows that his property or person will
be substantially affected by the alleged violation,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate such building,
structures, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in
or about such premises, any act, conduct, business
or use constituting a violation.
When any such action is instituted by a landowner or
tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon
the Borough at least 30 days prior to the time the
action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint
on the Borough Council of the Borough.
No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been given.
71
4. Jurisdiction: District Justices shall have initial
jurisdiction over proceedings brought under
subsection (5) below.
5. Enforcement Remedies:
a. Any person, partnership or corporation who or
which has violated or permitted the violation
of the provisions of this Zoning· Ordinance
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding cormnenced by the
Borough, pay a judgement of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a
result thereof.
No judgement shall conmence or be imposed,
levied or payable until the elate of the
determination of a violation by the District
justice.
If the· defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgement, the Borough may enforce
the judgement pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure.
Each clay that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the
District Justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there
was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the
Ordinance to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation
until the fifth clay following the elate of the
determination of a violation by the District
Justice and thereafter each clay that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
All judgements, costs and reasonable attorney
fees collected for the violation of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be paid over to the Borough.
b. The Court of Corranon Pleas, upon petition, may
grant an order of stay, upon cause shown,
tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgement.
72
c. Nothing in this Section shall be construed or
inte:i:preted to grant to any person or entity
other than the Borough the right to corrmence
any action for enforcement pursuant to this
Section.
805 Payment of Fees
1. Permit Fees; No pennit to begin work for the erection,
construction, alteration, repair, extension, replacement,
and/or use of any building, structure, sign, and/or land
for construction or use pu:i:poses shall be issued until
the fees prescribed below shall be paid to the Zoning
Officer. The payment of fees under this Section shall
not relieve the applicant or holder of said pennit from
payment of other fees that may be required by this
Ordinance, or any other Ordinance or law. The fees shall
be established from time to time by Resolution of the
Borough Council.
73
ARTICLE 9
ZONING HEARING BOARD AND OTHER APMINISTRATDJE PRQCEEDINGS
·901 Zoning Hearing Board Membership, organization,
Operation
902 Hearings
903 Mediation Option
904 Jurisdiction
905 Applicability of Judicial Remedies
906 Zoning Hearing Boards Functions: Variances
907 Zoning Hearing Boards Functions: Special
Exception Uses
908 Parties Appellant Before the Board
909 Time Limitations
910 Stay of Proceedings
911 Validity of Ordinance: Substantive Questions
912 Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinion
74
Article 9
ZONING HEARING BOARD AND OTHER AJ:llllINIS'I'RATIVE PROCEEDINGS
901 Zoning Hearing Board Membership. Organization. Operation
1. Creation and Membership: There is hereby created, to be
appointed by resolution of Borough Council, a Zoning
Hearing Board ("Board"), consisting of three (3)
residents. The terms of office shall be three (3) years
and shall be so fixed that the term of off ice of one
member of the three (3) member Board shall expire each
year. The Board shall promptly notify the Borough
Council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to
fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of
the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other
office in the Borough.
2. Removal of Members: Any Board member may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for
other just cause by a majority vote of the. Borough
Council which appointed the member, taken after the
member, has received fifteen (15) days advance notice of
the charges and of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
member shall request it in writing.
3. O:r:ganization of Board
a. The Board shall elect from its own membership its
officers, who shall se:rve annual terms as such and
may succeed themselves. For the Conduct of any
hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall
be not less than a majority of all members of the
Board, but the Board may appoint a hearing officer
from its own membership to conduct any hearing on
its behalf and the parties may waive further action
by the board.
b. The Board may make, alter, and rescind rules and
forms for its procedure, consistent with the ·
ordinance of the Borough and laws of the
Commonwealth. '!he Board shall keep full public
records of its business, which records shall be the
property of the Borough, and shall submit a report
to the Borough Council as requested by them.
4. Expenditures for Services: Within the limits of funds
appropriated by the Borough Council, the Board may employ
or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services.
Members of the Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the
75
Borough Council, but in no case, shall it exceed the rate
of compensation authorized to the paid to the members of
the Borough Council.
5. Meetings; Meetings shall be held at the call of the
Board Chairman and at such other times as appeals are
brought before the Board.
902 Hearings; The Board shall conduct hearings and make
decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Notice of Hearings: Public notice shall be given and
written notice shall be given to the applicant, the
Zoning Officer and to any person who has made timely
request for the same.
a.
b.
c.
Public Notice: Public notice of a hearing before
the Zoning Hearing Board shall be published once
each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the particular nature of the matter to
be considered at the hearing. The first publication
shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the
second publication not be less than seven (7) days
from the date of the hearing.
Written Notice; Written notice of a hearing before
the Zoning Hearing Board shall be given by direct
individual notice mailed, handed or delivered at
least seven (7) days prior to the date of the
hearing.
Posting of Pr~erty; In addition to the written
notice provide herein, written notice of said
hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land by the Zoning officer at
least one (1) week prior to the hearing.
2. Hearing Fees; Hearing. fees include compensation for the
secretary and members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice
and advertising costs and necessary administrative
overhead connected with· the hearing. The costs shall not
include legal exJ;>enses of the Zoning hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other
technical consultants or expert witness costs.
3. Hearing Schedule; The hearing shall be held within sixty
(60) days from the date the applicant's request for a
hearing was accepted by the Zoning Officer, unless the
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
76
4. Hearing Officer: The hearing shall be conducted by the
Board or the Board may appoint any member as a hearing
officer. The Decision or, where no decision is called
for, the findings shall be made by the Board; however,
the aJ?Pellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in
addition to the Borough, may prior to the decision of the
hearing, waive decision or findings by the Board and
accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer.as
final;
5. Parties to the Hearing: The parties to the hearing shall
be the Borough, any person affected by the application
who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person including civic or cormrunity
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The
Board shall have the power to require that all persons
who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in
writing on foJ:lllS provided by the Board for that purpose.
6 . oaths and Sub.l;>oenas: 'Ihe chairman or acting chairman of
the Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have the
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel
the attendance of witnesses and documents requested by
the parties.
7. Representation by Counsel: The parties shall have the
right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded
the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all
relevant issues.
8. Rules of Evidence: Formal rules of evidence shall not
apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitiO\lS
evidence may be excluded.
9. Stenographic Record: The Board or he hearing officer, as
the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. the appearance fee for a stenographer shall
be shared equally by the applicant and the Board. The
cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the
Board if the transcript is ordered by the Board or
hearing officer or shall be paid by the person requesting
such copy. In other cases the .party requesting the
original transcript shall bear the cost.
10. Conduct of Board or Hearing Officer: The Board or the
hearing officer shall not cormrunicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in
connection with any issue involved except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not
take notice of any cormrunication, reports, staff
77
memoranda, or other materials so noticed and shall not
inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his
representative unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present.
11. Written Decision or Findings: The Board or the hearing
.officer , as the case may be, shall render a written
decision, or, when no decision is called for, make
written findings on the application within forty five
(45) days after the last hearing before the Board or
hearing officer.
Where the application is contested or denied, each
decision shall be accorrpanied by findings of fact and
conclusions together with the reasons. Conclusions based
on any provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning code (Act 24 7, as amended) or of any ordinance,
rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is
deemed approp:i:;iate in the light of the facts found.
If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and
there has been no stipulation that his decisions or
findings are final, the Board shall make his report an
recommendations available to the parties within forty
five (45) days, and the parties shall be entitled to make
written representations thereon to the Board prior to the
final decision or entry of findings, and the Board's
decision shall be entered no later than thirty (30) days
after the decision of the hearing officer.
Where the Board fails to render the decision within the
period required by this subsection, or fails-to hold the
required hearing within sixty (60) days from the date of
the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall
have been deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the
applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or
render a decision, the Board shall give public notice of
said decision within ten (10) days from the last day it
could have met to render a decision in the same manner as
provided in paragraph (1) of this Section. if the Board
shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do
.so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right
of an¥ party opposing the application to appeal the
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
78
12. Copy of Final Decision or findings: A copy of the Final
decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings, shall be delivered to the applicant ~ersonally
or mailed to him not later than the day following its
date.
To all other persons who have filed their name and
address with the Board, the Board shall provide by mail
or othei:wise, brief notice of the decision.of findin~s
and a statement of the ~lace at which the full decision
or findings may be examined.
903 Mediation option
1. Parties to Proceedings : Parties to proceedin!iJs
authorized in this article may utilize mediation as an
aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings
before the Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the
Zoning Hearing Board initiate mediation or participate as
mediation party.
2. Supplemental Roles of Mediatioil: Mediation shall
supplement, not replace, those procedures in this Article
and Article 10, Appeals to Court once they have been
formally initiatea. Nothing in this Section shall be
interpreted as expanding or limiting nrunicipal police
powers or as modifying any principles of substantive law.
3. Rules for Mediation: Participation in mediation shall
be wholly voluntary. The appropriateness of mediation
shall be determined by the ~articulars of each case and
the willingness of the parties to negotiate. The Borough
shall assure that, in each case, the mediating parties,
assisted by the mediator as appropriate, develop terms
and conditions for:
a. Funding mediation.
b. Selecting a mediator who, at a llll.nimurn, shall have a
workin~ lmowledge of nrunicipal zoning and
subdivision procedures and demonstrated skills in
mediation.
c. Completing mediation, including time limits for such
completion.
d. Suspending time limits othei:wise authorized in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247,
as amended), provided there is written consent by
the mediating parties, and by an applicant or
nrunicipal decision-making body if either is not a
party to the mediation.
79
e.
f.
g.
Identifying all parties and affording them the
opportunity to participate.
Subject to legal restraints, determining whether
some or all of the mediation sessions shall be open
of closed to the public.
Assuring that mediated solution are in writing and
signed by the parties, and become subject to review
and approval by the api;>ropriate decision-making body
pursuant to the authorized procedures set forth in
other sections of this Ordinance.
4. Admissibility as Evidence: No offers or statements in
the mediation sessions, excluding the final written
mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
904 Jurisdiction
1. Jurisdiction of Zoning Hearing Board: The Zoning Hearing
Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications on the following matter:
a. Substantive Challenges to Validity of I.gnd Use
Ordinances: Substantive challenges to the validity
of any land use ordinance, except those brought
before the Borough Council pursuant to Section 1006,
Procedures for Landowner Curative Amendments.
b. Challenges to Validity of Land Use Ordinances on
Procedures: Challenges to the Validity of a land
use ordinance raising procedural questions or
alleged defects in the process of enactment or
adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within thirty (30) days after the
effective date of said ordinance.
c. 11,ppeals from the Zoning Officer: Appeals from the
determination of the Zani~ Officer, including, but
not limited to, the granting or denial of any
permit, or failure to act on the application
therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order
or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure, or lot.
d. 11,ppeals from Determination on Flood Plain Matters:
Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer
or the Zoning Officer with reference to he
administration of any flood plain or flood hazard
ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance.
80
e. Applications for Variances: Applications for
variances from the tenns of the Zoning Ordinance and
Flood Hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance, pursuant to Section 906, below.
f. 1-,pplication for Special exception Uses: Application
for Special Exception Uses under the Zoning
Ordinance or Flood Plain or Flood Hazard Ordinance
or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to Section 907, below
g. Appeals from Determinations on Provisions Involving
Transfers of Develqpment Rights or Perfonnance
Density: Appeals from the detennination of any
officer or agency charged with the administration of
any transfers of development rights or performance
density provisions in the Zoning Ordinance presently
or by future amendment.
h. J\tlpeals from Zoning Officer on Procedure to Obtain
Prelirninacy Opinion: Appeals from the Zoning
Officer's determination under Section 912, Procedure
to Obtain Preliminary Opinion.
i. 1-,ppeals from Determinations on Sedimentation and
Erosion Control and Storm Water Management Matters:
Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer
or Borough Engineer in the administration or any
land use ordinance or provision thereof with
reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
storm water management insofar as the satne relate to
development not involving Subdivision and Land
Development and Planned Residential Development
applications.
2 . Jurisdiction of the Borough Council: 'Ihe Borough
Council, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudication in the following matters:
a. P.,PPlications for eurative Amenament:
for Curative Amendment to the Zoning
pursuant to Section 1106, Procedures
Curative Amendments.
Applications
Ordinance
for Landowner
b. Petitions for Amendments to rand Use Ordinances:
All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances,
pursuant to procedures set forth in Section 1104,
Procedures of the Borough Council. Any action on
such petitions shall be deemed legislative acts,
provided that nothing contained in this clause shall
be deemed to enlarge or diminish existing law with
reference to appeals to court.
81
c. 11,pplication for Conditional Uses: Borough Council
shall hear and render decisions on request for
Conditional Uses after recconendation by the Borough
Planning Commission.
905 11,pplicability of Judicial Remedies: Nothing contained in
this Article shall be construed to deny the appellant the
right to proceed directly to court where appropriate,
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure No.
109l(relation to action in.mandal!Rls).
906 Zoning Hearing Board's Functions: Variances:
1. Hearing Regμests for and Grant Variances: 'Ihe Board
shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged
that the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. 'Ihe Board may
by rule prescribe the f onn of application and may require
preliminary application to the Zoning Officer.
'Ihe Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given
case:
a. 'Ihat there were unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including i=egularity, narrowness, or
shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar
to the particular property and the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is
located.
b. 'Ihat because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the
property can be developed in strict conformity with
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and that the
Authorization of a variance is therefore necessary
to enable the reasonable use of the property.
c. 'Ihat such unnecessary hardship has not been created
by the appellant.
d. 'Ihat the variance, if authorized, will not alter
the essential character of the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
e. 'Ihat the variance, if authorized, will represent the
minimum variance that will afford relief and will
I
82
i
\
represent the least modification possible of the
regulatin in issue MCP Section 910.2(a) (5).
2 , Attach Reasonable Conditions and Safeguards: In granting
any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
irrplement the puzposes of the Pennsyl"Vania Municipalities
Planning Code and this Zoning Ordinance.
907 Zoning Hearing Board' s Functions: Special Exception Uses:
908
909
Where the Borough Council, in the Zoning Ordinance, has
stated Special Exception Uses to be granted or denied by the
Board pursuant to express standards and criteria, the Board
shall hear and decide requests for such Special Exception
Uses in accordance with such standards and criteria.
1. Attach Reasonable Conditions and Safeguards: In granting
a Special Exception use, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed in the Ordinance, as it may deem
necessary to inplement the purposes of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended) and
this Zoning Ordinance.
Parties ~ellgnt Before the Board:. Appeals under the
jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Boai:a by Subsection 904.1
(a) , (b), (c), (d), (g), (h) , and (i) may be filed with the Board
in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or agency
of the Borough, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a
variance under Section 906 and for Special Exception Uses
under Seeton 907 may be filed with the Board by any
landowner or any tentant with the permission of such
landowner. ·
Time Limitations
1. Time Limitations for Filing by Any Person:
a. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding
· with the Board later than thirty (30) days after an
application for development, preliminary or final,
has been approved by an appropriate municipal
officer, agency or body if such proceeding is
designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval
in any manner unless such person alleges and proves
that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason to
believe that such approval had been given. If such
person has succeeded to his interest after such
approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest.
b. The failure of anyone, other than the landowner, to
appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan
83
pursuant to Zoning Ordinance Provisions for Planned
Residential Development "findings" of from an
adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a
challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map
pursuant to Section 912, Procedure to Obtain
Preliminary Opinion, shall preclude an appeal from
the final approval except in the case where the
final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative approval.
2. Time Limitation for Filing by If!pdowners: All appeals
from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be
filed by the landowner within thirty (30) days after
notice of the determination is issued.
910 Stay of Proceedings
1. Conditions for Stay of Proceedings Puring Appeal
a. Exceptions to Stay of ram Develqpment Proceedings :
Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in Section
908 and during its pend.ency before the Board, all land
development pursuant to the challenged ordinance, order
or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or
body, and all official action thereunder shall be
stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other
appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to
life or property, in which case the develq;mient or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or
by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on
petition,, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body.
b. Devel~er•s Petition for Appellant to Post Bond: When
an app ication for development, prelimi~ of final,
has been duly approved and proceedings designed to
reverse or limit the approval are filed with the board
by persons other than . the applicant, th applicant may
petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the
Board.
2. Hearing to Determine if Filing of Appeal is Frivolous:
After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a
hearing to determine if the filing of the appeal is
frivolous. At the hearing evidence may be presented on
the merits of the case. It shall be the burden of the
applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous.
After consideration of all evidence presented,if the
court determines that the appeal is frivolous, it shall
grant the petition for a bond. The right to petition the
84
court to order the appellants to post bond may
be waived by the appellee, ·but such waiver may
be revoked by him if an appeal is taken from a
final decision of the court.
3. Petition for Granting Bond if Petition is Frivolous: The
question whether or not such petition should be granted
and the amount of the bond shall be within the sound
discretion of the court. An order directing the
responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
4. Appeal by Respondent to Petition for Granting Bond: If
an appeal is taken bya respondent to the petition for a
bond from an order of the court dismissing a zoning
appeal for refusal to post a bond and th appellate court
sustains th order of the court below to post a bond, the
respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals, shall be liable for all
reasonable costs, expenses and attorney fees incurred by
the petitioner.
911 Validity of Ordinance: Substantive Questions:
1. Submission of Challenge by landowner: A landowner, who,
on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the validity
of an ordinance or map or any provisions thereof which
prohibits o restricts the use or development of land in
which he has an interest shall submit the challenge
either:
a. To the Zoning Hearing Board under Subsection 904.1
Jurisdiction of Zoning Hearing Board; or
b. To the Borough Council under Subsection 904.2
Jurisdiction of the Borough Council. Applicants for
Curative Amendment, together with a request for a
curative amendment under Section 1006, Procedures
for Landowner Curative Amendments.
2. Submission of Challenge by persons Aagrieved: Persons
aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land
of another by an ordinance or map, or anr provisions
thereof, who desires to challenge its va idity on
substantive grounds shall first submit their challenge to
the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision thereon under
904.1 (a) Jurisdiction of Zoning Hearing Board,
Substantive Challenges to Validity of Land Use
ordinances.
3 . Rules Governing Submission of Challenges: The submission
Referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2), above, shall be
governed by the following:
85
a. In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the
challenging party shall make a written request to
the Board that it hold a hearing on its challenge.
The request shall contain the reason for the
challenge.
Where the landowner desires to challenge the
validity of such ordinance and elects to proceed by
Curative amendment under Section 1106, Procedures
for Landowner Curative Amendments, his application
to the Borough Council shall contain the plans and
explanatory materials describing the use or
development proposed by the landowner in lieu of the
use or development permitted by the challenged
ordinance or map.
Such plans or other materials shall not be required
to meet the standards required for preliminary,
tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a
permit, so long as they provide reasonable notice of
the proposed use or development and a sufficient
basis for eVa.luating the challenged ordinance or
map.
Nothing herein contained shall preclude the
landowner form first seeking a final approval before
sul::xnitting his challenge.
b. If the sul::xnission is made by the landowner to the
Borough Council under paragraph (1) (b), above, the
request also shall be accompanied by an amendment or
amendments to the ordinance proposed by the
landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
c. If the sul::xnission is made to the Borough Council,
the Borough solicitor shall represent and advise it
at the hearing or hearings referred to in Subsection
904.2 (a), Jurisdiction of the Borough Council,
Applications for Curative Amendments.
d. The Borough Council may retain an independent
atto:i::ney to present the defense of the challenged
ordinance or map on its behalf and to present the
witnesses on its behalf.
e. Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or
hearings, the Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing
Board, as the case maybe, shall determine whether
the challenged ordinance or map is defective, as
alleged by the landowner.
If a challenge heard by the Borough Council is found
to have merit, the Borough Council shall proceed as
86
provided in Section 1106, Procedures for Landowner
Curative Amendments.
If a challenge heard by the Zoning Hearing Board is
found to have merit, the decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall include recolllil\ended amendments
to the challenged ordinance which will cure the
defects found.
In reaching its decision, the Zoning hearing Board
shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory
material submitted by the landowner and shall also
consider:
( i) The impact of the proposal upon road, sewer
facilities, water supplies, school and other
public service facilities;
(ii) If the proposal is for a residential use, the
impact of the proposal upon regional housing
needs-and the effectiveness of the proposal in
providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of
persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the
challenged provisions of the ordinance or map;
(iii)The suitability of the site for the intensity
of use proposed by the site's soils, slopes.
woodlands. wetland, flood plains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(iv) The impact of the proposed use on the site's
soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood
plains, natural resources and natural features,
the degree to which these are protected or· ·
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to
development and any adverse environmental
impacts; and
(v) The illlJ?aCt of the proposal on the preservation
of agricultural and other land uses which are
essential to public health and welfare.
f. If the Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board,
as the case may be, fails to act on the landowner's
request within the time limits a denial of the
request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day
after the close of the last hearing.
4 . Hearing Schedule: The Zoning Hearing Board or the
Borough Council, as the case may be, shall commence its
hearings within sixty (60) days after the request is
filed unless the landowner requests or consents to an
extension of time.
87
5. Public Notice Content: Public Notice of the hearing
shall include notice that the validity of the ordinance
or map is in question and shall give the place and time
when a copy of the request, including any plans,
. explanatocy material or proposed amendments may be
examined by the public. ·
6. Deemed Denial of Challenge: 'Ihe challenge shall be
deemed denied when:
a. 'Ihe Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as the
case may be, fails to commence the hearing within
the time limits set forth.
b. 'Ihe Borough Council notifies the landowner that it
will not adopt the curative amendment;
c. The Borough Council adopts another curative
amendment which is unacceptable to the landowner; or
d. 'Ihe Zoning Hearing Board or the Borough Council, as
the case may be, fails to act on the request forty
five (45) days after the close of the last hearing
on the request, unless the time limit is extended by
mutual consent of the landowner and the Borough.
7. Period for Filing .Application for Prelimina:ry or
Tentative Plan .Approval or for Zoning Permit
a. Where, after the effective date of this Ordinance, a
curative amendment proposal is aJ(Proved by the grant
of a curative amendment application by the Borough
Council Jurisdiction of the Borough Council, ·
Applications for Curative Amendment, or a validity
challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board
Jurisdiction of Zoning Hearing Board, Substantive
Challenges to Validity of Land use Ordinances, or
the court acts finally on appeal from denial of a
curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge,
and the proposal or challenge so approved requires a
further application for subdivision or land
development, the developer shall have two (2) years
from the date of such approval to file an
application for preliminacy or tentative approval
pursuant to Article V, Subdivision and Land
Development or Article VII, Planned Residential
Development of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act 247, as amended).
Within the two year period, no subsequent change or
amendment in zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of the applicant
88
.
\
i
\
as granted in the curative amendment or the
sustained validity challenge.
b. Where the proposal appended to the curative
amendment application or the validity challenge is
approved but does not require further application
under any Subdivision or Land Development Ordinance,
the developer shall have one (1) year within which
to file for a zoning pennit.
Within the one year ~eriod, no subsequent change or
amendment to the zoning,subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any
manner which adversely affects the rights of the
applicant as granted in the curative amendment or
the sustained validity challenge.
During these protected ~eriods, the court shall
retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of
awarding such supplemental relief as may be
necessary ..
912 Procedure to Obtain Preliminacy Opinion: In order not to
unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that the ordinance or map under which the proposed
to build is free from challenge, and recognizing that the
procedure for preliminary approval of his development may be
too cumbersome or may be unavailable, the landowner may
advance the date from which time for any challenge to the
ordinance or map will run under Section 909, Time
Limitations, by the following procedure:
1. Submission of Plans and Other Materials: The landowner
may submit plans and other materials describing his . ·
·proposed.use or development to the Zoning Officer for a
preliminary opinion as to their compliance with the
applicable ordinance and maps.
2.
Such plans and other materials shall not be required to
meet the standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative
or final approval or for the issuance of a zoning pennit
so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed
use or development and a sufficient basis for a
preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
P\lblic Notice of Con:pliance: If the Zoning Officer's
preliminary opinion is that the use or development
complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof shall
be published once each week for two (2) successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Such notice shall include a general description of the
proposed use or development and its location, by some
readily identifiable directive, and the place and times
89
where the plans and other materials may be examined by
the public.
The favorable preliminary approval under Section 909,
Time Limitations, and the time therein specified for
commencing a proceeding with the Board shall :nm from the
time when the second notice therof has been published.
90
i
\.
ARTICLE 10
APPEl-H .q TO COURT
1001 land Use Appeals
1002 Jurisdiction and Venue on Appeal; Time for
Appeal
1003 Appeals to Court; Corrmencement; Stay or
Proceedings
1004 Intervention
1005 Hearing and Argument of I.and Use Appeal
1006 Judicial Relief
91
Article 10
APPEALS TO COURT
1001 r2nd use Appeal
The procedures set forth in this Article shall constitute
the exclusive mode for securing review of any decision
reridered pursuant to Article 9·or deemed to have been made
under this Ordinance.
1002 Jurisdiction
All appeals from all land use decisions rendered pursuant to
Article 9 shall be taken to he Court of Common Pleas of the
Judicial District wherein the land is located and shall be
filed within thirty (30) days after entry of the decision as
provided by 42 Pa. C.S. Section 5572 (relating to the time
of entry of order) or, in the case of a deemed decision,
within thirty (30) days after the date upon which notice of
said deemed decision is given as set forth in Subsection
902.11 of this Ordinance.
1003 Appeals to Court; Conunencement; Stay of Proceedings
1. rand Use Appeal Notice: land use appeals shall be
entered as of course by the prothonotary or clerk upon
the filing of a land use appeal notice which concisely
sets forth the grounds on which the appellant relies.
The appeal notice need not be verified. The land use
appeal notice shall be accompanied by a true copy
thereof.
2. Writ of Certiorari: Upon filing of a land use appeal,
the·prothonotary or clerk shall forthwith, send the
Borough Council, Board or Agency whose decision or action
has been appealed, by registered or certified mail, the
copy of the land use appeal notice, together with a writ
of certiorari commanding said Borough Council, Board or
Agency, within twenty (20) days after receipt thereof, to
certify to the court its entire record in the matter in
which the land use appeal has been taken or a true and
complete copy thereof, including any transcript of
testimony in existence and available to the Borough
council, Board or Agency at the time it received the writ
of certiorari.
3. Appellant Other than landowner: If the appellant is a
person other than the landowner of the land directly
involved in the decision or action appealed, from, the
appellant, within seven (7) days after the land use
appeal is filed, shall serve a true copy of the land use
92
appeal notice by mailing said notice to the landowner or
his attorney at his last known address. For
identification of such landowner, the appellant may rely
upon the record of· the Borough, and, in the event of good
faith mistakes as to such identity, may make such sel'.Vice
nunc pro tune by leave of court.
4. Stay of Proceedings
a. Petition for Stay by ApI>ellants: The filing of an
appeal in court under this Section shall not stay the
action appealed from, but the appellants may petition
the court having jurisdiction of larid use appeals for a
stay.
b. T9ndowner 1s Petition for Ap!lellant to Post Bond.: If
the appellants are persons who are seeking to prevent a
use or development of the land of another, whether or
not a stay is sought by them, the landowner whose use
or development is in question may petition the court to
order the appellants to post bond as a condition to
proceeding with the appeal.
c. Hearing to Determine if filing of aooeal is Frivolous:
After the petition for posting a bond i.s presented, the
court shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing
of appeal is frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may
be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be
the burden of the landowners to prove the appeal is
frivolous. After consideration of all evidence
presented, if the court determines that the appeal is
frivolous, it shall grant the petition for posting a
bond. The right to petition the court to order the
appellants to post bond may be waived by the appellee,
but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
d. Decision for Granting Bond if Petition is Frivolous:
The question of the amount of the bond shall be within
the sound discretion of the court. An order denying
petition for bond shall be interlocuto:ry. An order
directing the respondent to the petition for posting a
bond to post a bond shall be interlocuto:ry.
e. Appeal 5'." Respondent to Petition for Granting Bond: If
an appea is taken by a respondent to the petition for
posting a bond from an order of the court dismissing a
land use appeal for refusal to post a bond, such
responding party, upon motion of petitioner and, after
hearing in the court having jurisdiction of land use
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs,
expenses and attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
93
\.
1004 Intervention
Within the thirty (30) days first following the filing of a
land use appeal, if the appeal is from a Board or Agency of
the Borou~h, the Borough and any owner or tenant of property
directly involved in the action appealed from may intervene
by filing a notice of intervention, accompanied by proof of
service of the same, upon each appellant or each appellant's
counsel of record. All other intervention shall be governed
by the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure.
1005 Hearing and Argument of land Use A,ppeal
If, upon motion, it is shown that proper consideration of
the land use appeal requires the presentation of additional
evidence,. a judge of the court may hold a hearing to receive
additional evidence, may remand the case to the body, agency
of officer whose decision or order has been brought up for
review, or may refer the case to a referee to receive
additional evidence provided that appeals brought before the
court pursuant to Section 911, Validity of Ordinance;
Substantive questions shall not.be remanded for further
hearings before any body, agency or officer of the Borough.
If the record below includes findings of fact made by the
Borough Council, Board or Agency whose decision or action is
brought up for review and the court does not take additional
evidence or appoint a referee to take additional evidence,
the finding of the Borough CC>uncil, Board or Agency shall
not be disturbed by the court if supported by substantial
evidence.
If the record does not include finding of fact or if
additional evidence is taken :!.?¥ the court or by a referee.
the court shall make its own findings of fact based on the
record below as supplemented by the additional evidence, if
any.
1006 Judicial Relief
1. Powers of the court in I and Use A,ppeals: In a land use
appeal, the court shall have the power to declare any
ordinance or map invalid and set aside or modify any
action, decision or order of the Borough Council, Agency
or officer of the Borough brought up on appeal.
2. Order of JWproval of Develqpment or use: if the court
finds that an ordinance or map, or a decision or order
thereunder, which has been brought up for review
unlawfully, prevents or restricts a development or use
which has been described by the landowner through plans
and other materials submitted to the Borough Council,
Agency or officer of the Borough whose action or failure
to act is in question on the appeal, it may order the
94
described development or use approved as the all elements
or it may order it approved as to some elements and refer
other elements to the Borough Council, Agency or officer
having jurisdiction thereof for further proceedings,
including the adoption of alternative restrictions, in
accordance with the court's opinion and order.
3. Additional Court Hearings: upon a motion by any of the
parties or upon motion by the court, the judge of the ·
court may hold a hearing or hearings to receive
additional evidence or employ experts to aid the court to
frame an appropriate order. If the court employs an
expert, the report or evidence of such expert shall be
available to any party and he shall be subject to
examination or cross-examination by any party. He shall
be paid reasonable compensation for his services which
may be assessed against any or all of the parties as
determined by the court.
The court shall retain jurisdiction of the appeal during
the pend.ency of any such further proceedings and may,
upon motion of the landowner, issue such supplementary
orders as it deems necessary to protect the rights of the
landowner as declared in its opinion and order.
4. Definitive Relief for Development or Use: The fact that
the plans and other materials are not in a form or are
not accompanied by other submissions which are required
for final approval of the development or use in question
or for the issuance of permits shall not prevent the
court from granting the definitive relief authorized.
The court may act upon preliminary or sketch plans by
framing its decree to take into account the need for
further submissions before final approval is granted.
95
AR.TICLE 11
AMENDME:NTS
1101 Purpose
1102 Citizen Request for Amendment to Text or Map
1103 Planning Comnission Request for Amendment to
Text or Map .
1104 Procedures or the Borough Council
1105 Procedilres of the Planning Commission
1106 Procedures for landowner Curative Amendments
1107 Procedures Upon Municipal Curative Amendments
1108 Public Notice and Hearings
1109 Publication, Advertisement and Availability of
Ordinance
96
Article 11
AMENDMENTS
1101 Pw;pose: Whenever the public necessity, convenience,
general good or good zoning practice require, the Borough
Council by Ordinance may, after receipt of recorranendation
thereon from the Planning Corranission, and subject to
procedures provided by law, amend, supplement, change, ot
repeal the regulations, district boundaries or
classifications of property, now or hereafter established by
this ordinance or amendments thereof.
1102 Citizen Request for Amendment to Text or Map: Requests for
· changes in the Zoning Ordinance may by made by owners of
land in the Borough or by their authorized agents.
1. Applications: All applications for amendments shall be
made in writing by the owner or authorized agent, and
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer on fonns
prescribed by him.
Applications shall contain all infonnation necessary to
assure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for
the record, and shall contain the following:
a. Applicant' s name and address and that of his
representative, and the interest of every person
represented in the application;
b. The verification by at least one of the owners of
property to be reclassified, if this be the nature
of the request, attesting to the truth and · .
correctness of facts and infonnation presented with
the application;
c. A plan showing the extent of the area to be rezoned,
if this be the nature of the request, and showing
the streets bounding and intersecting the area, and
the use and zone classification of abutting
districts; and
d. A statement of the circumstances in the proposed
district and the abutting districts and any other
factor on which the applicant relies as reasons for
supporting the proposed rezoning.
The Zoning Officer shall check the application to determine
whether it confonns with the requirements listed above, and,
if satisfactory, shall irmnediately submit it to the Borough
Council.
97
1103 Planning Commission Regμests for Amendment to Text or Map:
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance text or map may be
initiated by the Planning Corranission by motion reconmending
adoption according to procedures enumerated in Section 1105,
below, and be submitted to the Borough Council, who shall
follow the procedures enumerated in Section 1104.
1104 Procedures of the Borough Council: The Borough Council
shall follow the procedures below for amending the Zoning
ordinance:
1. Preparation of Amendments: The Borough Council may
request the Planning Commission to prepare amendments to
the Zoning Ordinance using the same procedure as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(Act 24 7, as amended) , for the ~reparation of the Zoning
Ordinance itself, as described in Section 1105.
2. Referral to the Planning Commission: In the case of an
amendment other than that pre~ed by the Planning
Commission, the Borough Council shall submit each such
amendment to the Planning commission at least thirty (30)
days prior to the public hearing on such proposed
amendment to provide the planning Commission an
opportunity to submit reconmendations. However, the
Borough Council shall not be bound by the
reconmendations of the Planning Commission.
3. Referral to County Planning Commission: The Borough
Council shall submit the proposed amendments to the
County Planning Commission for its review and
reconnnendations thirty (30) days prior to the public
hearing on the amendment by the Borough Council.
However, the Borough Council shall not be bound by the
recommendations of the County Planning Commission.
4. Public Hearing: Before voting on the enactment of an
amendment, the Borough Council shall hold·a public
hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice, which notice
shall be given in the manner prescribed in Section 1108.
5. Revision of Amendment: If, after the public hearing
held upon the amendment, the proposed amendment is
chan~ed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall
hold another public hearing pursuant to public notice,
which notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in
Section 1108, before proceeding to vote· on the amendment.
6. Voting on Affiendment: the Borough Council shall consider
the reconmendations of the Borough Planning Commission,
the County Planning Commission and Testimony presented at
the public hearing before voting on the proposed (
amenmnent at a public meeting.
98
7. Notice of Decision·: The applicant and others requesting
notice of the decision of the Borough Council shall
receive such notice through the Zoning Officer.
8. Filing Copy of Amendment with County: Within thirty (30)
days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance shall be fo:i:warded to the County
Planning Commission.
1105 Procedures of the Plarming Commission: The Planning
Commission shall follow the procedures set forth below for
amending the Zoning Ordinance.
1. Preparation of AffiendI!lents: At the request of the Borough
Council or on its own initiative the Planning Commission:
a.
b.
c.
shall prepare the text and map of the proposed
zoning amendments as well as make all necessary
studies and surveys;
may hold a public meeting pursuant to public notice
and may hold additional public meetings upon such
notice as it shall determine to be advisable; and
shall present to the Borough Council the proposed
zoning amendment, together with recommendations and
explanatory materials, upon the completion of its
work.
2 . Review Amendments: In the case of an amendment other
than that prepared by the Planning Commission, · the
Commission shall review each such amendment submitted to
it by the Borough Council. It .shall consider whether or
not such proposed amendment reflects, in the view of· the
Commission, the policy goals of the Borou~h as found in
the statement of Cormrunity Development ObJectives and the
Comprehensive Plan upon which the Zoning Ordinance is
based. The Commission shall submit its recommendations
on the amendment to the Borough Council prior to the
public hearing scheduled on the amendment by the Borough
Council.
1106 Proced.ures for landowner eurati ve Amenaments: A landowner
shall follow the procedures below for challenging the
validity of the Zoning Ordinance text or may:
1. Submission of eurative Amendment and Regμest for Hearing:
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of the ordinance or Map or any
provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest may
submit a curative amendment to the Borough Council with a
written request that his challenge and proposed amendment
be heard and decided.
99
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Hearing Schedule: The Borough Council shall cormnence a
public hearing thereon within sixty (60) days of the
request.
Referral to Planning Commission: The curative amendment
and challenge shall be referred to the Planning
Commission.
Referral to County Planning Commission: The · curative
amendment and cha lenge shall be referred to the County
Planning Commission. ·
Notice of public Hearing: Notice of the public hearing
on the curative amendment shall be given.
Hearing Procedures: The J?U!:>lic hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with Sections 1102,Hearings, and
all references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board shall,
for the purposes of curative amendments, be references to
the Borough Council.
Consideration for Evaluating Curative Amendments: The
Borough Council shall consider the curative amendment,
plans and explanatory material submitted by the landowner
and shall also consider:
a. The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer
facilities, water supplies, schools and other public
service facilities;
b. If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact
of the proposal upon regional housing needs and the
effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing
units of a type actually available to and affordable
by classes of person otherwise unlawfully excluded
by the challenged provisions of the Ordinance or
Map;
c. The suitability of the site for the intensity of use
proposed by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands,
wetlands, flood plains, aquifers, natural resources
and other natural features;
d. The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils,
woodlands, wetlands, flood plains, natural resources
and natural features, the.degree to which these are
protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the
resource to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
e. The impact of the proposal on the ~reservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential
to public health and welfare.
100
8. Rejection of Curative Amendment: If the Borough does not
accept a landowner's curative amendment brought in
accordance with this Subsection and a court subsequently
rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision
shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the
entire Zoning Ordinance and Map, but only for those
provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's
.curative amendment and challenge.
9. 1\pproval of Curative Amendment or Alternative: If the
Borough Council determines that the validitr challenge
has merit, it may accept a landowner's curative
amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an
alternative amendment which will cure the challenged
defects.
1107 Procedures lJpon Municipal eurative Amen.dments: If the
Borough determines that its Zoning Ordinance or any port.ion
thereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the
following actions:
1. Declarat.i 1 f r Curative
Amendment: The Borough Corneil, formal action, shall
declare its Zoning Ordinance or portions thereof
substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such .invalidity. Within thirty
(30) days following such declaration and proposal, the
Borough Council shall:
a. By resolution make s~ec.ific findings setting forth
the declared invalidity of the Zoning Ordinance
which may include:
i) References to specific uses which are not
permitted, or not permitted in sufficient
quantity;
ii) Reference to a class of use or uses which
require revisions;
iii) Reference to the entire Ordinance which
requires revisions.
b. Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment
to the Zoning Ordinance to correct the declared
invalidity.
2. Time Limit for Enactment of Curative Amendment: Within
one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the
declaration and proposal, the Borough Corneil shall enact
a curative amendment to validate, or reaffinn the
validity of, its Zoning Ordinance, in order to cure the
declared invalidity of the Zoning Ordinance.
101
3. Similar landowner' s Curative Amendment Need Not be
Considered: Upon the initiation of the procedures the
Borough Council shall not be required to entertain or
consider any landowner's curative amendment, nor shall
the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report
requested under Article 9, Subsection 904.1, or Section
912, subsequent to the declaration and proposal if the
municipal curative amendment is based upon the grounds
identical to or substantially similar to those specified
in the resolution required by Subsection 1107.1 (a).
Furthermore, upon completion of the procedures as set
forth in Subsection 1107.1 and 1107.2, above, no rights
to a cure pursuant to the provisions of Section 1106 and
Section 912 shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the
substantive invalidity of the unamended Zoning Ordinance
for which there has been a curative amendment pursuant to
this section.
4 . Freg,uency of ·Use of Municipal Curative Amendment : The
Borough having utilized the procedures as set forth in
Subsections 1107.1 and 1107.2, above, may not again
utilize said procedure for a thirty six (36) month period
following the date of the enactment of a curative
amendment, or a reaffirmation of the validity of its
Zoning Ordinance, provided, however, if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new
duty or obligation imposed upon the Borough by virtue of
a change in statute or by virtue of a Pennsy 1 vania
Appellate Court decision, the Borough may utilize the
provisions of this Section to prepare a curative
amendment to its Ordinance to fulfill said duty or
obligation.
1108 Public Notice and Hearings: Before voting on the enactment
of an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, the Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of informing the
public and obtaining public conunent on the proposed
amendment. The public hearing shall be held pursuant to
public notice as follows:
1. Description of Amendment: Public notices of a proposed
Zoning Ordinance amendment shall include either the full
text thereof or the title and brief sunu:nary prepared by
the Borough Solicitor setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
a. A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough at the time the
public notice is published;
b. A copy thereof shall be filed in the County Law
Library; and
102
2.
3.
c. A public notice shall include a reference to the
place within the Borough where copies of the
proposed Zoning Ordinance amendment may be examined
without charge or obtained for a charge not greater
than the cost thereof.
Public Notice: A public notice of a proposed Zoning
Ordinance Amendment shall be published once each week for.
two (2) successive weeks, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall state the
time and place of the hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The
first publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days
and the second publication shall not be less than seven
(7) days f:rom the date of the hearing.
Posting of Pr~~erty: In addition, if the proposed ·
amendment invo ves. a zoning Map change, notice of said
public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Borough along the perimeter of the tract not more than
every one hundred (100) feet apart and at least one (1)
week prior to the date of the hearing to notify
potentially interested citizens.
1109 Publication. Advertisement and Availability of Ordinances
1. Notice of Proposed Ena.ctment: Proposed Zoning Ordinance
amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed
enactment is given in the manner set forth in this
Section, and shall include the time and place of the
meeting at which passage will be considered, a reference
to the place within the Borough where copies of the
proposed Zoning ordinance amendment may be examined
without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than
the cost thereof.
The Borough Council shall publish the proposed Zoning
Ordinance amendment once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough not more than sixty (60) days
nor less than seven (7) .days prior to passage~
Publication of the proposed zoning Ordinance amendment
shall include either the· full text thereof or the title
and a brief summary, prepared by the Borough Solicitor,
and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable
detail. If the full text is not included:
a. A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of
general circulation in the borough at the time the
public notice is published;
103
b. An attested copy of the proposed zoning Ordinance
amendment shall be filed in the County Law Library or
other county office designated by the County
Cormnissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than
that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing
said Ordinances.
2. Revision of Amendment: In the event substantial
amendments are made in the proposed Zoning ·Ordinance .
Amendments~ before voting upon enactment, the Borough
Council shall, at least ten (10) days prior to enactment,
readvertise, in one newspaper of general circulation in
the BorOU.gh, a brief sunnnary of the revised amendment
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail
together with a summary of the amendment.
3. Inco:i:;poration into Official Ordinance Books: This Zoning
Ordinance and any amendments may be incorporated into
official ordinance books by reference with the same force
and effect as if duly recorded therein.
104
f,
\
ORDINANCE NO. 1 OF 1997
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL INCREASING FILING FEES.
THE COUNCIL OF THE BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL, County of Carbon,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, HEREBY ORDAINS and ENACTS as follows:
ARTICLE I: This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
ARTICLE II: Article 805 of the Borough. of Summit Hill Zoning
Ordinance pertaining to payment of fees as well as any other
Ordinance or resolution setting fees pursuant to the Zoning
Ordinance are amended as follows:
PAYMENT OF FEES
1. PERMIT FEES: No permit to begin work for the erection,
construction, alteration, repair, extension, replacement,
and/or use of any building, structure, sign, and/or land
for construction or use purposes shall be issued until
the fees prescribed below shall be paid to the Zoning
Officer. The payment of fees under this Section shall
not relieve the applicant or holder of said permit from
payment of other fees that may be required by this
Ordinance, or any other Ordinance or law.
2. SCHEDULE OF FEES
a) PERMITS FOR USES NOT REQUIRING BOARD ACTION:
i) Where cost does not exceed $5,000.00, the fee
shall be $40.00;
ii) Where cost is greater than $5,000.00 but does
not exceed $10,000.00, the fee shall be
$60.00;
iii) Where cost is greater than $10,000.00 but does
not exceed $100,000.00, the fee shall be
$80.00;
iv) Where the cost is greater than $100, 000. 00,
the fee shall be $80.00 plus $2.00 for each
additional $10,000.00 or fraction thereof of
cost in excess of $100,000.00 to a maximum fee
of $2,000.00.
b) PERMITS FOR USES REQUIRING BOARD ACTION.: $60.00;
and
T~.Thr.,~.:..:1 ;->.,-. '1\..-.. ..... n:: l "°'I.,... ··--• ..... • ·-·· --.c-L- _..__.._ ~- ....
the fee shall be a
ARTICLE III: This Ordinance shall become effective immediately
upon enactment.
ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Town Council of the Borough
of Summit Hill on the 3rd day of March, 1997.
BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL
By:_flN~J; ~ {?... ...
Patrick J. LBOi, President
ATTEST:
_}fVi-"'fj-- ,t..,,~Je-~
Mary sCUtpa'nda, ~ecretary
APPROVED this 3rd day of March, 1997.
/~R~c!/~,, ----- iiCha~~~
ORDINANCE N0.1OF2001
AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1995 TO REGULATE THE
PLACEMENT OF COMMUNICATION TOWERS, ANTENNAE,
EQUIPMENT BIDLDING AND RELATED FACILITIES WITHIN THE
BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL
WHEREAS, technical developments in the telecommunications field have provided
new options for the expansion and delivery of personal wireless services to and within the
Borough of Summit Hill, Carbon County, Pennsylvania, and its residents; and
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Summit Hill, Carbon County,
Pennsylvania, desires to encourage efficient and adequate personal wireless services within
the Borough of Summit Hill, while at the same time protecting the public health, safety and
welfare; and
WHEREAS, in an effort to facilitate efficient and adequate personal wireless services
and protecting the interest of its residents, the Council of the Borough of Summit Hill desires
to regulate the construction and the placement of communications towers, antennae,
equipment buildings and related facilities; and
WHEREAS, federal and state statutes and regulations impose certain limitations on
the Borough's ability to regulate the placement and construction of communication towers,
antennae equipment buildings and related facilities; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to amend the Summit Hill Zoning Ordinance of 1995 to
make it consistent with the interests of the Borough of Summit Hill and its residents and the
limitations imposed by federal and state statutes regulations.
Be it enacted and ordained by the Council of the Borough of Summit Hill that the
Zoning Ordinance of 1995, shall be amended as follows:
SECTION I: PURPOSE OF ORDINANCE
The purposes of this Ordinance are as follows:
1. To provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers,
antennae, equipment buildings and other related facilities to the Borough of Summit
Hill;
2. To accommodate the need for communication towers, antennae, equipment buildings
and related facilities while regulating their location and numbers in the Municipality;
3. To minimize adverse visual effects of communication towers, antennae, equipment
buildings and related facilities through proper design, siting, landscaping and
screenmg;
4. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower and antennae support
structure failure and falling ice or other problems, through engineering and proper
siting of tower, antennae and support structures;
5. To encourage the joint use of any new communication towers so as to minimize the
number of such towers needed in the future throughout the Municipality;
6. To protect the safety and welfare of the residents of the Municipality; and
7. To implement certain recommendations of the Borough and County Planning
Commissions and Planning and Zoning Consultant, and Community Programs Inc.,
regarding the subject matter of this Ordinance.
SECTION II: DEFINITIONS
Section 202 of the Zoning Ordinance of 1995 is hereby amended to either modify
existing definitions or add new definitions as follows:
I. Alternate tower structure. Shall mean man-made structures such as clock towers, bell
towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles and similar alternative-design
mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennae and towers.
2. Communication Antenna (also known as a personal wireless service facility). Any
device used for the transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone,
pager, commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless communications signals,
including without rotation onmidirectional or whip antennas and directional or panel
antennas, owned or operated by any persons or entity licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device. This definition shall not
include private residence mounted satellite dishes or television antennas or amateur
radio equipment including without limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas.
3. Communication Equipment Building (also known as a personal wireless service
facility). An unmanned Building or cabinet containing communications equipment
required for the operation of Communications Antennas and towers and covering an
area on the ground not greater than 250 square feet.
4. Communications Tower: (Also known as a personal wireless service facility) A
structure, such as a self-supporting lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower,
constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other
permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended
for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular,
telephone towers. The terms excludes any tower and antennae under seventy (70) feet
in total height which owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission, and satellite earth station antennae one meter
in diameter or less, any receive-only home television antennae, and any satellite earth
station antennae two meters or less in diameter which is located in a commercial or
industrial zoning district.
5. Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas,
electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection,
communication, supply or disposal systems and their essential buildings,
EXCLUDING communications towers and communications antennas, communication
equipment buildings and other related facilities as defined herein.
6. EAA; The Federal Aviation Administration.
7. FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
8. Guy Tower: A communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy
wires and grounded anchor.
9. Height: When referring to a tower, antennae or other structure, means the distance
measured vertically from the highest point when positioned for operation to the lowest
point which is defined as the bottom of the base of the structure being measured at
either roof or ground level, which ever is applicable. The height of a tower shall
include the height of any antennae positioned for operation attached or which may be
attached to the highest point on the tower.
10. Lattice or Self-support tower: A communications tower that has open-framed supports
on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors.
11. Monopole tower: A communications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed
without guy wires or ground anchors.
12. Persona] Wireless Services: Any and all commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services and common carrier excess exchange access services.
13. Persona] Wireless Services Facilities: Any and all facilities for the provision of
personal wireless services including but not limited to communication towers,
communication antenna, communication equipment, buildings and related wireless
service facilities.
14. Public Utility Transmission Tower: A structure owned and operated by a public utility
electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission designed
and used to support overhead electricity transmission lines.
15. Unlicensed Wireless Service· The offering of telecommunications service using duly
authorized devices which do not require individual licensees, but does not include the
provision of direct-to-home satellite services.
NOTE: Any terms or provision in this Ordinance not specifically defined herein shall
that definition as defined in the Municipalities Planning Code if defined therein.
SECTION III: LOCATION OF COMMUNICATION ANTENNEA.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS. AND COMMUNICATIONS
EQUIPMENT BUILDINGS AND RELATED FACILITIES AS
USES BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION (SPECIAL USE$).
A. In an O.S. (open space district) the following new use by special exception is hereby
asserted in "Table I-Schedule of District Regulations":
1. Communication Antennas mounted on an existing public utility transmission
tower;
2. Communication Towers and Communication Equipment Buildings; and
3. Communication Antennas on other structures (including communication
towers; other communication related facilities.
B. In an M-1 (Industrial District) the following new use by special exception is hereby
asserted in "Table I - Schedule of District Regulations":
1. Communication Antennas mounted on an existing public utility transmission
tower;
2. Communication Towers and Communication Equipment Buildings; and
3. Communication Antennas on other structures; other communication related
facilities.
SECTION IV: ~R~E~G~UI"""",A~T~I~O~N,...S,__=G~O~VE_....,.RN....,,.I~N~G,__~C~O~MMU~~N~IC~A~T~I~O~N
ANTENNAS COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT BUILDINGS AND
RELATED FACILITIES.
1. Building mounted Communications Antennas shall not be located on any singlefarnily
dwelling or two family dwelling.
2. Building mounted Communications Antennas may be permitted to exceed the height
limitations by no more than twenty (20) feet.
3. Omnidirectional or wrap Communications Antennas shall not exceed twenty (20) feet
in height and seven (7) inches in diameter.
4. Directional or panel Communication Antennas shall not exceed five (5) feet in height
and three (3) feet in width.
5. Any applicant proposing Communications Antennas to be mounted on a Building or
other structure shall submit evidence from a Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer certifying that the proposed installation will not exceed the structural
capacity of the Building or other Structure, considering wind, ice and snow and other
loads associated with antenna location.
6. Any applicant proposing Communications Antennas to be mounted on a Building or
other structure shall submit detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating
how the antennas will be mounted on the Structure for review by the Borough
Engineer.
7. Any applicant proposing Communications Antennas to be mounted on a Building or
other Structure shall submit evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to
provide access to the Building or Structure on which the antennas are to be mounted
so that installation and maintenance of the antennas and Communications Equipment
Building can be accomplished.
8. Communications Antennas shall comply with all applicable standards established by
the Federal Communications Commission governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
9. Communications Antennas shall not cause radio frequency interference with other
communications facilities located in the Borough.
10. A Communications Equipment Building shall be subject to the height and setback
requirements of an applicable Zoning District.
11. The owner or operator of Communications Antennas shall be licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission to operate such antennas and must provide a copy of
their FCC License upon application.
SECTION V: STANDARDS OF APPROVAL OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR
COMMUNICATION TOWERS
The requirements set forth in this Section shall govern the location and construction of all
towers and the installation of all antennae governed by this Ordinance:
A. Building Code Safety Standards
I: To ensure the structural integrity of communication towers, the owner of a
tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained
in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that
are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time
to time. Tower owners shall conduct periodic inspections of communication
tower at least once every two years to ensure structural integrity. A structural
engineer licensed to practice in Pennsylvania shall conduct inspections. The
results of such inspection shall be provided to the Municipality which in tum
will submit the results to the Borough Engineer for further review and
comment.
2. In the case of a freestanding communication tower structure, the applicant shall
submit certification from a registered engineer that the tower structure and its
method of installation have been designed by a registered engineer and is
certified by that registered engineer to be structurally sound and able to
withstand wind and other loads in accordance with accepted engineering
practice.
3. In the case of a proposed mounting of antennae on an alternative tower
structure rather than the construction of a freestanding tower structure, the
applicant shall submit certification from a structural engineer that the structural
capacity of an existing building or structure on which an antenna is proposed to
be mounted is adequate to withstand wind and other loads associated with the
antenna's location.
4. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and any tower
structure are safe and that surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by
tower structure failure, falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic fields or
radio frequency interference.
5. All guy wires and guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at
all times.
B. Regulatory Compliance/Other Compliance
1. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the
FAA, including but not limited to standards for marking and lighting requirements of
obstructions to air navigation as set forth within the most recent addition of advisory
circular AC 70/7460-lH, the FCC, and all applicable standards of the American
National Standards Institute, ANSI/EIA-222-E Manual, and any other agency of the
state or federal government with the authority to regulate communication towers and
antennae. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the
communications towers and antennae governed by this Ordinance shall bring such
communications towers and antennae into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six ( 6) months of the effective date of such standards and
regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency.
2. Tower owners shall provide documentation showing that each communication tower
is in compliance with all federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must
be submitted upon initial applications and January 1 of each subsequent year.
3. All applicants and owners must comply with all applicable County or Borough
subdivision and land development Ordinances and regulations. All applications must
be submitted for review to the Summit Hill Planning Commission and
recommendations shall be made by the Summit Hill Planning Commission on that
application within thirty (30) days of that submission.
C. Security
1. Unless the communications tower or antennae is located on a building or
alternative tower structure, the tower structure or the entire property on which
the tower structure is located shall be completely enclosed by a eight (8) foot
high chain link security fence or similar fence with self-latching gate to limit
accessibility to the general public.
2. All tower structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices as approved by
the manufacturer for the type of installation proposed.
D. Lighting
.L No antenna or tower structure shall be illuminated, except as may be required by
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), or other governmental agency having jurisdiction in which
case the Zoning Board may review the available lighting options and approve the
design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views.
E. Signs ofAdvertising
1. No sign or other structure shall be mounted on the tower structure or antennae,
except as may be required and approved by the FCC, FAA or other governmental
agency. No advertising is permitted on an antennae or tower, buildings or related
or accessory structures.
F. Visual Impact
1. Tower structures and supporting antenna shall be painted silver or have a
galvanized finish or painted green up to the height of adjacent trees in order to
reduce visual impact as determined by the Summit Hill Zoning Hearing Board.
2. At a tower site the design of the buildings or related structures shall to the extent
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend
the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment.
3. Any towers which are clustered at the same site shall be of similar height and
design.
\
!
4. Towers shall be the rrrinimum height necessary to provide parity with existing
similar tower supported antennae and shall be freestanding where the negative
visual effect is less than would be created by use of a guyed tower.
G. Landscaping
Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from
adjacent public ways, public property and residential property and shall be as follows:
1. Excluding points of access, a buffer area not less than twenty (20) feet in width
shall be provided around the fenced-in area of buildings or accessory structures
related to the tower consisting of either native vegetation or two (2) staggered rows
of evergreen trees planted ten (10) feet on center maximum;
2. The buffer zone consisting of hedges is to be of a variety which can be expected to
grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet in height within two (2) years
planting.
3. Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall be of a kind that would not
exceed 20 feet in height or would not affect the stability of the guys, should they
be uprooted and shall not obscure visibility of the anchor from the transmission
building or security facilities and staff/maintenance.
4. Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent.
The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to
be removed and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost.
5. In lieu of these standards, the Zoning Board may allow use of an alternate detailed
plan and specifications for landscape and screening, including plantings, fences,
walls, and other features designed to screen and buffer and accessory uses. The
plan shall accomplish the same degree of screening achieved by the provisions
above, except as lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for
security purposes and/or traffic purposes. In certain locations where the visual
impact of the tower would be minimal as may be the case in developed heavy
industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the
Zoning Board.
H. Maintenance Impacts
1. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent
possible to reduce traffic and congestion where the site abuts or has access to a
collector and local streets, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by
means of the collector street.
2. If the communications facility is fully automated, adequate parking shall be
provided for periodic visits by maintenance workers. If the communications
facility is not fully automated, one (1) parking space shall be provided for each
employee on peak shift.
I. Principal. Accessory and Joint Uses
1. Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not be
used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile
equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or
parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made.
2. Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes
the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous
materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals.
J. Tower lot size. setbacks and separations
1. The site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide an adequate setback from
the base of the tower to any property line. To the extent this provision conflicts
with Table II "Bulk and Coverage Controls" of the Zoning Ordinance of 1995, this
provision applies and supercedes the conflicting section.
a. Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer as required in
Section N (G) of this Ordinance;
b. Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential property;
c. Protect adjoining property from the potential impact of tower failure (topple
effect) by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based
on the engineer's analysis required in this Ordinance.
M. Miscellaneous
1. The applicant is required to demonstrate, using technological evidence, that the
tower/antenna must go where it is proposed, in order to satisfy its function in the
Company's grid system.
2. If the applicant proposes to build a tower for purposes of mounting antennas( as
opposed to mounting an antenna on existing structure), the applicant must demonstrate
that it contacted owners of tall structures within a one-half mile radius of the proposed
site and that a good faith effort was made to obtain permission to install the antenna on
those structures but that permission was denied. This would include smoke stacks,
water towers, tall buildings, antenna support structures of other cellular phone
companies, other communication towers (fire, police, etc.) and other tall structures and
other alternative tower structures. The Zoning Board may deny the application to
construct a new tower if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the
antenna on an existing structures and that one (1) or more of the following reasons for
not selecting such Structure apply:
(a) The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of the existing Structure, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed antennas and related equipment would cause radio frequency
interference with other existing equipment for that existing Structure and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
( c) Such existing Structures do not have adequate location, space, access or height
to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
( d) Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment would result in
electromagnetic radiation from such Structure exceeding applicable standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission governing human
exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
(e) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owners of
such Structures.
)
2. A site is presumed to be of sufficient size when it:
a. Meets the requirements of the above subsection (l); and
b. Provides a setback distance to all property lines which is not less than the
height of the tower except as provided in Section 5 (distance from boundary
lines ofresidential or developed lots).
3. For a guyed tower structure, the site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to
provide a setback equal to at least the height of the tower from a guy anchor to any
property line. A vegetative cover or other buffer sufficient to obscure view to the
anchor from such adjoining properties shall be provided.
4. All structures and uses associated with the transmission use other than the
transmission tower shall be located to meet the required setbacks in the zoning
district in which the tower is to be located.
5. An antenna which is proposed to be mounted on an existing building or structure,
other than an existing communications tower, shall not exceed the height of the
building or structure by more than ten (10) feet, and the antennae and supporting
electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to,
or closely compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the
antennae and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
K. Shared Use
1. In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the Borough in
the future, the proposed tower shall be designed and required to structurally and
technologically accommodate the maximum number of additional users technically
possible.
L. Distance from Boundary lines of Residential or Developed Lots
No structure shall be constructed within one thousand five hundred (1500) feet from a
property line of a residential or otherwise developed lot.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate that the tower and antennae is the minimum height
required to function satisfactorily. No tower or antenna that is taller than this
minimum height shall be approved.
4. Upon application and in January of each year, the operator shall provide verification to
the Borough Zoning Officer that there have been no changes in the operating
characteristics of the tower, antennae and facility as approved at the time of the special
exception application, including at a minimum:
1. Direction of the signal;
2. Frequency, modulation and class of service;
3. Transmission and maximum effective radiated power;
4. Manufacturer, type and model of antennae and equipment;
5. Height of the antenna and tower;
6. Number of antenna;
7. Name, address and emergency telephone number for the operator;
8. Copy of the current FCC license.
9. A certificate of Insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of$1,000,000.00 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of$1,000,000.00 per
occurrence coverage the antenna/tower, equipment building and for
other related facilities.
5. Communications Towers shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation
Administration, Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation and applicable Airport Zoning
Regulations.
6. The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission to operate a Communications Tower, if applicable, and Communications
Antennas.
7. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed Communications Tower and
Communications Antennas proposed to be mounted thereon comply with all
applicable standards established by the Federal Communications Commission
governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
8. The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer that a proposed Communications Tower will be designed and constructed in
accordance with the current Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and
Antenna Supporting Structures, published by the Electrical Industrial
)
Association/Telecommunications Industry Association and applicable requirements of
the Summit Hill's Building Code.
9. All guy wires associated with the guyed Communications Towers shall be clearly
marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be located within a fenced enclosures.
10. The site of a Communications Tower shall be secured by a fence with a required
height of eight (8') feet (included any barbed/razor wire attached thereto) to limit
accessibility by the general public.
11. The location of any Communication Tower and/or Communications Equipment
Building shall comply with all natural resource protection standards of any federal,
state or local law, regulation or Ordinance.
12. Towers and antennae shall be designed to withstand wind gusts of at least one hundred
(100) miles per hour.
13. An antenna may not be located.on a building or structure that is listed on a historic
register or is in a historic district, if any district is hereafter established.
14. Access shall be provided to the Communications Tower and Communications
Equipment Building by means of a public street or easement to a public street. The
easement shall be a minimum of twenty (20') feet in width and shall be improved to a
width of at least ten (10') feet with a dust-free all weather surface for its entire length.
15. A Communications Tower may be located on a lot occupied by other principal
Structures and may occupy a leased parcel within a lot meeting the minimum lot size
requirements for the Zoning District, provided:
(a) It will be designed so as to have minimal visual impact to the building or
structure utilizing techniques such as being the same color as the building or
structure on which it is located.
(b) The minimum set back from all other principal structures on the same lot shall
be two (2) feet for every one-foot of height of the tower except for another
tower.
16. Recording of a plat of subdivision or land development shall be required for a lease
parcel on which a Communications Tower is proposed to be constructed, provided the
Communications Equipment Building is unmanned.
)
D. Utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power
lines impacting the proposed tower site.
E. A certified statement prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in Pennsylvania that
the construction of the tower, including reception and transmission functions, will not
interfere with the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television,
etc., service enjoyed by properties in the Municipality.
F. A description of anticipated maintenance needs, including frequency of service,
personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise and safety impacts of such
maintenance.
G. Report from a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Pennsylvania
documenting the following:
1. Tower height and design, including technical engineering, economic and other
pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design. A cross-section
of the tower structure shall be included.
2. Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including numbers and types of
antennae which can be accommodated.
3. Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure.
4. Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are
of adequate size to contain debris.
H. Written statements from the FAA, FCC and any appropriate state review authority
stating that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by that agency
or that the tower is exempt from those regulations.
I. Letter of intent to lease excess space on the tower structure and to lease additional
excess land on the tower site when the shared use potential of the tower is absorbed, if
structurally and technically possible. ' ·
J. The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the
approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall also describe any
limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g. radio frequency
interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall
describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why
the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The Zoning
Board shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable
technical means.
K. Evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed
antennae and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the
proposed antennae.
L. Each applicant must make a good faith effort to substantially demonstrate that no
existing or planned towers can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antennae/transmitter as described below.
1. The applicant shall contact the owners of all existing or planned towers of a
height roughly equal to or greater than the height of the tower proposed by the
applicant. A list shall provide all owners contacted, the date of such contact
and the form and content of such contact.
2. Such contact shall be made in a timely manner, that is, sufficiently before the
filing of an application for a special exception permit to include a response
from said owner(s) in the application when filed.
a. The Zoning Board shall maintain and provide, on request, records of
responses from each owner.
b. Once an owner demonstrates antennae of the sort proposed by the applicant
cannot be accommodated on the owner's tower, the owner need not be
contacted by future applicants for antennae of the sort proposed.
M. Any other information which may be requested by the Zoning Board to fully evaluate
and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed tower and/or
antennae.
Any addition of an antennae or modification of an existing antennae including but
not limited to any increase in the power or direction of the signal, shall require
submission of a new application for special exception approval in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance.
)
17. When an existing tower leases space on the tower to an additional user, the new entity
shall obtain a Zoning and Building permit from the Borough Zoning Officer and shall
be considered a permitted use by special exception subject to the requirements ofthis
Ordinance.
N. Additional Conditions
1. In granting a special exception permit for a tower or antennae or associated structures
the Zoning Board may impose additional conditions to the extent deemed necessary to
buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower, antennae
equipment buildings or related facilities on surrounding properties.
SECTION VJ; APPLICATION PROCEDURES
1. An application for special exception permit for any communication tower or use of an
alternate tower structure shall be made to the Zoning Board. An application will not
be accepted or considered until it is completed including the requisite filing fee. A
complete application must contain the following:
A. An inventory of the applicant's existing towers that are either within the
jurisdiction of the Municipality or within one mile of the border thereof, including
specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The
Zoning Board may share such information with other applicants applying for
administrative approvals or special exception permits under this Ordinance or
other organizations seeking to locate antennae or towers within the jurisdiction of
the Municipality, however, that the Zoning Board is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or
suitable.
B. Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location oftower(s), guy anchors (if any),
antennae, equipment buildings and/or accessory structures or uses, access, parking,
fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses and all other iten:;is required in the
Borough's Zoning Ordinance. The scale to be utilized to which the plans are to be
drawn shall not be less than one inch equals twenty (20) feet.
C. Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in this
Ordinance.
SECTION VII: REMOVAL OF ANTENNAE AND TOWERS FALLING OUT OF
COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS FOR SUCH FACILITY
All towers and antennae shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in
applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structur.al integrity of such towers.
If upon inspection by the Zoning Officer such tower is determined not to comply with the
code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower and the owner of the property if such owner is different,
such owners shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance. In the event
such tower or antennae is not brought into compliance within thirty (30) days, the
Municipality may provide notice to the owners requiring the tower or antennae to be removed.
In the event such tower or antennae is not removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such
Notice, the Municipality may remove such tower or antennae and place a lien upon the
property for the cost ofremoval. Delay by the Municipality in taking action shall not in any
way waive the Municipality's right to take action. The Municipality may pursue all legal
remedies available to it to insure that communication towers and antennae not in compliance
with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into
compliance or removed. The Municipality may seek to have the tower or antennae removed
regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antennae and regardless
of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted.
SECTION VIII: ABANDONED TOWERS
A. Any antennae or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends
to make use of the tower. The owner of an abandoned antennae or tower and the
owner of the property where the tower is located shall be under a duty to remove such
a tower or antennae. A Bond shall be posted by the owner/operator for the
dismantling of the tower. The amount of Bond shall be determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer. If not dismantled by
the Owner/Operator, the Borough will notify the Bonding Company and require it to
take necessary action pursuant to Bond. If such antennae and/or tower is not removed
within sixty ( 60) days of receipt of notice from the Municipality notifying the
owner( s) and Bonding Company of such abandonment, the Municipality may remove
such tower and/or antennae and place a lien upon the property for the costs of
removal. The Municipality may pursue all other legal remedies available to it insure
that abandoned communication towers and antennae are removed. Delay by the
Municipality in taking action shall not in any way waive the Municipality's right to
take action. The Municipality may seek to have the tower or antennae removed
l
J
regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antennae and
regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted.
SECTION IX: SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional or pre-empted by federal law, by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
SECTION X: REPEAL OF LAWS IN CONFLICT
This Ordinance supersedes all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances adopted prior hereto which
are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
SECTION XI: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Enforcement Remedies. In case any building, structure, or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained, or used in
violation of this Ordinance, the governing body or, with the approval of the governing
body, an officer of the Municipality, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the
name of the Municipality any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct and abate such building, structure or land, or to prevent, in or about such
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
B. Enforcement Penalties.
Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which shall violate the provisions of
this Ordinance, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in 53 P.S. Section
10617.2.
SECTION XII: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect innnediately upon adoption.
Ordained and Enacted at a meeting of the Borough Council of Summit Hill held the IO~
day of ::December , 2001.
ATTEST:
Approved this \ct!: day of ~c=-l:ic.r , 2001.
ORDINANCE NO. 4, 2002
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL,
CARBON COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING
ORDINANCE NO. 2 OF 1995 KNOWN AS THE "SUMMIT
HILL ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1995" TO REFLECT THE
REZONING OF CERTAIN LANDS WITHIN THE BOROUGH
OF SUMMIT HILL", THE APPROVAL OF A NEW ZONING
MAP INCORPORATING THE REZONING; THE CREATION
OF THE DEFINITION OF NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED
BUSINESSES; PERMITTING OF NO-IMP ACT HOME-BASED
BUSINESSES IN ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES EXCEPT WHERE
OTHERWISE PROHIBITED.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Council of the Borough of Summit
Hill, Carbon County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of
the same as follows:
WHEREAS, the Borough of Summit Hill enacted an Ordinance entitled "Summit Hill
Zoning Ordinance of 1995";
WHEREAS, since that time it has become necessary to amend this Ordinance through
a rezoning of certain lands within the Borough;
WHEREAS, recent changes to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
necessitate the creation and location of no-impact home-based businesses in all residential
zones throughout the Borough except where otherwise prohibited; and
WHEREAS, the Borough of Summit Hill hereby amends Ordinance No. 2 of 1995,
known as the "Summit Hill Zoning Ordinance of 1995 as follows:
Section I: The following lands shall be rezoned from an R-1 (low density residential)
zone to an 0-S (open space, special use) zone:
BEGINNING at a point, said point being the intersection of the southwesterly
comer ofland of the Borough of Summit Bill and the extension of Hazard Street;
thence in a northerly direction along the common boundary of land of the Borough
of Summit Hill and Black Di.amond Development Corp. and passing through lands
of Black Diamond Development Corp. and Lehigh Coal and Navigation Co. a
distance of approximately one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') to the existing
Open Space Special Uses (0-S) zoning district line; thence in an easterly direction
through land of Lehigh Coal and Navigation Co. and along the existing Open Space
Special District (0-S) zoning district line a distance of approximately five thousand
six hundred feet (5,600') to the Nesquehoning Borough boundary line; thence in a
southerly direction along the Nesquehoning Borough boundary line approximately
three hundred feet (300') to an existing earth road, said road being the extension
of Hazard Street; thence in a westerly direction in and along the extension of
Hazard Street approximately sixty-two hundred feet (6,200') to the place of
beginning.
Section II: Atticle 202 of the original Zoning Ordinance is amended to include the
following definition:
"No-impact home-based business", a business or commercial activity administered
or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a
residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether
vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises,
in excess of those normally associated with residential use.
Section III: Table 1 "Schedule of District Regulations" of the original Ordinance is
amended to allow for no-impact home-based business as permitted accessory uses in all
residential districts.
Section IV: Article 7 of the original Zoning Ordinance is amended to include the
following:
705; Supplemental Regnlations Governing No-Impact Home-Based
Businesses All no-impact home-based businesses must satisfy the
following requirements:
(1) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
(2) The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(3) There shall he no display or sale ofretail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
( 4) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including but not limited to parking, signs or lights.
(5) The business activity may not use any equipment or process
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
or electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(6) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential us<> in the neighborhood.
(7) The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(8) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
(9) The business, while permissible by right in all residential districts,
shall not supersede any deed restriction, covenant or agreement
restricting the use of land nor any master deed, bylaw or other
document applicable to a common interest ownership community.
Section V: EFFECTIVE DATES: This Ordinance shall be effective immediately
upon enactment.
Section VI: All provisions of the original Ordinance not inconsistent with this
Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED this qtt day of December, 2002, by the
Council of the Borough of Summit Hill, Carbon County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to the Act of
1966, February 1, P.L. (1965), No. 581, Section 1302, in lawful session duly assembled.
ATTEST: BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL
O~
Crampsie, Pre~
Approved this day of December, 2002.
}
ORDINANCE NO. ;),, OF 2008
OF THE BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL AMENDING THE SUMMIT
HILL BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE PERTAINING TO REAR YARD SETBACK
IN AN R-3 ZONING DISTRICT
The Council of the Borough of Summit Hill, Carbon County,
Pennsylvania, enacts and ordains as follows:
ARTICLE I. Table II, Bulk and Coverage Controls, shall be
amended as follows:
"Minimum Yard Dimensions for rear yard setbacks in an
R-3 zoning district shall be changed from thirty-five
(35) feet to five (5) feet."
ARTICLE II. All other portions of the Summit Hill Zoning
Ordinance not otherwise affected by the above amendment shall
continue in full force and effect.
ARTICLE III. This Ordinance shall be effective immediately
upon its adoption.
DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED this 11-m day of t°eBRl.lf\~Y ' 2008,
by the Council of the Borough of Summit Hill, Carbon County,
Pennsylvania in lawful session duly advertised and assembled.
Borough of Summit Hill
ATTEST:
eber, President
:\<~~:In~ .~a.Que
Kira Michalik, Secretary
AND NOW this \\\\-\ day of 'Fi;;i':.R\ll\I<'(, 2008, the
above Ordinance is hereby approved.
@eJ!_O,"'rvft ~
Paul R. McArdle, Mayor
ORDINANCE NO 2 OF 2009
OF THE BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE
OF SUMMIT HILL, CARBON COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
ENTITLED, "BOROUGH OF SUMMIT HILL ZONING ORDINANCE"
("ZONING ORDINANCE").
BE IT ENACTED OR ORDAINED by Summit Hill, Carbon County, Pennsylvania, and
it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of the same, that the following additions,
deletions and amendments be made to the Zoning Ordinance (unless otherwise indicated all
references are to sections in the Zoning Ordinance):
I. The following definitions shall be added to Section 202 of the Zoning Ordinance:
Hub Height: the distance measured from the surface of the lower foundation to the
height of the Wind Turbine hub, to which the blade is attached.
Turbine Height: the distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation
to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane.
Wind Rotor: the blades, plus the hub to which the blades are attached, that are
used to capture wind for the purpose of energy conversion. The wind rotor is
mounted on a pole or tower or other suitable structure along with other generating
and electrical equipment to form a Wind Turbine.
Wind Turbine: a wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and includes the nacelle,
wind rotor, tower, and pad transformer, if any.
2. Table I-Schedule of District Regulations shall be amended to permit Wind
Turbines as a Special Exception in all zoning districts.
3. Section 907 .2 shall be added and shall provide as follows:
Wind Turbines, when authorized by the Board, shall be permitted by special
exception, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The Wind Turbine shall be independent of any structure and shall be
located a minimum distance of one hundred ten (110%) percent times the
Turbine Height from any structure or property line.
(b) No part of the Wind Turbine shall be located within any required front,
side or rear setback. For the zoning district in which it is to be located
( c) The minimum height of the lowest position of the wind rotor shall be
twenty-five (25') feet above the ground.
(d) Wind Turbines shall not be climbable up to twelve (12') feet above the
ground surface.
(e) To the extent applicable, the Wind Turbine shall comply with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999 as amended,
· and the regulations adopted by the Department of Labor and Industry.
(f) The design of the Wind Turbine shall conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute.
The Applicant shall submit certificates of design compliance obtained by
the equipment manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories, Det Norske
Veritas, Germanishcer Lloyd Wind Energies, or other similar certifying
organizations.
(g) Wind Turbines shall be equipped with a redundant braking system. This
includes both aerodynamic overspeed controls (including variable pitch,
tip, and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes
shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation shall not be
considered a sufficient braking system for overspeed protection.
(h) All electrical components of the Wind Turbine shall conform to relevant
and applicable local, state and national codes and relevant and applicable
international standards.
(i) Wind Turbines shall be a non-obtrusive color such as white, off-white, or
gray.
(j) Wind Turbines shall not by artificially lighted, expect to the extent
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable
authority that regulates air safety.
(k) Wind Turbines shall not display advertising, except for reasonable
identification of the turbine manufacturer, which sign shall have an area
of less than two hundred (200) square inches.
(1) On-site transmission and power lines shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, be placed underground.
(m) A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed at the
base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
(n) Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or tape shall
be placed on the anchor points of guy wires and along the guy wires up to
a height often (10') feet from the ground.
( o) The Applicant shall make reasonable efforts to avoid any disruption or
loss of radio, telephone, television or similar signals, and shall mitigate
any harm caused by the Wind Turbine.
(p) When a building is necessary for storage cells or related mechanical
equipment, the building must not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square
feet in area, fifteen ( 15') feet in height, and must not be located within any
required front, side, or rear setbacks.
( q) The resultant energy harnessed from the wind shall only be used on the
property on which the Wind Turbine is located.
(r) The Wind Turbine shall comply with all other applicable regulations and
requirements as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. However, land
development approval shall not be required under the Summit Hill
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for a single Wind Turbine.
(s) The landowner shall, at his expense, complete decommissioning of the
Wind Turbine within twelve (12) months after the end of the useful life of
the Wind Turbine. It shall be presumed that the Wind Turbine is at the
end of its useful life if no electricity is generated for a continuous period
of twelve (12) months.
(t) Decommissioning of the Wind Turbine shall include removal of the Wind
Turbine, buildings, cabling, electrical components, roads, foundations to
a depth of thirty-six (36") inches, and any other associated facilities.
Disturbed earth shall be graded and re-seeded, unless the landowner
requests in writing that the access roads or other land surface areas not be
restored.
(u) The Wind Turbine shall be subordinate to and located on the same lot
occupied by the principal use to which it relates.
(v) For lots in excess of one (I) acre, one (1) wind turbine shall be permitted
for each acre making up that lot.
4. All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with provisions of this ordinance
are hereby repealed.
5. The Summit Hill Zoning Ordinance is amended in no other way.
6. This ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after its enactment.
THIS ORDINANCE IS ENACTED AND ORDAINED this \ 3 -n+ day of
J 1:>;(\\.J,.>A<;i.'-\ ,2009.
SUMMIT HILL BOROUGH
. Weber, President
ATTEST:
~\n.oJ1\.:i.0o oJ<
Kira Michalik, Secretary
)
approved.
AND NOW this l?i1'l day of .'.:l~u.:A\<.,~ , 2009, the above Ordinance is hereby
<:52JQ.:q*~
Paul R. McArdle, Mayor
-- ·- .. -
RESOLUTION NO. 3 OF 2006
BE IT HEREBY resolved this 11th day of July, 2006 that the
Borough of Summit Hill hereby adopts and accepts the following
fee schedule relating to the summit Hill Zoning Ordinance,
· Zoning Permit Fees and Zoning Hearing Board actions
WHEREAS, on the 7th day of August, 1995, the Borough of
Summit Hill adopted Ordinance No. 2 of 1995; and
WHEREAS, Article 805 of this Ordinance permitted the
Borough to establish fees in accordance with the authority
granted in 53 P.S. § 10908 (1.1) and payable under this
Ordinance from time to time by Resolution; and
WHEREAS, the Borough of Summit Hill desires to update the
zoning fee schedule and replace the previously enacted fee
schedule; and
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the following zoning
fee schedule should be applicable for all zoning applications
filed with the Borough of Summit Hill, and/or Zoning Hearing
Officer:
1. Applications for zoning permits which do not
require zoning hearing board action: $40.00;
2. Applications for variance, special exceptions,
validity challenges, conditional uses,
interpretations, or appeals from zoning officer:
$500.00 (non-refundable).
THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that, the
Summit Hill, Carbon County, Pennsylvania,
above Resolution this II~ day of ju,\~
APPROVED BY:
Borough
hereby
, 2006.
Council of
adopts the
resident
Kira Michalik, Borough Secretary
' ,_
SUMMIT HILL BOROUGH
" CARBON COUNTY
PENNSYLV4:NIA
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DE\AELO~MENT"
ORDINANCE
' :: SUMMilT HILbBdFGUGH COUNCIL -
l'~ .,. . .. ,,,_·, ' .
SUBblVISION AND LAl"JD DEVEL~~MENT'ORDINANC~ -
' -- ., :,~'. ... : ' .•. -
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION
100 TITLE
101 AUTHORITY
102 OBJECTIVES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
103 APPLICATION OF THE ORDINANCE
104 STATUS OF PENDING SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
105 STATUS OF APPROVED SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
106 PHASED DEVELOPMENT EXCEEDING FIVE YEARS
107 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND
108 INTERPRETATION
109 MODIFICATION OF REQUIRED STANDARDS
110 FEES
111 PENAL TIES
112 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
113 APPEALS TO COURT
114 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
115 SEVERABILITY
116 EFFECTIVE DATE
Community Programs, Inc. 3
ARTICLE ff
DEFINITIONS
SECTION
200 GENERAL INTERPRETATION
ARTICLE Ill
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION
301 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS
302 SKETCH PLAN REVIEW
303 SUBMISSION OF PLANS AND APPLICATIONS
304 DISTRIBUTION OF PLANS
305 CARBON COUNTY REVIEW
306 PUBLIC HEARING
307 INSTALLATION OR GUARANTEE OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
308 PROCEDURAL METHODS IN RENDERING DECISIONS
309 WITHDRAWAL AND/OR REVISIONS TO SUBMITIED PLANS
310 RECORDING OF FINAL PLAN
311 PHASING MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLANS
ARTICLE IV
PRELIMINARY PLAN
SECTION
401 INITIAL REVIEW
402 REVIEW BY CARBON COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
403 REVIEW AND APPROVAL/DISAPPROVAL OF PLAN
404 PRELIMINARY PLAN - DRAFTING STANDARDS
405 PRELIMINARY PLAN - EXISTING CONDITIONS
Community Programs, Inc. 4
406 PRELIMINARY PLAN - PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT
407 ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED WITH PRELIMINARY PLAN
ARTICLEV
FINAL PLAN
SECTION
501 SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURE
502 REVIEW AND APPROVAUDISAPPROVAL OF PLAN
503 FINAL PLAN DRAFTING STANDARDS
504 FINAL PLAN REQUIREMENTS
505 ADDITIONAL MATERIAL - SUBMITTED WITH FINAL PLAN
506 RECORDING OF PLAN
ARTICLE VI
MINOR SUBDIVISION/LAND DEVELOPMENT
SECTION
601 ONLY FINAL PLAN REQUIRED
602 SUBMISSION PROCEDURE
603 DISTRIBUTION OF PLAN
604 DRAFTING STANDARDS FOR MINOR PLANS
605 REQUIREMENTS FOR MINOR PLANS
606 INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED WITH PLAN
607 RECORDING OF PLAN
ARTICLE VII
ASSURANCES FOR COMEPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION
701 INSTALLATION OR GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS
702 TYPES OF FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
703 REVIEW BY SOLICITOR
Community Programs, Inc. 5
704 AMOUNT OF FINANCIAL SECURITY
705 REQUIRED TIME PERIOD FOR COMPLETION
706 PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT
707 START OF WORK NOTICE
708 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS DURING CONSTRUCTION
709 RELEASE OF PORTIONS OF FINANCIAL SECURITY
710 FINANCIAL SECURITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
711 FINANCLAL SECURITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS UNDER JURISDICTION
OF A PUBLIC UTILITY OR MUNICPAL AUTHORITY
712 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS WHEN FINANCIAL SECURITY HAS BEEN POSTED
713 COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
714 RESPONSIBILITY OF APPLICANT UPON DISAPPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS
715 APPLICANTS RIGHT TO CONTEST ACTION
716 REMEDIES TO EFFECT COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
717 ENGINERRING FEES AND CONSUL TING FEES
718 PROCEDURE FOR DISPUTES OVER CONSUL TING FEES
ARTICLE VIII
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION
800 APPLICATION
801 GENERAL STANDARDS
802 SITE SUITABILITY FOR DEVELOPMENT
803 MARKERS AND MONUMENTS
804 RESIDENTLAL BLOCKS
805 RESIDENTIAL LOTS
806 STREETS - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
807 STREET NAMES
Community Programs, Inc. 6
808 STREET SIGNS
809 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS
810 CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS AND DEAD-END ROADS
811 DEAD-END ROADS (PERMANENT)
812 ACCESS TO ARTERIAL STREETS
813 INTERSECTIONS
814 ROAD DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND PAVING STANDARDS
815 HORIZONTAL VISIBILITY
816 CUL-DE-SAC STREETS
817 BRIDGES AND STREAM CROSSINGS
818 DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES
819 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
820 WATER SUPPLY FACILITIES
821 CENTRALIZED WATER SYSTEM
822 ON-LOT WATER SYSTEM
823 SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES
824 CENTRALIZED SEWERS
825 ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
826 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
827 INFORMATION ON STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
828 DESIGN FEATURES FOR DRAINAGE FACILITIES
829 DRAINAGE EASEMENTS
830 STORM WATER DETENTION
831 DESIGN OF STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM
832 NONRESIDENTLAL SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Community Programs, Inc. 7
ARTICLE IX
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION
901 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
902 SITE LOCATION STANDARDS
Community Programs, Inc. 8
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 100
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Summit Hill Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance."
SECTION 101 AUTHORITY
Summit Hill Borough is empowered to regulate subdivisions and land developments within its municipal
limits as provided for under the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended. The
Summit Hill Borough Council shall retain and exercise the authority for the approval or disapproval of all
subdivisions and land developments as set forth in this Ordinance. The Summit Hill Borough Planning
Commission shall act in an official advisory capacity to the Borough Council for the review and
recommendation of the approval or disapproval of all subdivisions and land developments set forth in this
Ordinance. ·
SECTION 102 OBJECTIVES
Through the adoption, administration and enforcement of this Ordinance, Summit Hill Borough
proposes to create conditions favorable to promote the health, safety, and general welfare
of the Borough with regulations aimed at achieving the following objectives:
102. 1 To guide the future growth and development of the Borough in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan
102.2 To provide a standard set of minimum regulations to guide applicants in the design and
development of subdivisions and land developments.
102.3 To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger,
and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population.
102.4 To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Borough and the value of buildings and
improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts about the uses of land and buildings.
102.5 To insure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve a proposed
subdivision or land development.
102.6 To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and land
developments in order to further the orderly layout and use of land and to insure proper legal
descriptions and monumentation of proposed subdivisions and land developments.
102.7 To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient
transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public
requirements and facilities.
Community Programs, Inc. 9
102.8 To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the
circulation of traffic throughout the Borough, with particular regard to the avoidance of congestion
in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses
of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines.
102.9 To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land and
preserving the density of land as established in the Zoning Ordinance.
102.10 To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities;
to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the prudent use and management of natural
resources throughout the Borough in order to preserve the integrity and stability of the community
and the natural environmental characteristic of the land.
102.11 To protect and regulate land in critical areas which may be unsuitable for development.
SECTION 103 APPLICATION OF THE ORDINANCE
103.1 No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made, and no street,
sanitary sewer, water main, gas, oil, or electric transmission line, or other facilities in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for public use or travel or for the
common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in accordance with the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance regulations adopted herein.
103.2 No lot in a proposed subdivision or land development may be sold, and no zoning permit to erect
any building upon land in a subdivision or land development may be used unless and until the
following conditions are met:
(a) The plans and application have been granted final approval by the Borough Council.
(b) All required improvements as set forth in the grant of approval have been constructed or
until the applicant posts a form of financial security, acceptable to the Borough Council,
which guarantees that all required improvements shall be subsequently constructed within
a defined period of lime.
(c) The final plan as approved, is filed with the Carbon County Recorder of Deeds.
SECTION 104 STATUS OF PENDING SUBMISSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
APPLICATIONS
From the lime an application for approval of a subdivision or land development whether preliminary or
final, is duly filed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and while such application is pending
approval or disapproval an amendment to this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, or any other applicable
ordinance, shall not affect the decision on such application adversely to the applicant and the applicant
shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of all applicable ordinances as they stood
at the time the application was duly filed. When an application is, however, properly and finally denied,
any subsequent application shall be subject to any amendments to this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance
and any other applicable ordinance and/or regulations.
Community Programs, Inc. 10
SECTION 105 STATUS OF APPROVED SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT
APPLICATIONS
105.1 When an application for approval of a subdivision or land development whether preliminary or
final, has been approved, no subsequent amendment to this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, or
any other applicable ordinance, shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the term
of such approval within five (5) years from such approval. If final approval is preceded by
preliminary approval, the five (5) year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary approval, the terms shall be
construed in the light of the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the
lime when the application for such approval was duly filed.
105.2 Where the applicant has substantially completed the required improvements as depicted upon the
final plan within the aforesaid five (5) year limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the
Borough Council, no change of municipal ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the date of
filing of the preliminary plan shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved final plan pertaining
to zoning classification or density, lot, building, street or utility location.
SECTION 106 PHASED DEVELOPMENT EXCEEDING FIVE YEARS
In the case of a preliminary plan for the installation of improvements beyond the five year period, a
schedule shall be filed by the landowner with the preliminary plan delineating all proposed sections as well
as deadlines within which applications for final plan approval of each section are intended to be filed.
Such schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the preliminary
plan approval until final plan approval of the final section has been granted and any modification in the
aforesaid schedule shall be subject to approval of the Borough Council in its discretion.
Each section in any residential subdivision or land development except for the last section, shall contain a
minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Borough Council in its discretion. Provided the landowner has not
defaulted with regard to or violated any of the conditions of the preliminary plan approval, including
compliance with landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plans for the various sections, then
the protections afforded by substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plan within
five years, as contained in Section 105, shall apply and for any section or sections, beyond the initial
section, in which the required improvements have not been substantially completed within said five year
period the aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years from the date of
final plan approval for each section.
Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of final plans for the various sections shall
subject any such section to any and all changes in zoning, subdivision and other governing ordinance
enacted by the municipality subsequent to the date of the initial preliminary plan submission.
SECTION 107 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND
A revision or re-subdivision of a plan of record and/or lot of record shall be considered as a new
subdivision and shall come under the jurisdiction of this Ordinance.
Community Programs, Inc. 11
SECTION 108 INTERPRETATION
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of the Ordinance shall be held to the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. When provisions,
standards and specifications of this Ordinance differ from those of any ordinance, statute or regulation, the
more restrictive or higher standards shall apply.
The provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to abrogate any private easement, covenant or any
other restriction of record, provided that where the provisions of this Ordinance are more restrictive or
impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other restriction, the applicable
provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
SECTION 109 MODIFICATION OF REQUIRED STANDARDS
109.1 The Borough Council may grant a modification of requirements of one or more provisions if the
literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land
in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the
purpose and intent of this Ordinance is observed.
109.2 Any request for a modification shall be submitted in writing and shall accompany and be a part of
the application for development. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the provisions or requirements of
this Ordinance in question, and the minimum modification or modifications necessary.
109.3 All proposals for modification of provisions or requirements of this Ordinance shall require
approval by the Borough Council, subject by an initial review and recommendation by the
Planning Commission.
109.4 Upon rendering a final decision for any proposed modification the Borough Council shall provide a
record of their action with the minutes of their meeting.
SECTION 110
MUNICIPAL FEES
The Summit Hill Borough Council shall establish by resolution, a fee schedule for subdivision and land
development applications.
COUNTY FEES
The applicant shall also be required to submit all required fees for review and comment by the Carbon
County Planning Commission.
FILING DATE AND PAYMENT OF FEES
A completed application and plan for any proposed subdivision or land development shall not be
considered as filed until all fees are paid and all applications are properly signed.
Community Programs, Inc. 12
SECTION 111 PENAL TIES
111.1 PREVENTATIVE REMEDIES
In addition to other remedies the Borough may institute and maintain appropriate actions by law or equity
to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds to
the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or
develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this Ordinance. The authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any
of the following applicants:
1. The owner of record at the time of such violation.
2. The vender or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard as
to whether such vendor or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
3. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether the current owner had actual or constructive knowledge of
the violation.
4. The vendor or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendor or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or granting of an approval to any such owner,
current owner, vendor or lessee for the development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the lime the applicant
acquired an interest in such real property.
111.2 JURISDICTION
District Justices shall have jurisdiction in proceedings brought under Section 111.3 of this Ordinance.
111.3 ENFORCEMENT
Any person partner or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this Ordinance, shall upon
being found liable therefore under civil enforcement proceedings commenced by the municipality, pay a
judgment of not more than $500.00 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
municipality as a result of such proceedings. No judgment shall be commenced or be opposed, levied or
payable until the dale of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable codes of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the District Justice determines that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this Ordinance to have
believed that there was no such violation.
Community Programs, Inc. 13
Under such circumstances, there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
The Court of Common Plea, upon petition may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per
diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
Nothing contained within this Section shall be construed or interpreted to grant any person or entity other
than the municipality the right to commence action for enforcement pursuant to this Section.
SECTION 112 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
The regulations set forth in this Ordinance may; from time to time be amended by the Summit Hill Borough
Council. The following requirements shall be observed prior to enacting any amendments to this
Ordinance.
A. A public hearing on the proposed amendment shall be held by the Borough Council
pursuant to public notice.
B. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning Commission, the
Borough Council shall submit such amendment to the Planning Commission not less than
thirty days prior to the public hearing.
C. The proposed amendment shall be submitted to the Carbon County Planning Commission
not less thirty days prior to the public hearing.
D. The proposed amendment shall not be enacted unless public notice is given which shall
include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered and a
reference to a place within the municipality where copies of the proposed amendment
may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater that the cost of
reproduction.
E. Public notice of the proposed amendment shall include the full text thereof or the title and
a brief summary, prepared by the municipal solicitor, setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not provided, a copy shall be supplied to the
newspaper in which the public notice is placed and an attested copy of the amendment
shall be placed on file in Carbon County.
F. Within thirty days following the adoption of an amendment to this Ordinance, the Borough
Council shall forward a certified copy of the amendment to the Carbon County Planning
Commission.
SECTION 113 APPEALS TO COURT
Decisions rendered by the Borough Council may be appealed to a Court of proper jurisdiction in
accordance with the procedures, provisions and time limitations as contained in Article X-A of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
Community Programs, Inc. 14
SECTION 114 CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
All Ordinances, or any parts thereof, which are inconsistent or in conflict with this Ordinance of December
4, 1990, and any amendments thereto are hereby repealed.
SECTION 115 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any part of this Ordinance is declared to
be unconstitutional illegal or invalid, the validity of the remaining provisions shall be unaffected thereby. It
is the intention of Summit Hill Borough that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional illegal or invalid part not been included.
SECTION 116 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its enactment as provided for by law.
APPROVED AND ENACTED BY THE SUMMIT HILL BOROUGH COUNCIL ON
Community Programs, Inc. 15
Monda/ Jem.1a.ry21 2002 2.16 Pru\ To: D<;'lbbi-e Y"Jselle From: Dave Unterl)erQ 610 437 543,J Psge: 1 of 1
£.Q!'l.f.JJ.CT WITH OTHER ORDINAflCE.Ji!
All :Jrd1nances, or !3ny parts then:i1>f, v-1hioh are incvnslstent or in conflict with this Orclif1ance of December
4. 1990, and ary a111en:::lrnente thereto are hereby re;:iealed.
SECTION 1'15
T1e p1·ovfs1ons of this OrdinanGe arF.: severable. If any part of th!:; Ord:nance is declared to
be unconstitutional lllegai or 1r,valid, the validity of 11"'.e rerr:aining pro11isions shall be unaffected thereby. It Is
11·1e 1ntent1,on of summit Hill Borough that this Ordinance woul:J have been adopied had suer,
un;:;cnstitutiona! illegal or invalid oa.rt not been 1ncluoed.
EFFECTIVE DATE
This Cirdinanc:e shall be 1n force e.no effect f1orri and ::i.fter its en-3c1ment as ;)rovlded far by la:.N.
t.~.F·PF~OVED A~J[i SJ\JA.CTED BY TμE SUfV1\lliT HILL SORC:..JGH Cf.)IJ~.:<::IL (Ji\] Oecer.1ber ·10, 2001
SlNMIT HILL BOROUGH COU:\JCI:..
. '
R1ch;:ird CafJrey, rv1ayor
Con•n-1LLniiy Progan."1:'l, lnc. 15
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 200 GENERAL INTERPRETATION
Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine
and the neuter. The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular. The word 'may' is permissive.
When used in this Ordinance, the following words, text and phrases shall have the following meaning
unless expressly stated otherwise, or unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
ABUT: Next to or adjacent to, and includes the words "directly across from streets, natural features, and
rights-of-way."
ACRE: 43,560 square feet.
ADJACENT: A state of being side by side, next to, adjoining contiguous, or abutting one to another,
and includes the words "directly across from streets, natural features and rights-of-way."
ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the Borough Council who is authorized to accept and
receive subdivision and land development plan and applications for and on behalf of the Borough Council.
ALLEY: A public or private right-of-way affording secondary means of access to abutting property .
APPLICANT: A landowner or developer who has filed an application for a subdivision or land
development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The highest elevation, expressed in feet above mean sea level of the flood
waters of a one-hundred (100) Year Flood Plain, as projected and delineated upon the most recent official
Flood Insurance Rate Map, published by the Federal Insurance Administration.
BLOCK: A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rightsof-
way, waterways or any other barrier to the continuity to development
BOROUGH COUNCIL: The Summit Hill Borough Council, Carbon County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, or property of any kind.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The minimum distance as required in the Zoning Ordinance between any
building or structure, to the front rear, or side property.
CARTWAY: The paved portion of a street or alley designated intended or capable of being used for
vehicular travel.
CATCH BASIN: An inlet designated to intercept and redirect surface storm water.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE: An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by lines of sight
between points at a given distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The most recent Comprehensive Plan, and amendments thereto, as adopted
by the Borough Council.
Community Programs, Inc. 16
CONDOMINIUM : A building or group of buildings, in which the units are owned individually, while the
structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all owners on a proportional and individual basis.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS: The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision or land development plan
and showing the improvements to be installed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and
in accordance with any terms or conditions as set forth by the Borough Council.
COUNTY : Carbon County, Pennsylvania
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISION: The Carbon County Planning Commission
COVENANT: A restriction on the use of land usually set forth in the deed. A covenant usually runs with
the land and the restrictions thereunder are binding upon subsequent owners.
CRITICAL AREA: An area with one or more of the following characteristics: (1.) slopes in excess of
twenty percent; (2.) flood plain and/or wetlands; soils classified as having a high water table; (3.) soils
classified as highly erodible, subject to erosion or highly acidic; (4.) land incapable of meeting percolation
requirements.
CULVERT: A drain, ditch or conduit not incorporated in a closed system that carries storm drainage
water under a driveway, roadway, or railroad.
DEVELOPER: Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of such landowner,
who makes or caused to be made a subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The provisions for development included with an application for a subdivision
and/or land development including all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other
structure intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open
space, easements and public facilities. The phrase "development plan" shall mean the written and graphic
materials referred to in this definition.
DISTRICT OR ZONING DISTRICT: A portion of the territory of the Borough within which certain uniform
regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
DRAINAGE: (1) Surface water runoff, (2) The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during
and after construction or development.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: An easement required for the installation of storm water sewers or drainage
ditches, and/or required for the preservation or maintenance of a natural stream or water course or other
drainage facility.
DRIVEWAY: A privately owned and constructed vehicular access from an approved or public road into a
lot or parcel having a frontage on the road.
DWELLING: One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separated living
quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive
use of a single family maintaining a household.
Community Programs, Inc. 17
A. DWELLING. SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building arranged or used for occupancy by
one (1) family.
B. DWELLING. TWO FAMILY: A detached or semi-detached building where not more than
two (2) individual family or dwelling units are entirely separated by vertical walls or
horizontal floors, unpierced except by access to the outside or to a common cellar.
C. DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building containing three or more dwelling units entirely
separated by vertical walls or horizontal floors unpierced except by access to the outside
or to a common cellar.
EASEMENT: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by
the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
ENGINEER: A registered professional engineer licensed and registered as such by standards established
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
FINAL APPROVAL: Last official action of the Borough Council granting approval of a subdivision or land
development which has been granted pre approval after all conditions and requirements have been met
including as applicable, the installation of all required improvements or the posting of an improvement
bond to guarantee the installation of such.
FLOOD: A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas occurring from
the overflow of inland waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff and surface water from
any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of a one-hundred (100) Year Flood Plain outside of the floodway, as
delineated upon the most recent Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as published by the Federal Insurance
Administration.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAPS: The most recent map, as published by the Federal Insurance
Administration, which delineates the boundaries of the floodway and Flood Fringe of a 100 Year Flood
Plain.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS: The most recent map, as published by the Federal Insurance
Administration, which delineates areas of special Flood hazards, base flood elevations and applicable risk
premium zones of a one-hundred (100) Year Flood Plain.
FLOOD PLAIN (100 YEAR FLOOD PLAIN): Areas of land which are subject to inundation by waters of a
one-hundred (100) year flood. The source of delineating the boundaries of a one-hundred (100) year
flood plain shall be based upon the most maps of the Flood Insurance Administration.
FLOODPROOFING: A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and
structures subject to flooding for the reduction or elimination of flood damage to properties, water and
sanitary facilities and other utilities, structures and the contents of buildings.
FLOODWAY: The portion of a one-hundred (100) Year Flood Plain as delineated upon the most recent
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as published by the Federal Insurance Administration, which is designated
to carry and discharge water and flow of a one-hundred (100) Year Flood without increasing the water
surface elevation by more than one ( 1 ') foot at any given point.
GOVERNING BODY: The Summit Hill Borough Council.
Community Programs, Inc. 18
GRADE: The slope of a road, street or other public or private way, specified in percentage(%) terms.
GRADING: Any stripping, gutting, filing, stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled
condition.
HIGHWAY OCCUPANCY PERMIT: A permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
which authorizes access from a parcel of land onto a street or highway which is under the jurisdiction of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
HOMEOWNER'S ASSOCIATION: A community association, other than a condominium association which
is organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests in open space or
facilities.
IMPACT ANALYSIS: A study, which may be required by the Borough Council prior to preliminary or
conditional approval of a subdivision or land development to determine the potential impact of a proposed
development on activities, utilities, traffic generation and circulation surrounding land uses, community
facilities, environmental features, critical areas, the health, safety and welfare of residents and other
factors directly, indirectly or potentially affected. The landowner and/or applicant shall be responsible for
all costs related to the study and any and all reports and/or studies required by the Borough Council under
or which the context of the term "IMPACT ANALYSIS. The landowner and/or applicant shall also be
responsible to fully reimburse the Borough for any engineering and/or other consulting fees which are
incurred for the review of any studies or reports.
IMPROVEMENT BOND: Financial security which may be accepted by the Borough in lieu of a
requirement that certain improvements be completed by a developer before a plan is approved; including
a letter of irrevocable credit, a cash deposit, an escrow agreement or other collateral or surety agreements
as approved by the Borough Council upon the advise of their solicitor.
IMPROVEMENTS: Man-made physical additions, alterations and/or changes which becomes part of,
placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
LAND DEVELOPMENT: The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of
land for any purpose involving
A. A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively.
B. A single nonresidential building on a lot or lots with two (2) or more occupants regardless
of their tenure.
C. A single nonresidential building, designed or intended for a single occupant with a
minimum gross floor area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet excluding
agricultural buildings and/or structures.
D. Any nonresidential use of land, with or without structures, which encompasses five (5) or
more acres of land, including grading and/or the backfilling of land, earth moving activities,
and/or removal of vegetative cover. Agricultural uses of land and/or related agricultural
activities shall be specifically excluded.
E. the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
Community Programs, Inc. 19
F. the conversion of an single family detached dwelling or single family semidetached
dwellings into more than (3) residential units. Any conversion, described above, which
results in not more than (3) residential units shall be deemed as a land development if the
units are intended to be a condominium.
G. the development of a mobile home park or a campground or the expansion of
an existing mobile home park or a campground.
The development of any accessory building, including farm buildings on a lot or lots which are subordinate
to an existing principal building shall not be classified as a "Land Development".
LAND DEVELOPMENT : MAJOR: A land development which does not qualify or as a minor land
development.
LAND DEVELOPMENT: MINOR: A development of a parcel of land which contains not more than three
(3) detached single family residential structures, whether developed initially or cumulatively.
LAND OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contact is subject to any condition a lessee if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the Rights of the landowner, or other having a proprietary interest
in the land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of this Ordinance.
LAND SURVEYOR: A person who is licensed and registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
which qualifies said person to perform accurate field measurements including the field measurements
including the description and definition of land boundaries.
LOT: A designated parcel tract or area of land established by plan, subdivision, or as
otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA: The total area within the lot lines of a lot excluding any street rights- of-way.
LOT CORNER: A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two
parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
LOT COVERAGE: That portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and structures.
LOT DEPTH: The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE: The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line.
LOT INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private
street or any other public space.
LOT FRONT: The lot line separating a lot from a street right- of- way.
LOT REAR: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot fine, or
in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot,
parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot.
LOT. SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
Community Programs, Inc. 20
LOT. MINIMUM AREA OF: The smallest lot area established by the Zoning Ordinance on which a use or
structure may be located in a particular district.
LOT. THROUGH: A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do
not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth
along a line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable, single family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, and
contained in one unit or two units designated to be joined into one integral unit which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations
and constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility
connection and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is
leased or rented by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A site with required improvements and utilities for the long term placement of
mobile homes which may include services and facilities for the residents.
MULTIPHASE DEVELOPMENT: A development project that is to be constructed in stages, each stage
being capable of existing independently of the others.
MUNICIPALITY: Summit Hill Borough, Carbon County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL DRAINAGE FLOW: The pattern of surface and storm water drainage from a particular site
before the construction or installation of improvements or prior to any regrading,
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or
amend men! to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: A structure or building, the size, dimensions or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, but
which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of
the zoning district.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use or act which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of the
Zoning Ordinance, but which falls, by of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present
requirements of the zoning district.
OFFICIAL MAP: The Municipal Map adopted by Ordinance conclusively showing the location of the lines
of existing and proposed public streets, watercourses and public grounds including the widening
narrowing, extension, diminution, opening or closing of the same, for the entire Borough.
OFFICIAL SOIL MAP: Soil survey maps of Carbon County as provided by the Carbon County
Conservation District.
OFFICIAL SOILS INTERPRETATION: The written description of soil types and their characteristics and
accompanying maps based upon soil maps of Carbon County as provided by the Carbon County
Conservation District.
Community Programs, Inc. 21
ONE HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD: A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one
hundred (100) years and has a one (1%) percent chance of occurring each year.
ONE HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD PLAIN: The areas within the Borough that have a one (1%) percent
chance of being flooded in any given year based upon the most recent data and maps as provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration.
OPEN SPACE. COMMON: Land within or related to a development not individually owned or dedicated
for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the
development and may include complementary structures and improvements which are deemed
appropriate to the development.
ORDINANCE: The Summit Hill Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and any
amendments thereto.
PERSON: An individual partnership, organization, association, trust or corporation. When used in a
provision, "person" shall include the members of such partnership, the trustees of such trust and the
officers of such organization, association or corporation.
PLAN OR PLAT: The map or plan of a subdivision or land development:
A. Preliminary Plan: The preliminary drawings and any accompanying data, which accurately
shows the proposed layout of lots, streets and other information as required by this
Ordinance, with all such material being properly indicated in title as "Preliminary Plan".
B. Final Plan: A complete and exact plan prepared for official recording with the Carbon
County Recorder of deeds as required by this Ordinance with said plan being properly
indicated in title as 'Final Plan'.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of Summit Hill Borough.
PUBLIC HEARING: A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Borough Council, intended to
inform and obtain public comment prior to taking action on a particular subject.
PUBLIC NOTICE: A notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in Borough. Such notice shall state the lime and place of the hearing the particular and
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than thirty days and the
second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
RESUBDIVISION: A change in a map of an approved or an approved subdivision plat if such change
affects any street layout on such map or area reserved therein for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects
any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
RETAINING WALL: A structure constructed to hold back or support an earthen bank.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A defined and designated area for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, or alley, and
including both cartway and shoulders.
SANITARY SEWER: Pipes that carry only domestic or commercial sewage and into which storm, surface
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
Community Programs, Inc. 22
SEDIMENTATION: The depositing of earth or soil that has been transported from its site of origin by
water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a product of erosion.
SEPTIC SYSTEM: An underground system with a septic tank used for the decomposition of domestic
wastes, in which bacteria in the wastes decompose the organic matter, and the sludge settles to the
bottom. The effluent flows through drains into the ground. Sludge is pumped out at in regular intervals.
SEPTIC TANK: A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of sewage from a building sewer or
part thereof and is designed and constructed so as to permit settling of solids from this liquid, digestion of
the organic matter, and discharge of the liquid portion into a disposal area.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: CENTRAL: A means of collecting sanitary sewage from individual lots by
a system of pipes which transports the sewage to a central treatment and disposal system with all aspects
of the system being constructed and operated in compliance with all governing federal, state and Borough
regulations.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM ON-LOT: A structure designed to biochemically treat sewage within the
boundaries of an individual lot.
SITE: A plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN: A plan that indicates necessary land
treatment measures, as approved by the Carbon County Conservation District, designated to effectively
minimize soil erosion and sedimentation.
STORM SEWER: A pipe that collects and transports rainwater, surface water and other liquid waste
exclusive of sewage.
STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property, including avenue, place, way, parkway, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and alley.
A. Arterial: Arterials are designed to carry traffic and generally should not provide access to
land which would interfere with their primary traffic functions. They are also designed for
medium to heavy volumes at moderately high speeds with restricted vehicular access to
abutting properties.
B. Collector Street: Collector streets are, designed to carry a moderate volume of traffic
between local streets and arterials, and provide only limited vehicular access to the
abutting properties.
C. Local Street: Local streets provide direct access to abutting properties and provide routes
to collector streets.
D. Cul-De-Sac : A minor or local street with a single common ingress and egress and with a
turnaround located at its end.
E. Dead End Street: A street with a single common ingress and egress.
F. Limited Access: A street designed to carry a high volume of traffic and as an
expressway, freeway, highway or boulevard. Owners or occupants of abutting property
normally have no expressed or legal right to access to or from the same.
Community Programs, Inc. 23
SUBDIVISION: The division or redividing of a lot tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more
lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of
ownership or building or lot development. Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
A. Subdivision Major: Any subdivision which does not qualify or classify as a minor
subdivision.
B. Subdivision Minor: A subdivision of a parcel of land into not more than six (6) lots, which
has access, direct or indirect to an existing public street or road and does not require any
expenditures for the extension of any street or the extension or creation of any public
improvements, does not adversely affect the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property
and does not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan. Any proposed subdivision of a lot of
record, which resulted from a minor subdivision shall be classified as a major subdivision,
when the cumulative number of lots, from the original lot of record and/or any resulting lot,
exceeds six (6) lots within five (5) years from date of its approval under a minor
subdivision classification. Information stating the above requirement shall be included
upon all deeds for lots created under a minor subdivision.
Community Programs, Inc. 24
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED: The point at which, in the judgment of the municipal engineer, at least
ninety (90%) percent of those improvements required as a condition for final approval have been
completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used occupied or
operated for its intended use.
STRUCTURE: Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water,
whether or not affixed to the land.
WATERCOURSE: A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, creek, or channel or ditch for
collection and conveyance of water, whether natural or man made.
WATER TABLE: The upper surface of groundwater, or that level below which the soil is seasonally
saturated with water.
WETLANDS: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas. The term includes but is not limited to wetlands areas listed in the State Water Plan, The
United States Forest Service Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Management Plan and
any wetland area designated by a river basin commission.
YARD: An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest
lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically
provided in this Ordinance.
A. Front Yard: A space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front
lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line.
B. Rear Yard: A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal
building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest
point of the rear lot line.
C. Side Yard: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal
building and the side lot line measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest
point of the principal building.
ZONING OFFICER: An administrative officer authorized to administer the literal terms and provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Zoning Ordinance of Summit Hill Borough of August 71", 1995, as amended.
ZONING PERMIT: A permit issued indicating that a proposed use, building or structure is in accordance
with the Zoning Ordinance which authorizes an applicant to proceed with said use, building, or structure.
Community Programs, Inc. 25
ARTICLE Ill
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 301 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS
The submission and review process for subdivision and land development applications shall be in
accordance with the following:
a. Major Subdivision shall require the submission and approval of a preliminary plan and a
final plan. The Submission of a sketch plan prior to the formal submission of preliminary
plan shall be optional.
b. Minor Subdivision shall require the submission and approval of only a final plan in
accordance with the provisions as set forth in Article 5 of this Ordinance.
c. Major Land Development shall require the submission of and approval of a preliminary
plan and a final plan. The submission of a sketch plan prior to the formal submission of a
preliminary plan shall be optional.
d. Minor Land Development shall require the submission and approval of only a final plan in
accordance with the provisions as set forth in Article 4 of this Ordinance.
The owner of record and the applicant must attend the Borough Council meeting for the purpose of
presenting the plans and to respond to questions.
SECTION 302 SKETCH PLAN REVIEW
302.1 Prior to submitting a major subdivision application or a land Development application, the
applicant is advised but not required to submit a sketch plan to the Planning Commission and the
Borough Council. The submission and review of a sketch plan shall not constitute the filing of an
application for plan review and approval of a subdivision or land Development. The Planning
Commission and the Borough Council shall provide advise and comment on the necessary
requirements to achieve conformity to the standards and provisions of this Ordinance and other
related regulations.
302.2 The applicant submit an application and ten (10) copies of a sketch plan to the Administrator not
less than fourteen (14) days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the Borough Council, unless
waived by the discretion of the Borough Council.
302.3 The sketch plan shall be drawn to a scale of not greater than one (1") inch equals fifty (50') feet
and shall address:
a. All land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and /or develop.
b. All land within two hundred (200') feet of site's boundaries and the names of the subject
property owners based upon the records of the Carbon County Assessor's Office.
c. All existing and proposed streets, proposed lot sizes, natural features including
topographic contour's, sewage disposal, drainage, water supply and related utilities.
Community Programs, Inc. 26
Upon reviewing a sketch plan the Planning Commission and/or the Borough Council shall advise the
applicant of any initial changes and/or additions, if any, which should be addressed relative to the
proposed design, layout, character of the site.
SECTION 303 SUBMISSION OF PLANS AND APPLICATIONS
The applicant shall provide the following information to the Administrator not less than fourteen (14) days
prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of Planning Commission:
a. Twenty (20) prefolded copies of the plan (preliminary or final);
b. Twenty (20) prefolded copies of construction plans (if applicable);
c. A completed subdivision or land development application with signatures and nineteen
( 19) copies of the same.
d. A completed Planning Module, if applicable, as required by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection and five copies of the same.
SECTION 304 DISTRIBUTION OF PLANS
304.1 The Administrator shall provide each member of the and the Borough Council with a copy of the
complete set of plans (preliminary or final), a copy of the subdivision application and a copy of the
DER Planning Module.
304.2 The Administrator, or his/her designee, shall provide, as applicable, a copy of the complete set of
plans (preliminary or final), a copy of the application and a copy of the DER Module, to the
following agencies and officials for review, comment and approval as applicable:
a. The Carbon County Planning Commission. (9)
b. The Borough Zoning Officer. (1)
c. The Borough Engineer and/or Planning Consultant. (1)
d. The Solicitor to the Borough Council (1)
e. The Borough Planning Commission Solicitor. ( 1)
f The Municipal Sanitary Authority (if applicable)
g. The Summit Hill Borough Council
304.4 The applicant shall be responsible to insure that copies of the plan and supporting materials are
provided to all applicable utility companies intended to service the site.
304.5 The applicant shall pay any applicable fees related to the review and inspection by other agencies
and parties provided under Section 304.3.
Community Programs, Inc. 27
SECTION 305 CARBON COUNTY REVIEW
The Summit Hill Borough Council shall not approve any subdivision or land development plan or
application until a report, containing the comments and recommendation of the Carbon County Planning
Commission is received or until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date said plans and application
were forwarded to the Carbon County Planning Commission. The applicant shall pay all review fees
required by the Carbon County Planning Commission.
SECTION 306 PUBLIC HEARING
The Borough Council, at its discretion, may hold a public hearing prior to rendering a decision on any plan
(preliminary or final)
SECTION 307 INSTALLATION OR GUARANTEE OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Prior to approving the final plan of a major subdivision or a major land development in
which the approval was conditioned upon specific improvements, the Borough Council shall require the
following of the applicant:
(a) The installation of all required improvements in accordance with the design standards and
specifications of this Ordinance and all applicable terms and conditions in granting
approval.
(b) Provision of a form of financial security, acceptable by the Borough Council, which
assures and guarantees the subsequent installation of all required improvements in
accordance with the design standards and specifications of this Ordinance and all
applicable terms and Conditions in granting approval.
SECTION 308 PROCEDURAL METHODS IN RENDERING DECISIONS
308.1 The Borough Council shall approve or reject a submitted plan (preliminary or final) within ninety
(90) days following the date of the Planning Commissions regular meeting at which said plan is
first reviewed. Should the regular meeting dale occur more than thirty (30) days following the date
of submission of said plan, the ninety (90) day period shall be measured from the thirtieth (30th)
day following the date on which the plan was properly submitted to the Borough.
308.2 The Borough Council shall communicate its decision to the applicant in writing either by delivery in
person or by mail to applicant's last known address not later than fifteen ( 15) days following the
decision
308.3 When an application and plan (preliminary or final) is not approved as submitted, the Borough
Council decision shall specify the defects found in such, and describe the requirements which
have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied
upon.
308.4 In granting approval to a plan (preliminary or final) which is subject to specific conditions, the
Borough Council shall include in their notification that the applicant may notify the Borough
Council of his refusal to accept all said conditions in writing. In such cases, the Borough Council
conditional approval shall be deemed rescinded upon receipt of the applicant's written
Community Programs, Inc. 28
notification. In the event the applicant fails to notify the Borough Council of his refusal to accept
all said conditions within the thirty day time period, all conditions shall stand granted and deemed
accepted by the applicant
308.5 As prescribed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, failure of
the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate said decision to the applicant as set
forth in this section shall be deemed approval of the plan as submitted, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of communication of
the decision.
SECTION 309 WITHDRAWAL AND/OR REVISIONS TO SUBMITTED PLANS
309.1 Until a submission is approved or rejected by the Borough Council, the applicant may withdraw
the submission and submit a revised plan following the submission and review procedures which
apply to the plan. If a revised plan is submitted within 120 days from the date of withdrawing said
plan no additional submission fee shall be charged by the Borough for the first or second revision.
Failure to resubmit a revised plan within said period of lime, or a third revision and any
subsequent revision shall be treated as a new revision for which a new submission fee shall be
required. No additional fee shall be charged for plan revisions which are directed by the Borough
Council. Should an applicant wish to withdraw a plan under review and consideration by the
Borough Council, notice of withdrawal shall be in writing and shall include a statement that the
ninety (90) day time limitation for the Borough Council to render a decision shall not include the
period of time which the plan is withdrawn.
309.2 All revised plans shall be accompanied by an itemized listing of revisions to the plans and the
basis for such revisions. Such information shall be prepared and certified by a professional
engineer.
309.3 Any revised plan may be resubmitted to the Carbon County Planning Commission or to any other
party noted within Section 304.3 of this Ordinance if the Borough Council renders a determination
that the scope of the revisions are substantial in nature to warrant any additional review. If such a
determination is rendered, the applicant shall be responsible for the applicable required fees.
SECTION 310 RECORDING OF FINAL PLAN
310.1 The applicant shall record the final plan as approved by the Borough Council in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Carbon County within thirty (30) days of such final approval unless an
extension has been granted in writing by the Borough Council. Failure by the applicant to record
the final plan within the thirty (30) days, or an approved extension of the time period, will result in
the Borough Council' approval becoming null and void. The final plan for recording shall comprise
of all plans submitted for final approval.
310.2 A final plan shall not be submitted for recording within the Recorder Of Deeds Office unless it
bears the signature of the Borough Council' Chairman and Secretary and bears the appropriate
signature and/or seal that it has been reviewed by the Carbon County Planning Commission.
310.3 Within fourteen (14) days from the date on which the final plan is recorded, the applicant shall
furnish to the Administrator a copy of a certificate or receipt attesting to the recording of the final
plan in the Recorder of Deeds Office.
Community Programs, Inc. 29
SECTION 311 PHASING MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLANS
Prior to granting final approval of a major subdivision plan, the Borough Council may permit the plan to be
divided into two or more sections or phases and may impose such conditions upon the filing of the
sections as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the plan. The Borough Council
may require that the financial security be in such amount as is commensurate with the section or sections
of the plan to be filed and may defer the remaining required financial security principal amount until the
remaining sections of the plan are offered for filing. The developer may also file in writing irrevocable
offers to dedicated streets and public improvements in the sections offered to be filed such sections,
subject to any conditions imposed by the Borough Council shall be granted concurrently with final
approval of the plan.
Community Programs, Inc. 30
ARTICLE IV
PRELIMINARY PLAN
SECTION 401 INITIAL REVIEW
The Borough Council shall review the Preliminary Plan to determine its completeness with regard to the
standards, provisions, and requirements of this Ordinance. Any submission which is found to be
incomplete shall be deemed to be invalid. The Borough Council shall notify the applicant in writing as to
the nature and type of additional information which the applicant must submit.
SECTION 402 REVIEW BY CARBON COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
The Borough Council shall not approve a Preliminary Plan until a report is received from the Carbon
County Planning Commission or until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date it was forwarded to
the Carbon County Planning Commission.
SECTION 403 REVIEW AND APPROVAL/DISAPPROVAL OF PLAN
The Borough Council shall consider all official reports, comments and recommendations as provided in
Section 304.3 of this Ordinance. The Borough Council shall render a decision in conformance with
Section 308 of this Ordinance. The following constitutes the type of action the Borough Council may take:
(a) The Borough Council may disapprove the Preliminary Plan, in which case it shall specify
the defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been
met and shall in each case, cite the provisions of this Ordinance relied upon.
(b) The Borough Council may conditionally approve the Preliminary Plan, in which case it
shall specify all additional information and/or changes needed, describing the
requirements that have not been met, citing each case, the provisions of this Ordinance
winch were relied upon and/or the basis for additional information and/or changes. The
additional information or changes shall be required prior to further consideration of the
Preliminary Plan or the submission of the Final Plan. In granting preliminary approval,
the Borough Council shall include in their notification that the applicant, within thirty (30)
days from the date of conditional approval may notify the Borough Council of his refusal to
accept all said conditions in writing. In such cases the Borough Council's conditional
approval shall be deemed rescinded upon receipt of the applicant's written notification. In
the event that the applicant fails to notify the Borough Council of his refusal to accept all
said conditions within thirty (30) days from the date of conditional approval all conditions
shall stand granted and deemed accepted by the applicant.
Community Programs, Inc. 31
(c) The Borough Council may approve the Preliminary Plan. Such approval shall constitute
approval of the subdivision or land development as to the character and intenstty of
Development, the arrangement and approximate dimensions of streets, lots, and other
planned features. The approval binds the applicant to proceed with the installation of the
required improvements and/or to arrange for a form of financial security to cover
installation of improvements and to prepare the Final Plan. Approval of the Preliminary
Plan does not authorize the sale of lots, property or the recording of the Preliminary Plan.
The Borough Council shall render a decision in conformance with Section 308 of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 404 PRELIMINARY PLAN DRAFTING STANDARDS
404.1 The Preliminary Plan of a proposed subdivision or land development shall be clearly and legibly
drawn to a scale not greater than:
(a) one (1 ") inch equals fifty (50') feet for a property in excess of two (2) acres.
(b) one (1") inch equals twenty (20') feet for a property equal to or less than two (2) acres.
404.2 The original drawing, and all submitted prints thereof shall be made on a sheet size of twenty-four
(24") inches by thirty (36") inches.
404.3 All dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal parts thereof, and bearings in degree minutes and
seconds.
404.4 If the preliminary plan requires more than one ( 1) sheet, a key diagram showing relative location
of the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet and appropriately labeled with match lines.
404.5 Preliminary Plans shall be so prepared and shall bear an adequate legend to indicate clearly
which features are existing and which are proposed.
SECTION 405 PRELIMINARY PLAN - EXISTING CONDITIONS
The Preliminary Plan shall contain the following information:
405.1 The name and address of record owner, with source of title by deed, book and page
number and certification of ownership which carries a Notary Seal.
405.2 Name and address of applicant if different from owner.
405.3 Name of proposed subdivision or land development labeled as the Preliminary Plan.
405.4 Name and address of registered engineer, or registered land surveyor, responsible for the
subdivision plan or land development plan, including certification of the accuracy of the plan and
its conformance to the provisions of this Ordinance.
405.5 North point, graphic scale, and date including the month day and year that the original drawing
was completed and the month day and year that the original drawing was revised for each
revision.
Community Programs, Inc. 32
405.6 Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided, showing bearings and distances, with not
less than the nearest ten (10) seconds and distances to the nearest one hundredth (.01) of a foot.
The total size of the properly shall be listed in both acreage and square feet.
405.7 The names of all adjoining landowners, including block and lot numbers from the Carbon County
Assessors Office.
405.8 All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not constructed) on or abutting the
tract, including names, right-of-way widths, cartway (pavement) widths and approximate grades.
405.9 All existing sewer lines, water lines, fire hydrants, utility transmission lines, utility easements, or
utility right-of-ways, culverts, storm drains, bridges, railroad right-of-ways and other significant
man made features within the proposed subdivision or land development.
405.10 All existing buildings or structures within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision or land
development
405.11 The Zoning District or Districts delineated upon the plan, along with the required building setback
line and/or the proposed placement of each building shall be shown, and where corner lots are
involved, the required setback lines on both streets shall be shown.
405.12 Existing contour lines at vertical intervals of not greater than five (5) feet when existing slopes are
five (5 %) percent or greater. Existing contour lines at vertical intervals of not greater than ten
(10) feet when existing slopes are less than five (5%) percent.
405.13 Existing watercourses, streams, ponds, wetlands, flood plain and/or flood prone areas, wooded
areas, tree masses and rock outcrops within the proposed subdivision or land development.
405.14 With regard to wetlands, all plans must specifically address the subject of as to whether any
wetlands are located upon the site. If no wetlands are located within the site, a certification ofthe
absence of wetlands shall be so noted upon the plan, which is certified by a person with
appropriate training and experience in the identification of wetlands. If wetlands are located within
the site, a delineation of all wetlands boundaries, upon the site shall be provided by a person with
appropriate training and experience in the identification of wetlands. The inclusion of wetlands
upon the site shall require a complete survey, delineation and total acreage of said wetlands
boundaries included upon the plan.
405.15 A location map at a scale of not greater than one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet,
indicating the relation of the site to its geographic proximity within the municipality.
SECTION 406 PRELIMINARY PLANS - PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT
The Preliminary Plans shall contain and include the following information:
406.1 Lot layout and related features which shall indicate and provide:
(a) the total number of lots proposed for the site, with identification numbers;
(b) the dimensions and area of all lots, expressed in either square feet or acres;
Community Programs, Inc. 33
(c) the building setbacks for all lots along each street, or in the case of a land development,
the proposed placement of each building along each street, and the proposed use of each
building.
(d) proposed open space, parks, playgrounds, or recreations facilities, with any governing
conditions thereof.
(e) copies of proposed deed restrictions, easements, and protective covenants on the plan.
(f) Proposed contour lines at vertical intervals of five (5) feet of the entire site;
(g) location, width and purpose of proposed easements and utility right-of-way,
(h) In the case of wetlands, total acreage of any such area proposed to be disturbed.
406.2 Street and right-of-way layout which shall indicate and/or provide:
(a) the location of all proposed streets and existing streets (public and private) within the site
and abutting or adjoining the site;
(b) the location, right-of-way, and cartway of all proposed streets, with a statement of any
condition governing their use and the right-of- way and cartway of any existing streets
(public or private) to which the proposed street will intersect.
(c) Suggested street names, in accordance with Section 806 of this Ordinance, the location
of street signs in accordance with Section 808 of this Ordinance and the location of traffic
control signs in accordance with Section 809 of this Ordinance;
( d) the beginning and end point of proposed street construction;
(e) location, width, and purpose of proposed easements and utility right-of-way
(f) the location of sidewalks
406.3 A subdivision and/or land development when being serviced by sanitary sewers, shall be
connected to public sewers. The developer shall provide a letter of commitment from the
Municipal Sanitary Authority providing notice that said Authority can adequately serve the
proposed subdivision or land development and accept the conveyance of sewage for treatment
and disposal including any conditions required for the provision of service. If applicable, written
approval from any adjoining municipality regarding the conveyance of sewage into their system to
access intended conveyance of sewage to facilities of the Municipal Sanitary Authority shall also
be required. The following information shall be provided upon the plan.
1. the layout size and material of sanitary sewers upon the site;
2. location of manholes with invert elevation of flow line and grade at the top of each
manhole;
3. location of laterals;
Community Programs, Inc. 34
A subdivision and/or land development to be serviced by on lot sewage disposal shall provide the
following information:
1. location of soil percolation test sites;
2. location and extent of various soil types within the site with DER definitions for each;
3. proposed or typical location of building and/or structure with proposed location of walls if
applicable;
4. copy of the applicable report and findings of the Borough's Sewage Enforcement Officer.
406.4 A subdivision and/or land development when being serviced by a centralized water system shall
indicate and/or provide the following:
(a) if to be served by an existing water company or authority, a letter from the same indicate
said company or authority can adequately serve the proposed subdivision or land
development, including any conditions required for the provision of service;
(b) location and size of all water lines;
(c) location of fire hydrants.
A subdivision on and/or land &development when individual lots are serviced by individual wells shall
indicate the location of the subject wells on the plans.
406.5 Storm drainage shall indicate and/or provide:
(a) The location, size and material of all storm drainage facilities;
(b) watershed areas for each drainage facility or swale.
406.6 A letter from the applicable public utility company which provides electric service and/or gas
service to the Borough, indicating said company can and shall adequately serve the proposed
subdivision or land development including any conditions required for the provision of service.
SECTION 407 ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED WITH PRELIMINARY PLAN
The following materials and information shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plan:
407.1 Proof of ownership including a copy of the existing deed.
407.2 Preliminary Plan Application and required fee.
407.3 The required fee for Carbon County Planning Commission review.
407.4 A copy of the application for a Highway Occupancy Permit if applicable, as required by Summit
Hill Borough, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and/or the Carbon County Road and
Bridge Department.
407.5 Construction plans which include, where applicable, preliminary design, preliminary profiles,
typical cross-sections and specifications for the construction or installation of streets, sidewalks,
Community Programs, Inc. 35
sanitary sewers, sewage treatment facilities, storm drainage facilities, water lines, bridges or
culverts.
(a) Cross-sections for proposed streets and sidewalks shall be provided at intervals of fifty
(50') feet and at intersections and the limits of work.
(b) Engineering design of proposed bridges or culverts shall be prepared in conformance
with the latest Pennsylvania Department of Transportation design manuals.
(c) Engineering design of a proposed central sewage system and/or central water
supply and distribution system shall be accompanied by all permit applications for all
respective utilities.
407.6 Any offers of dedication of proposed improvements, signed by the owner of the property and
properly notarized
407.7 A Sewage Planning Module and all accompanying data as required by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
407.8 A copy of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, application and related information as
required by the Carbon County Conservation District.
407.9 Stormwater management plans including drawings of present and proposed contours, stormwater
runoff data and facilities for stormwater drainage.
407.10 In the case of delineation of wetlands, the wetland boundaries as provided by the developer, must
be verified by either the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection based upon a jurisdictional determination of said agencies.
407.11 Estimated costs by item for required improvements in accordance with Section 703 of this
Ordinance.
407.12 Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, including but not limited to
any Impact Analysis, as defined in Article 2 of this Ordinance.
407.13 An executed written agreement under which the applicant agrees to fully reimburse the Borough
for any and all consulting fees incurred resulting from the review of plans, applications and
supporting information, data and/or reports or studies. In providing for such an agreement, the
Borough Council, at its discretion, may require the applicant to establish an escrow account in a
manner arranged for the Borough's withdrawal of funds for the payment of consulting fees
incurred by the Borough.
Community Programs, Inc. 36
ARTICLEV
FINAL PLAN
SECTION 501 SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURE
501.1 The Borough Council shall review the Final Plan to determine its completeness including, but not
limited to, conformance with the standards and data as set forth in Article 4 and any changes or
modifications required by the Borough Council as a condition of granting approval of the
Preliminary Plan
501.2 The applicant shall submit the Final Plan within one (1) year from the date of the approval of the
Preliminary Plan by the Borough Council, unless an extension in writing has been approved by the
Borough Council. Failure to comply with the one (1) year time requirement shall render the
Preliminary Plan and any accompanying approval as null and void thus requiring a new
submission of the Preliminary Plan.
SECTION 502 REVIEW AND APPROVAL/DISAPPROVAL OF PLAN
The Borough Council shall consider the reports, comments and recommendations as provided in Section
304.3 of this Ordinance. The Borough Council shall render a decision in conformance with Section 308 of
this Ordinance. The following constitutes the type of action the Borough Council may take:
a. The Borough Council may disapprove the Final Plan in which case ii shall specify the
defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been met
and shall in each case, cite the provisions of this Ordinance relied upon.
b. The Borough Council may conditionally approve, the Final Plan, in which case ii shall
specify all additional information and/or changes needed, describing the requirements
and/or conditions of approval the Preliminary Plan that have not been met, citing in each
case, the provisions of this Ordinance which were relied upon and/or the basis for
additional information and/or changes. The additional information or changes shall be
required prior to further consideration of the Final Plan. In granting conditional approval of
the Final Plan, the Borough Council shall include in their notification that the applicant,
within thirty (30) days from the dale of conditional approval, may notify the Borough
Council of his refusal to accept all said conditions in writing. In such cases, the Borough
Council conditional approval shall be deemed rescinded upon receipt of the applicants
written notification. In the event that the applicant fails to notify the Borough Council of his
refusal to accept all said conditions within thirty (30) days from the date of conditional
approval, all conditions shall stand granted and deemed accepted by the applicant.
c. The Borough Council may approve the final Plan as submitted. Such by the Borough
Council shall allow the applicant to file said Final Plan with the Carbon County Recorder
of Deeds Office.
Community Programs, Inc. 37
SECTION 503 FINAL PLAN DRAFTING STANDARDS
The Final Plan of a proposed subdivision or land development shall be at a scale not greater than:
(a) one (1") inch equals fifty (50') feet for a property in excess of two (2) acres.
(b) one ( 1 ") inch equals twenty (20') feet for a property equal to or less than two (2) acres.
The original drawing and all submitted prints thereof shall be made on a sheet size of twenty-four (24")
inches by thirty-six (36") inches.
SECTION 504 FINAL PLAN REQUIREMENTS
The Final Plan shall include all additional information and any changes required by the Borough Council in
granting approval of the Preliminary Plan. It shall not be necessary to resubmit all supporting data
required under the Preliminary Plan, provided there have been no changes. In the event of any changes,
the procedures and requirements outlined in Section 308 of this Ordinance shall apply. The following
additional information shall be included on the Final Plan:
504.1 Drawings and/or plans shall be titled "Final Plan".
504.2 An accurate field boundary survey of the entire site which shall be balanced and close with an
error of closure not to exceed one (1 ')foot in five thousand (5,000') feet
504.3 The location and material of all permanent monuments and lot markers.
504.4 Written certification by the responsible land surveyor, which attests to the accuracy of the survey
and compliance with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
504.5 A three (3") inch by five (5") inch blocked space shall be provided on the Final Plan for the
signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Borough Council indicating the Borough Council'
approval of the Final Plan and dale of the same.
A separate three (3") inch by five (5") inch blocked space shall also be provided on the Final Plan
for the appropriate signature and/or seal which indicates compliance with required review
procedure by the Carbon County Planning Commission.
504.6 The latest source of title to the property as shown by deed, page number and book of the Carbon
County Recorder of Deeds Office.
504.7 The exact dimensions of all streets, including right-of-way and cartway-, lot lines, areas and
distances; utility and other easements; and all land to be dedicated to public use.
504.8 All lot lines shall be completely dimensioned in feet if straight, and if curved, by designating length
of arc and radius (in feel) and central angle (in degrees, minutes and seconds). All internal angles
within the lots shall be designated to the closest second.
504.9 The Zoning District or Districts, delineated upon the Plan, along with the required building setback
line and/or the proposed placement of each building shall be shown, and where corner lots are
involved, the setback lines on both streets shall be shown.
Community Programs, Inc. 38
504.10 If applicable, the number of the approved Highway Occupancy Permits (Borough, State or
County) and date of issuance or the notation that deed restrictions prohibit development or
improvements to the site or parcels to be created thereunder until the appropriate Highway
Occupancy Permit is secured.
504.11 A space shall be provided on the lower edge of the Final Plan for acknowledgment of receipt and
recording of the plan by the Carbon County Recorder of deeds Office.
SECTION 505 ADDITIONAL MATERIAL - SUBMITTED WITH FINAL PLAN
The following material and information shall be submitted with the Final Plan:
505.1 Certification of ownership, certification of Plan's compliance with all applicable terms and
conditions required by this Ordinance and/or the Borough Council and any offer of dedication, if
applicable, signed by the owner of the property and notarized.
505.2 Final application and required fee.
505.3 If applicable, a copy of the Highway Occupancy Permit as required by Summit Hill Borough, the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and/or the Carbon County Road and Bridge
Department, or the deed restriction that prohibits development or improvements to the site or
parcels to be created thereunder until the appropriate Highway Occupancy Permit is secured.
505.4 Copies offinal deed restrictions, those existing and those to be included upon recording, if any.
505.5 All final covenants running with the land governing the reservation and maintenance of dedicated
or undedicated land or open space.
505.6 Written certification from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection approving the
required Planning Module and any supporting data.
505.7 Written certification from the Carbon County Conservation District approving the Soils Erosion and
Sedimentation control Plan.
505.8 Final construction plans and subsequent "as built" drawings of all sanitary sewer, water
distribution and storm drainage systems, showing their exact location, size and invert elevations;
the location of all manholes, inlets and culverts and final profiles, cross- sections and
specifications for proposed streets, sidewalks, sanitary sewers, water distribution systems and
storm drainage systems, with written certification from the applicant's engineer which notes that
the above plans and/or drawings are in compliance with the applicable governing design
standards and/or have been installed in compliance with said plans or drawings. The submission
of the above referenced "as built" drawings shall precede the release of any remaining funds
placed as a financial security by the developer.
Community Programs, Inc. 39
505.9 If any streets are not offered for dedication to public use, the applicant shall submit and record
with the plan a copy of the agreement made and executed on behalf of the applicant, including his
heirs or assigns, subject to review by the Borough's Solicitor and approval by the Borough
Council, establishing the conditions under which the streets may be later offered for dedication.
Said conditions shall include, although not limited to, that the subject streets shall conform to the
Borough's design specifications at such time the offer of dedication is made or that the owners of
the lots within the subject subdivision shall include with their offer of dedication sufficient funds, as
estimated by the Borough Engineer, to provide the needed improvements required for
conformance to the Borough's design specifications at the time of such dedication.
505.10 An agreement for any streets not offered for dedication, stating who shall be responsible for the
improvements and maintenance of such streets. If a homeowners association is deemed to be
responsible, such association must be legally organized prior to approval of the Final Plan.
505.11 A financial security, in accordance with Section 703 of this Ordinance, subject to the approval by
the Borough Council, for the installation of required improvements, unless all such improvements
are installed and completed to design specifications prior to Final Plan approval.
505.12 A financial security, for the maintenance of improvements, in accordance with Section 710 of this
Ordinance.
505.13 If applicable, written certification from the Municipal Sanitary Authority granting final approval for
the acceptance of the conveyance of sewage for treatment and disposal from the proposed
subdivision and/or land development.
505.14 Written certification from the appropriate public utility company which authorizes and approves the
provision of water, gas and electrical service for the proposed subdivision and/or land
development.
505.15 All required permits and/or approvals from either the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for site development activities which
affects delineated wetlands.
505.16 The cost of all consulting fees and costs incurred by the Borough for the review of the application,
plan and supporting information, data and/or reports or studies, including but not limited to, any
required impact analysis and site inspections to insure compliance with the terms of approval and
required improvements.
SECTION 506 RECORDING OF PLAN
The applicant shall record the Final Plan in accordance with the requirements as set forth in
Section 310 of this Ordinance.
Community Programs, Inc. 40
ARTICLE VI
MINOR SUBDIVISION/LAND DEVELOPMENT
SECTION 601 ONLY FINAL PLAN REQUIRED
The classification of a proposed subdivision as a "Minor Subdivision" shall only require the submission,
review and approval of only a Final Plan. A land development classified as a "Minor Land Development"
shall only require the submission, review and approval of only a Final Plan. The classification shall be
based upon the definitions of terms "Minor Subdivision" and "Minor Land Development" as provided for
under Article 2 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 602 SUBMISSION PROCEDURE
The submission procedure for a Minor Subdivision or Minor Land Development shall be in accordance
with Section 303 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 603 DISTRIBUTION OF PLAN
The distribution of a Minor Subdivision Plan or Minor Land Development Plan shall be in accordance with
Section 304 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 604 DRAFTING STANDARDS FOR MINOR PLANS
604.1 The Final Plan for a proposed Minor Subdivision or Minor Land Development shall be clearly and
legibly drawn to a scale not greater than:
(a) one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet for a property in excess of two (2) acres.
(b) one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet for a property equal to or less than two (2) acres.
604.2 The original drawing, and all submitted prints thereof shall be made on a sheet size of twenty-four
(24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches.
SECTION 605 REQUIREMENTS FOR MINOR PLANS
The Final Plan shall be noted as "Minor Subdivision Final Plan" or "Minor Land Development- Final Plan"
and contain the following information:
605.1 Name and address of record owner, including certification of ownership which carries a Notarial
Seal.
605.2 The name and address of the applicant, if different from owner.
605.3 Name of proposed subdivision or land development.
605.4 Name and address of registered engineer and/or registered land surveyor, responsible for the
subdivision plan or land development plan, including certification of the accuracy of the plan for an
error of closure not to exceed one (1) foot in five thousand (5,000) feet and its conformance to the
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
Community Programs, Inc. 41
605.5 North point, graphic scale and date, including the month, day and year that the original drawing
was completed and the month, day and year that the original drawing was revised for each
revision.
605.6 Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided and/or developed, showing bearings and
distances, and total size of the property expressed in acreage and square feet.
605.7 The total number of proposed lots, within a subdivision, with identification numbers for each or for
a land development, the location of buildings upon the lot with identification numbers for each.
605.8 The dimensions and area of all lots, expressed in both square feet and acres.
605.9 The Zoning District of Districts, delineated upon the Plan, along with the required building setback
line and/or the proposed placement of each building shall be shown, and where corner lots are
involved, the setback lines on both streets shall be shown.
605.10 The required yard setbacks, as provided in the Zoning Ordinance, for all lots along each street or
in the case of a land development, the proposed placement of each building along each street and
the proposed use of each building.
605.11 The location and dimensions of all existing structures, including accessory structures and offstreet
parking areas upon the subject property.
605.12 The distance of all existing structures to lot lines, front, rear and side, which will result upon
approval of the plan.
605.13 The names of all adjoining property owners, including block and lot numbers from the Carbon
County Assessors Office.
605.14 All existing streets, public or private, including streets of record (recorded but not constructed) on
or abutting the subject tract, including their names and right-of-way widths.
605.15 All existing sewer lines, water lines, fire hydrants, utility transmission lines, utility easements or
right-of-ways, culverts, storm drains, bridges, railroad right-of-ways, and other significant manmade
features located within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision or land development.
605.16 Existing watercourses, streams, ponds, wetlands, flood plain and/or flood prone areas, wooded
areas, tree masses and rock outcrops within the proposed subdivision or land development.
605.17 With regard to wetlands, all plans must specifically address the subject of as to whether any
wetlands are located upon the site. If no wetlands are located within the site, a certification of the
absence of wetlands shall be so noted upon the plan, which is certified by a person with
appropriate training and experience in the identification of wetlands. If wetlands are located within
the site, a delineation of all wetlands boundaries, upon the site shall be provided by a person with
appropriate training and experience in the identification of wetlands. The inclusion of wetlands
upon the site shall require a complete survey, delineation and total acreage of said wetlands
boundaries included upon the plans. The total acreage of any wetlands area proposed to be
disturbed shall also be indicated upon the plans.
Community Programs, Inc. 42
605.18 Existing contour lines a vertical intervals of not greater than five (5) feet, when existing slopes are
five (5) percent or greater. Existing contour lines at vertical intervals of not greater than ten (10)
feet, when existing slopes are less than five (5) percent.
605.19 If the lots or development are to be serviced by individual on-lot sewage disposal:
(a) the location of soil percolation test sites.
(b) location and extent of various soil types within the site with DEP definitions for each.
(c) proposed or typical location of building and/or structure with proposed location of wells, if
applicable;
(d) copy of the applicable report and findings of the Borough's Sewage Enforcement Officer.
605.20 All easements, existing and/or proposed, including their location, dimensions and purpose.
SECTION 606 INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED WITH PLAN
The following information, as applicable shall be submitted with the Final Plan of a Minor Subdivision or
Minor Land Development.
(a) Proof of ownership including a copy of the existing deed.
(b) Application for Minor Subdivision Plan or Minor Land Development Plan, and the required
fee.
(c) Required fee for Carbon County Planning Commission review.
(d) If applicable, an approved Highway Occupancy permit, as required by Summit Hill
Borough, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and/or the Carbon County
Bridge Department or a deed restriction that prohibits development or improvements to
the site or parcels to be created thereunder until the appropriate Highway Occupancy
Permit is secured.
(e) If applicable, a letter of commitment from the Municipal Sanitary Authority that said
Authority can and shall adequately serve the proposed subdivision or land development
and accept the conveyance of sewage for treatment and disposal, including any
conditions required for the provision of service.
(f) Written certification from the appropriate public utility company which authorizes and
approves the provision of water, gas and electrical service for the proposed subdivision
and/or land development, including any conditions required for the provision of service.
(g) If applicable, the Sewage Enforcement Officer's report and findings regarding percolation
testing of the site for suitability of the site for any proposed on-lot sewage system as
required by DEP.
Community Programs, Inc. 43
(h) Copies of deed restrictions, those existing, and those to be included upon recording of
plan.
(I) Copies of description of easements, existing easements of record and any proposed
easements to be included upon recording of plan.
U) In the case of delineation of wetlands, the wetland boundaries, as provided by the
developer, must be verified by either the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection based upon a jurisdictional
determination of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for site development activities which affects delineated
wetlands.
(k) If applicable, an appropriate Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, approved by
the Carbon County Conservation District.
(I) An appropriate Planning Module for Land Development, approved by the DEP.
(m) Any other information as required by the Planning Commission.
(n) The cost of all consulting fees incurred by the Borough for the review of the application,
plans and supporting information, data and/or reports or studies, including but not limited
to, any required Impact Analysis and the site inspections of the property to insure
compliance with the terms of approval and required improvements.
SECTION 607 RECORDING OF PLAN
The applicant shall record the Final Plan in accordance with the requirements as set forth in Section 310
of the Ordinance. A space shall be provided on the lower edge of the Final Plan for acknowledgment of
receipt and recording of the plan by the Carbon County Recorder of deeds Office.
Community Programs, Inc. 44
ARTICLE VII
ASSURANCES FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 701 INSTALLATION OR GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS
No plan shall be granted final approval until the applicant either:
a. Installs all required improvements in accordance with the terms of approval and the
applicable design standards of said improvements.
b. Posts a form of financial security , acceptable to the Borough Council, which shall be of
sufficient amount to fully cover the costs of all required improvements in accordance with
the terms of approval and the applicable design standards of said improvements. The
Borough Council shall retain sole discretion in all matters and decisions related to the
acceptance and/or approval of the posting of any financial security.
SECTION 702 TYPES OF FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
702.1 A financial guarantee which shall be deemed as acceptable financial security for the purposes of
this Ordinance shall include:
a. An unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit with authorization for drawing upon by the
Borough in the event of default or failure by the developer or applicant to complete the
installation of required improvements.
b. A restrictive escrow account
c. Other types of financial security which the Borough may approve, which approval shall not
be unreasonably withheld.
702.2 Such financial security shall be with a lending institution which is chartered by he Federal
Government or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or with a bonding company which is legally
authorized to conduct such business within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SECTION 703 REVIEW BY SOLICITOR
When an applicant proposes to provide a financial security, said financial security shall be submitted to the
Borough Council and their Solicitor for review not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the public meeting
of the Borough Council at which the acceptance and/or approval of proposed financial security will be
considered by the Borough Council.
SECTION 704 AMOUNT OF FINANCIAL SECURITY
The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion or required improvements shall be equal
to one hundred ten (110%) percent of the cost of completion, estimated as of ninety days following the
scheduled completion dale. The amount of the required financial security shall be based upon a written
estimated cost of completion of required improvements, submitted by the developer or applicant, and
prepare by a professional engineer, licensed as such by the Commonwealth.
Community Programs, Inc. 45
Said engineer shall certify in writing that his estimated cost for the completion of the required
improvements is a fair and reasonable estimate. The Borough Council, upon the recommendation of the
Borough Engineer, may for good cause shown, refuse to accept the developer's estimated cost. In cases
where the Borough and the developer or applicant are unable to agree on an estimate, then the estimate
shall be recalculated and recertified by another licensed professional engineer, mutually accepted by the
Borough and the developer or applicant. The estimate certified by the third party engineer, being
presumed fair and reasonable, shall be deemed the final estimate. In the event that the third party
engineer is chosen, the cost of his services shall be paid equally by the Borough and the developer or
applicant.
SECTION 705 REQUIRED TIME PERIOD FOR COMPLETION
705.1 The financial security shall provide for, and secure to the public the completion of the required
improvements within one (1) year of the date fixed on the Final Plan for the completion of such
improvements.
705.2 If the applicant in posting the financial security requires more than one (1) year from the date of
posting the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial
security may be increased by an addition ten ( 10%) percent for each one year period beyond the
anniversary date from posting of the financial security or to an amount not exceeding one hundred
ten (110%) percent of the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished on or
before the expiration of the preceding one (1) year period.
SECTION 706 PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT
In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the Borough Council may authorize
the submission of final plans by sections or phases of development subject to such requirements or
guarantees as to improvements in future sections or phases of development as it finds essential for the
protection of any finally approved section of the development.
SECTION 707 START OF WORK NOTICE
The applicant and/or developer shall provide the Borough and the Borough Engineer with not less than a
seventy-two (72) hour notice prior to the commencement of work at the site.
SECTION 708 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS DURING CONSTRUCTION
The Borough Engineer shall make periodic inspections to the site during the construction of improvements
to insure the work is in conformance with the approved plans. The Borough Engineer shall promptly
provide Borough Council with a written report after any such inspection.
SECTION 709 RELEASE OF PORTIONS OF FINANCIAL SECURITY
709.1 As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting financial security
may request the Borough Council to release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such
portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or contractors performing
the work.
709.2 Any such request shall be in writing addressed to the Borough Council. The Borough Council
shall have forty-five (45) days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough
Engineer to certify in writing to the Borough Council that such portion of the work upon the
improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved plan.
Community Programs, Inc. 46
709.3 Upon such certification the Borough Council shall authorize release by the bonding company or
lending institution of an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer as fair in representing the
value of the completed improvements. Failure of the Borough Council to act within the said fortyfive
(45) day period shall be deemed an approval of the release of the funds requested.
709.4 The Borough Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion and certification by its
Engineer, require retention of ten (10%) percent of the estimated cost of the aforesaid
improvements.
SECTION 710 FINANCIAL SECURITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
710.1 Where Summit Hill Borough accepts dedication of all or some of the required improvements
following completion, it shall require the posting of financial security to secure the structural
integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with
the design and specifications as shown on the final plan for a term not to exceed eighteen (18)
months from the date of acceptance of dedication.
710.2 Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in Section 702 of this
Ordinance with regard to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the financial
security shall not exceed fifteen (15%) percent of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements.
SECTION 711 FINANCIAL SECURITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS UNDER JURISDICTION OF A
PUBLIC UTILITY OR MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
If water mains or sanitary sewer lines or both, along with apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be
installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise required by this
Section. A copy of any such executed financial security shall be provided to the Borough Council not less
than fourteen (14) days prior to its next regularly scheduled meeting at which the final plan shall be
considered.
SECTION 712 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS WHEN FINANCIAL SECURITY HAS BEEN POSTED
712.1 If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of improvements required as a
condition for final approval as set forth in this article, the Borough shall not condition the issuance
of zoning, building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement improvements,
including buildings, upon the lots or land as shown on the final plan upon actual completion of the
improvements shown on the approved final plan.
712.2 If a financial security has been provided certificates of zoning compliance or occupancy permits
for any building or buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following:
(a) The improvement of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such
building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition.
and
Community Programs, Inc. 47
(b) The completion of all other improvements as shown on the approved final plan, either
upon the lot or lots beyond the lot or lots in question, if such improvements are deemed
necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
SECTION 713 COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
713.1 When the applicant has completed all of the necessary and required improvements, the applicant
shall notify the Borough Council in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough Engineer.
713.2 The Borough Council shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize
the Borough Engineer to inspect all the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall
thereupon file a report, in writing with the Borough Council, and shall promptly mail a copy of the
same to the developer. The report by the Borough Engineer shall be made and mailed within
thirty (30) days from the aforesaid authorization from the Borough Council.
713.3 The report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in
whole or in part. If said improvements, or any portion thereof be rejected, said report shall contain
a statement of the reasons for such rejection.
713.4 The Borough Council shall notify the developer, in writing, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the
Borough's Engineer's report, by certified or registered mail of the action of the Borough Council
with relation thereto.
713.5 If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the time limitation provisions
contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved, and the applicant shall
be released from all liability, pursuant to its performance guarantee bond or other security
agreements.
SECTION 714 RESPONSIBILITY OF APPLICANT UPON DISAPPROVAL OF
IMPROVEMENTS
If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Borough Council,
the applicant shall proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined in Section 713 shall be followed.
SECTION 715 APPLICANT'S RIGHT TO CONTEST ACTION
Nothing herein, however shall be construed in limitation of the applicant's right to contest or question by
legal proceedings or otherwise any determination of the Borough Council or Borough Engineer.
SECTION 716 REMEDIES TO EFFECT COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
716.1 In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided in
this Ordinance or in accordance with the approved final plan, the Borough can enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies.
716.2 If the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or
making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Borough may,
at its option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development,
may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete
the remainder of the improvements.
Community Programs, Inc. 48
716.3 All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action or
from both brought against the applicant shall be used solely for the installation of the
improvements covered by such security, and not for any other municipal purpose.
SECTION 717 ENGINEERING AND CONSUL TING FEES
In addition to the fees noted in Section 110 of this Ordinance, the developer shall be responsible for
payment of all engineering fees which the Borough may incur as related to Sections 704, 705, 708, 709, 710
and 713 of this Ordinance. The developer shall be required to fully reimburse the Borough for said
Engineering fees. The developer shall also be required to fully reimburse the Borough for any engineering
and/or other consulting fees which the Borough may incur for the review of any required studies and/or
reports within the context of an "IMPACT ANALYSIS" as so defined in Article 2 of this Ordinance. Upon
notification by the Borough of such costs, the developer shall provide a certified check or money order to
the Borough to fully reimburse the Borough for said engineering fees, within thirty (30) days from the billing
date from Summit Hill Borough. An approved plan shall not be signed by the Borough Council nor shall
any permits related to the development of the site be issued until all fees are paid in full.
SECTION 718 PROCEDURE FOR DISPUTES OVER CONSUL TING FEES
718.1 An applicant may contest the amount to be reimbursed to the Borough for consulting fees. The
applicant shall notify the Borough, in writing, within ten (10) working days of the billing date, as to
which consulting fees are disputed as being unreasonable and/or unnecessary. The applicant
shall forfeit any right to contest the amount to be reimbursed to the Borough for consulting fees, if
written notification is not submitted within the prescribed ten (10) working days of the date of the
billing.
718.2 In such cases, the Borough Council shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application or any permit related to development due to the applicants written
request to contest certain consulting expenses.
718.3 If, within twenty (20) days from the date of billing, the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of consulting expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and
the Borough Council shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional engineer,
licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to review the said expenses and make a
determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
718.4 The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such documentation
as the professional engineer in his or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision
within fifty (50) days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay the entire amount
determined in the decision immediately.
718.5 In the event that the Borough Council and applicant cannot agree upon a professional engineer to
be appointed within twenty (20) days of the billing date, then upon application of either party, the
President Judge of the Carbon County Court of Common Pleas (or if at the time there be no
President Judge, the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such engineer, who shall be
neither the Borough Engineer nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Borough or the applicant within the preceding five (5) years.
Community Programs, Inc. 49
718.6 The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the reasonable and necessary
consulting expenses shall be paid by the applicant if the amount of the payment required in the
decision is equal to or greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in the
decision is less than the original bill by one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or more, the Borough
shall pay the fee of the professional engineer. If neither of the aforementioned cases apply, the
Borough and the applicant shall each pay one-half of the fee of the appointed professional
engineer.
Community Programs, Inc. 50
ARTICLE VIII
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 800 APPLICATION
800.1 The design standards and requirements as outlined in this Article shall be utilized by the Borough
Council in evaluating the plans for all proposed subdivisions and land developments.
800.2 Any request to modify the design standards and requirements of this Article shall be in
accordance with Section 109 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 801 GENERAL STANDARDS
(a) All applicable Borough, County, State and Federal statutory provisions, and/or
regulations;
(b) All governing rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection;
(c) The applicable regulations and design standards of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation;
(d) Whenever another Borough, County, State or Federal statute and/or regulation imposes a
higher or more restrictive standard than those contained in this Ordinance, the higher or
more restrictive standard shall apply;
(e) All applicable regulations and design standards for compliance with the American with
Disabilities Act, and any subsequent amendments thereto.
SECTION 802 SITE SUITABILITY FOR DEVELOPMENT
802.1 The land for any proposed subdivision or land development shall be suited for the purpose of
intended use.
802.2 Land which the Borough Council deems unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding,
improper drainage, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, steep slopes, utility
easements, or other features which may reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general
welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall
not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the applicant and
approved by the Borough Council upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer.
802.3 The approval of a plan for any proposed subdivision or land development shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Borough, any official, any employee, or
agent thereof of the practicability or safety of the use of such land or development, and shall
create no liability upon the Borough, its officials, employees or agents.
Community Programs, Inc. 51
SECTION 803 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS
The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments and markers by a Registered Land Surveyor.
803.1 Monuments shall be placed so that the center of a scored or marked point shall coincide exactly
with the intersection of the lines to be marked.
803.2 Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, with a flat top having a minimum width or diameter of
four (4) inches and a minimum length or thirty (30) inches. Concrete monuments shall be marked
with a three-quarter (3/4) inch copper or brass dowel. Stone or precast monuments shall be
marked on the top with a proper inscription and a drill hole. Monuments shall be set so that the
top of the monument or marker is level with the surface of the surrounding ground.
803.3 Markers shall consist of either iron or steel bars at least thirty-six (36) inches long and not less
than five-eighths (5/8) inch in diameter. Markers normally shall be flush with the surrounding
grade.
803.4 Monuments shall be set as follows:
(a) One at each single angle of the perimeter of the property at all major subdivisions and
land developments;
(b) One at the beginning and end of all curves along street right-of-way lines alone one side
of the street;
(c) A minimum of one at each street intersection along the street right-of -way line.
803.5 Markers normally shall be flush with the surrounding grade.
803.6 Markers shall be set as follows:
(a) At all points where lot lines intersect street right-of-way lines, except for monument
locations;
(b) At all other lot corners;
(c) At all points where lot lines intersect curves;
(d) At all angles in property lines of lots.
SECTION 804 RESIDENTIAL BLOCKS
804.1 For blocks the following standards shall apply:
(a) Maximum length not to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet;
(b) Be of sufficient width to permit two (2) tiers of lots.
804.2 Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets,
railroads, or waterways.
Community Programs, Inc. 52
SECTION 805 RESIDENTIAL LOTS
805.1 All subdivisions and land development for residential use shall be in conformance with the
applicable minimum lot sizes, lot widths and yard requirements as set forth in the Summit Hill
Borough Zoning Ordinance.
805.2 Each lot or area platted for residential use shall be accessible from an existing or proposed street.
805.3 the lot depth shall not be greater than three (3) times its width.
805.4 Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight streets and on radius lines on curved streets.
Some variation may be permitted at the discretion of the Borough Council, but pointed or very
irregular shaped lots shall be avoided.
805.5 In the case of lots utilizing an on-site sewage disposal system, there shall be sufficient area for the
disposal field in accordance to DEP regulations.
805.6 Double frontage lots shall be avoided but may be permitted when required to provide a separation
of a residential development from arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography or other natural features of the site.
805.7 Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot
drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall
be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot onto adjacent lots.
SECTION 806 STREETS - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
806.1 Any proposed subdivision or land development shall have frontage upon or access to an existing
State, County or Borough road.
806.2 Streets shall be designed to provide adequate vehicular access to all lots or parcels within any
proposed subdivision or land development.
806.3 Streets shall be designed and appropriately related to the topographic conditions of the site, with
the grade of streets conforming as closely as possible to the original topography.
806.4 Streets shall be graded and improved in accordance with the appropriate design standards and
specifications of this Ordinance.
806.5 All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of streets and
dedicated right-of-way as established in the Comprehensive Plan.
806.6 All streets shall be properly related to specific traffic generators such as industries, business
districts, schools, churches and shopping centers: to population densities, and to the pattern of
existing and proposed land uses.
806.7 Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless
prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Borough
Council such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the
subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development on adjacent
tracts.
Community Programs, Inc. 53
806.8 Any residential subdivision and/or land development containing ten (10) or more lots which do not
front upon an existing off-site public road, shall provide within the overall traffic design of the site,
not less than two separate points within the site where an interior road as part of the proposed
subdivision and/or land development shall intersect with and provide access to an existing off-site
public road.
SECTION 807 STREET NAMES
The applicant may propose names for all streets within a subdivision or land development prior to final
approval. A proposed street name shall not include the name of any existing street in the Borough, except
that a street when planned as a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name. Final
approval of street names for streets subject to public dedication to the Borough shall be vested with the
Summit Hill Borough Council. Final approval of street names for streets to remain under private
ownership shall be vested with the Borough Council.
SECTION 808 STREET SIGNS
Street signs, which provide the legal name of each street shall be erected at the intersection of each street
within a subdivision or land development prior to final approval. The size, color and construction materials
of said signs shall be subject to approval by the Borough Council.
SECTION 809 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS
Traffic control signs, designed to regulate the speed of traffic or to convey any other pertinent traffic or
physical characteristic of the road to motorists shall be installed at appropriate locations by the applicant
as determined by PennDOT, Carbon County or the Borough Council.
SECTION 810 CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS AND DEAD-END ROADS
The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent
properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire
protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and when such continuation is in accordance with the
Borough's goals as provided for within the Statement of Community Development Objectives of the
Summit Hill Borough Zoning Ordinance. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a
dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary
turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets. This may limit the length of temporary
dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations.
SECTION 811 DEAD-END ROADS !PERMANENT)
Where a road does not extend to the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by
the Borough Council for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such
boundary than fifty (50') feet. However, the Borough Council may require the reservation of an
appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac
turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with Borough
construction standards and specifications. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police
and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited in length in accordance with
design standards of this Ordinance.
Community Programs, Inc. 54
SECTION 812 ACCESS TO ARTERIAL STREETS
Where a subdivision or land development borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial street,
the Borough Council may require that access to such street be limited by one of the following methods.
(a) The subdivision of lots in a manner in which the lots front onto a parallel local street with
no access provided to or from the arterial street which shall contain a strip of screening
along the rear property line of such lots.
(b) A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed
generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots
backing onto the arterial.
(c) A marginal access or service road, separated from the arterial street by a planting or
grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points.
SECTION 813 INTERSECTIONS
813.1 Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. When local streets intersect with
collector or arterial streets the angle of intersection at the street centerlines shall in no case be
less than seventy-five (75) degrees. No two streets shall intersect with an angle of intersection at
the centerlines of less than sixty (60) degrees.
813.2 Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be prohibited.
813.3 Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the
approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a four (4%)
percent grade at a distance of forty (40') feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way of the
intersecting street.
813.4 Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any corner lot
that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the applicant shall cut such ground and/or
vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent
deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.
813.5 The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections shall be two (2%) percent or less.
SECTION 814 ROAD DESIGN. CONSTRUCTION AND PAVING STANDARDS
814.1 In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width and improvement to accommodate
prospective traffic and to afford satisfactory access to police, fire fighting, snow removal,
sanitation and road maintenance equipment and to coordinate streets so as to compose a
convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties.
814.2 The classification of any street, when not identified within any Comprehensive Plan adopted by
Summit Hill Borough, shall be determined by the Borough Council by utilizing applicable
definitions of this Ordinance.
Community Programs, Inc. 55
814.3 Subgrade and Base Specifications
A. The subgrade of all streets shall be rolled and prepared in accordance with PennDOT
Specifications as contained in the applicable sections of the 2000 edition of Publication 408, or the
most recent edition of Publication 408, including any subsequent revisions and/or amendments
thereto. The following conditions shall also apply to the subgrade.
1. the area within the limits of the proposed road surface shall be shaped to conform to the
line, grade, and cross-section of the proposed road.
2. All unsuitable subgrade material shall be removed or stabilized.
3. Wet areas, excluding wetland, shall be permanently drained and stabilized. Details shall
be furnished on the method of drainage and shall by approved by the Borough Engineer.
4. Areas requiring fill shall be made with suitable materials and thoroughly compacted for full
width in uniform layers not more than eight (8") inches thick per layer.
5. The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted by rolling with a minimum ten ton roller and
or a sheeps foot roller in layers not greater than six (6") inches.
6. Backfill for trenches within the cartway and curb area shall be thoroughly compacted prior
to the application of the base course.
7. All stone used to replace unsuitable subgrade materials shall be subject to prior approval
by the Borough Engineer.
B. The base for all streets, unless otherwise specified shall contain a minimum of six (6") inches of
stone sub-base placed upon a prepared and compacted subgrade. The required minimum of six
(6") inches of stone sub-base material shall be determined by site conditions. The construction of
the base for all streets shall be in accordance with PennDOT Specifications as contained in the
applicable sections of the 2000 edition of Publication 408, or the most recent edition of Publication
408, including any subsequent revisions and/or amendments thereto. The following requirements
shall apply to the base course.
All streets shall have a minimum slope of two (2%) percent crown as measured from the centerline of the
street to the edge of each side of the cartway.
Community Programs, Inc. 56
814.5 Use of Fill Material
If fill material is proposed to be used for the roadway bed, subgrade or any other aspect of the design and
construction of a street, the fill material shall be acceptable material for such use as determined by the
Borough Engineer. Placement of acceptable fill material within three (3') feet of the proposed final
roadway grade shall be in eight (8") inch loose lifts and compacted to not less than ninety-seven (97%)
percent of the material's dry weight density as determined by methods prescribed by the Engineer.
Placement of acceptable fill material below three (3') feet of the proposed final roadway grade shall be in
eight (8") inch loose lifts and compacted to not less than ninety-five (95%) of the material's dry weight
density as determined by methods prescribed by the Engineer. The type of compacting equipment to be
used for such purposes shall be of sufficient and nature as determined by the Borough Engineer. Use of
fill material shall comply with PennDOT Specifications of Section 206 of the most recent edition of
Publication 408, including any subsequent revisions and/or amendments thereto. The regulations within
this Section shall apply to the use of fill material within any area of the cartway and the shoulder of the
roadway.
814.6 Slope of Embankments
The recommended slope of any required road embankment shall be three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical,
but under no circumstances shall the embankment have a slope greater than two (2) horizontal to one (1)
vertical.
814.7 Local Streets
The minimum pavement structure for a Local Street shall be as follows:
One and one-half (1.5") inches of Superpave asphalt mixture 9.5 mm PG64-22, wearing course 0.0 to 0.3
ESAL's, SRL-L, 1 W' depth. Superpave asphalt mixture 24 mm PG64-22, Base Course, 0.0 to 0.3 mill..
ESAL's 3" depth.
Applicable construction and design standards of PennDOT, as contained within Section 400, of the 2000
edition of Publication 408, or the most recent edition of Publication 408, including any subsequent
revisions and/or amendments thereto shall apply.
814.8 Collector Streets
The minimum pavement structure for a Collector Street shall be as follows:
One and one-half (1.5") inches of Superpave asphalt mixture 9.5 mm PG64-22, wearing course 0.0 to 0.3
ESAL's, SRL-L, 1 %" depth, Superpave asphalt mixture 24 mm PG64-22, Base Course, 0.0 to 0.3 mill ..
ESAL's 3" depth.
Applicable construction and design standards of Penn DOT, as contained within Section 400, of the 2000
edition of Publication 408, or the most recent edition of Publication 408, including any subsequent
revisions and/or amendments thereto shall apply.
Community Programs, Inc. 57
814.9 Arterial Streets
The pavement structure for an Arterial Street or Highway shall be governed by the most recent edition of
PennDOT publication No. 242, Roadway Management Manual, including any subsequent revisions or
amendments. All applicable construction and design standards of PennDOT, as contained within Section
400, of he 2000 edition of Publication 408, or the most recent edition of Publication 408, including any
subsequent revisions and/or amendments thereto shall apply.
814.10 Dimensional Standards for Roads
DIMENSIONS
TYPE OF STREET
ARTERIAL'
COLLECTOR'
LOCAL1
RIGHT-OF-WAY
PennDOT SPEC
60 FEET
50 FEET
CARTWAY
PennDOT SPEC
24 FEET
18 FEET
SECTION 815 HORIZONTAL VISIBILITY
SHOULDER WIDTH
PennDOT SPEC'
8 FEET per side
2 FEET per side
The all applicable regulations contained within Chapter 441 (Access to and Occupancy of Highways by
Driveways and Local Roads) of Title 67 Transportation shall govern all design features of roads and
driveways related to horizontal visibility.
815.1 A minimum tangent of one hundred (100') feet shall be required between curves on all
classifications of streets.
815.2 The centerline grades shall not exceed the following:
Arterial Street -five (5%) percent
Collector Street - ten ( 10%) percent
Local Street - eleven ( 11 % ) percent
There shall be a minimum centerline grade of not less than five (5%) percent on all streets.
815.3 Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding one (1%) percent. Vertical curves
shall be designed to produce the following minimum sight distances:
Arterial Street - five hundred (500') feet
Collector Street - three hundred (300') feet
Local Street - one hundred fifty ( 150') feet
1 Streets containing curbing and sidewalks shall provide barrier-free ramps in accordance with the drawing
attached as Exhibit A to this Ordinance.
2 PennDOT SPEC represents governing PennDOT standards.
Community Programs, Inc. 58
815.4 Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections. Within such triangles no object
greater than two and one-half (2.5') feet in height and no other object that would obscure the
vision of the motorist shall be permitted. Such triangles shall be in conformance with Chapter 441,
Title 67, Department of Transportation of Pennsylvania.
SECTION 816 CUL-DE-SAC STREETS
816.1 A cul-de-sac street will not be approved when a through street is more advantageous.
816.2 Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such and/or single access streets, shall not exceed
one thousand (1,000') feet in length and furnish access to not more than ten (10) dwelling units,
subject to all proposed lots being in compliance with the applicable zoning regulations for the
minimum front footage for the Zoning District in which the subdivision is located.
816.3 Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with a minimum diameter of one
hundred (100') feet and Eighty (80') feet diameter to the outer pavement edge or curb line.
816.4 The pave width of a cul-de-sac shall not be less than the minimum cartway width for a local street.
816.5 The entire area within a cul-de-sac shall be paved. No physical obstructions shall be permitted
within the cul-de-sac including, but not limited to, islands, vegetative cover, trees, and/or any other
types of decorative features.
816.6 Any street which is terminated, with planned future access to an adjoining property or because of
authorized stage development, shall be provided with a temporary, all-weather turning circle. The
turning circle shall be completely within the boundaries of the subdivision and/or land
development, and the use of the turn around shall be guaranteed to the public until such time as
the street is extended.
Community Programs, Inc. 59
SECTION 817 BRIDGES AND STREAM CROSSINGS
Bridges and other stream crossing structures which are part of the proposed street system shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with current PennDOT Standards and Specifications. Evidence
of compliance with and approval of the Division of Dams and Encroachments, Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, shall be provided by the developer, if applicable.
SECTION 818 DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES
818.1 Adequate provisions to maintain uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street at the point
of driveway entry shall be required. The adequacy of each proposed driveway shall be made
based upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer in relationship to existing site
conditions.
818.2 Driveway entrances or aprons within the street right-of-way shall be surfaced their full width of
entrance.
818.3 Driveway entrances or aprons shall be stabilized and maintained by the property owner in a
manner to prevent erosion of driveway material onto any adjoining public right-of-way.
818.4 All driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all applicable provisions
within Chapter 441 (Access to and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads) of
Title 67 Transportation.
SECTION 819 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
819.1 All earth moving activities shall be conducted in such a way as to prevent accelerated erosion and
the resulting sedimentation.
819.2 A subdivision and/or land development which includes any earth moving activity, as defined in
Chapter 102, Erosion Control, Rules and Regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection , shall require that a soil erosion and sedimentation plan be prepared by the developer.
The developer shall submit said plan to the Carbon County Conservation District for their review,
comment and written approval.
819.3 The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and measures used to control erosion and
sedimentation shall meet the standards and specifications set forth in the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual and
Chapter 102 of the Rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection .
819.4 Any subdivision and/or land development requiring the submission of a soil erosion and
sedimentation plan shall not be granted approval, preliminary or final, until the Carbon County
Conservation District issues written notification that the soil erosion and sedimentation plan is
deemed adequate and/or approved.
819.5 Where the earth moving activity affects twenty-five (25) acres or more, the soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan must be submitted to the County Conservation District, together with
an application for an earth disturbance permit. An earth disturbance permit must be granted by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection prior to preliminary approval of a
subdivision plan or land development plan.
SECTION 820 WATER SUPPLY FACILITIES
Community Programs, Inc. 60
Within any proposed major subdivision or major land development, if the water is to be provided by means
other than by private wells, owned and maintained by the individual owners of the lots within the
subdivision or land development, the developer shall present evidence to the Borough Council that the
subdivision or land development is to be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperate
association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of
Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate,
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable as evidence.
SECTION 821 CENTRALIZED WATER SYSTEM
821.1 All subdivisions and land developments shall utilize an approved public distribution system for
water supply when such a system is accessible to the site or is within one tenth (0.1) mile to the
site and connection to such is feasible.
821.2 The plans for the installation of water lines of a public water supply shall be prepared by the
developer with the cooperation of the applicable public water company or authority and submitted
with the Preliminary Plans.
821.3 When a subdivision or land development is to be serviced by a centralized water supply system,
fire hydrants shall be installed. The location and number offire hydrants shall be determined on a
case by case basis. Fire hydrants along any approved street shall not be more than five hundred
(500') feet apart and connected to a water main not less than eight (8'') inches in diameter.
821.4 All suppliers of water to any proposed subdivision or land development shall be organized in such
a fashion as to fall within the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission. One copy
of all correspondence, supporting documentation, application for permits, and certificates for
operation submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission for the right to provide such services shall be forwarded to
the Borough as part of the public record. One copy of the permit and certificate of convenience
issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission authorizing such services shall be forwarded upon receipt to the Borough
Council as part of the public record.
SECTION 822 ON-LOT WATER SYSTEM
On-lot water systems shall be permitted subject to their construction in accordance with applicable criteria
as set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection . Any subdivision or land
development which equals or exceeds ten (10) lots or ten (10) dwelling units and/or exceeds three
hundred (300) gallons per day, shall be required to submit a "groundwater availability and well interference
analysis" prepared by certified hydrogeologist.
Community Programs, Inc. 61
SECTION 823 SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES
All subdivisions and land developments shall be served with a sewage system (either centralized or on-lot)
which meet or exceed the applicable minimum design standards as set forth by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection . All proposed subdivisions and/or land developments shall
require the preparation and submission of an appropriate Sewage Planning Module to DER in accordance
with Pennsylvania Code Title 25.
SECTION 824 CENTRALIZED SEWERS
824.1 All subdivisions and land developments shall be served by centralized sewage disposal systems,
when existing soils conditions and other environmental features are unsatisfactory for on-lot
sewage or when an existing centralized sewage system is within one-eighth (1/8) of a mile from
the proposed subdivision or land development and connection to such is feasible.
824.2 All centralized sewage disposal systems shall be compatible with any sewage feasibility studies
and/or the official Borough Sewage Plan, and be approved by the appropriate agencies prior to
Final Plan approval.
824.3 All sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed to provide adequate capacity for the
ultimate flow of the subject development plus additional flow as may be projected to be generated
by adjacent properties.
824.4 All individual lateral connection shall be installed to the curb right-of-way line at the lime of initial
installation of the system.
824.5 All systems classified as Sewage Services, as defined in Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Regulations shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with regulations and requirements set forth in the "Sewage Manual" prepared by the
Bureau of Water Quality Management of Department of Environmental Protection .
SECTION 825 ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
825.1 On-lot sewage systems, both individual and community sewage systems, shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
requirements under Title 25, Rules and Regulations Part 1, Subpart C, Chapter 73 and any
amendments thereto.
825.2 Prior to approval of Preliminary Plan, the Borough Sewage Enforcement Officer shall submit a
report to the Borough Council regarding the site and soils investigation and analysis.
825.3 All systems utilizing subsurface disposal of sewage effluent (Community Sewage Systems as
defined by Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Regulations)
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with requirements of the aforesaid Chapter 73.
A registered professional engineer employed by the applicant shall provide written certification
that the existing or proposed facility has adequate capacity to satisfactorily treat the total projected
sewage flow.
825.4 A sewage permit must be approved and issued by the Borough Sewage Enforcement Officer prior
to the start of any construction or development upon any lot within an approved subdivision or
land development.
Community Programs, Inc. 62
SECTION 826 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
A Storm Water Management Plan shall illustrate the following information:
(a) Mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed development is located,
including both pre-development and post-development areas.
(b) Calculations of all runoff for all points of runoff concentration, including pre-development
and post-development conditions.
(c) Complete drainage systems for the development. All existing drainage features which
are to be incorporated in the design shall be so identified. If the development is to be
developed in stages, a drainage plan for the entire development shall be submitted with
the Preliminary Plan.
(d) A soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan shall be integrated with the Storm Water
Management Plan.
( e) Any development, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, which equals or exceeds
10,000 square feet (combined building and paving area) shall require the submission of
a Storm Water Management Plan in accordance with the applicable provisions within this
Section.
(f) A Storm Water Management Plan and a Soils Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
must be approved prior to the start of any construction or development.
SECTION 827 INFORMATION ON STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
The following items, as applicable, shall be included upon and/or within the Storm Water Management
Plan:
(a) General description of project.
(b) General description of storm water controls both during and after development.
(c) Expected project time schedule, including anticipated start and completion dates.
(d) Training and experience of person(s) preparing the plan.
( e) A signature block by a Registered Professional Engineer attesting to the following: "I,
----,.' have prepared and hereby certify that the Storm Water Management Plan
meets all design standards and criteria of the Summit Hill Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance."
(f) A location map which provides the location of the project relative to its geographic
proximity to streets highways, municipal boundaries or similar identifiable features.
(g) Existing contours at intervals of two (2') feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than five
(5%) percent), five (5') foot contour interval may be used.
(h) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project area or adjacent to the
site which will be affected by runoff from the project.
Community Programs, Inc. 63
(i) Other physical features including existing drainage swales and areas of natural vegetation
to be preserved.
Ul Location of existing underground utilities, sewers and water lines.
(k) Location of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water lines.
(I) Soil types and boundaries.
(m) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(n) Areas to be cut or filled.
(o) Proposed structures, roads,, paved areas and buildings.
(p) Final contours at intervals of two(2') feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than five (5%)
percent) five-foot contour intervals may be used.
( q) Location of where water will exit the site and the means for discharging.
SECTION 828 DESIGN FEATURES FOR DRAINAGE FACILITIES
Storm water drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions.
(a) No storm water runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to overload existing
drainage systems, or create flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on
other private properties or public lands, without approved provisions being made by the
developer for properly handling such conditions.
(b) Storm drainage systems shall be designed to convey through the proposed.development
of the peak runoff that will occur when all tributary areas upstream are developed to the
extent reasonably projected during the next twenty-five (25) years. The calculation of this
runoff rate shall take into account the land use and development regulations including
runoff controls in effect in the tributary areas.
(c) Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, a drainage
easement shall be provided which substantially conforms to the line of such watercourse
at a width adequate to preserve the unimpaired flow of natural drainage. Such drainage
easement shall be established on both sides of the watercourse at least twenty (20') feet
from any recognized high water mark of the watercourse, but in no case shall said
drainage easement be less than twenty (20') feet from the top of the bank of the
watercourse. The terms of the easement shall prohibit any form of development within
any portion of the easement, including fill material, and activities related to grading or
excavation.
(d) Drainage facilities that are located on State highway right-of-ways shall be approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and a letter indicating such approval shall
be directed to the Borough Council.
(e) All streets shall be so designed to provide for the discharge of surface water from their
right-of-way. The slope of the crown of proposed streets shall be one-quarter (1/4") inch
per foot away from the centerline.
Community Programs, Inc. 64
(f) When it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer that, due to topographic
conditions, natural drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage,
open channels may be constructed which substantially conform to the line and grade of
such natural drainage swales. Capacities of open channels shall be calculated using the
applicable procedures as contained in the April 1990 edition of the "Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual" as published by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection .
(g) Whenever storm sewers are required by the Borough Council, such storm sewers shall be
separate from the sanitary sewer system. Storm sewer facilities shall be provided where
the Borough Council, with the advice of the Borough Engineer, determines that surface
drainage facilities are inadequate to prevent excessive erosion and lot or road
maintenance problems.
(h) Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed and provided as to
minimize erosion in watercourse channel velocities.
(i) Energy dissipaters shall be placed at the outlets of all pipes where flow velocities exceed
maximum permitted channel velocities.
U) The minimum size diameter of a drainage pipe shall be fifteen ( 15") inches, unless
otherwise approved by the Borough Council, based upon a recommendation by the
Borough Engineer. The minimum value for "n" in pipes shall be based on engineering
judgment and experience. Pressure flow is permitted in storm sewers. The elevation of
the hydraulic gradient shall be at least one (1 ')foot below ground level. Pressure heads
up to twenty-five (25') feet can be used with concrete pipe with rubber gasket joints.
(k) Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any
intersection, nor for a distance of more than six hundred (600') feet in the gutter. When
calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance
shall be made for flow beyond that point, and catch basins shall be used to intercept flow
at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and
block. Design of inlets must account for any bypass flows from upgrade inlets. Capacity
calculations for inlets shall be submitted with the design report.
(I} All storm water drainage facilities shall be designed to handle, at minimum, the peak
discharges from a 10-Year post-development storm event. The Borough Council, shall
have the discretion to require that certain drainage facilities be designed for peak
discharges which may exceed a 10-Year post-development storm event, if so warranted
in the recommendation of the Borough Engineer.
(m) Drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from upstream
drainage areas, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The Borough Engineer shall
give approval to the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the
construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum runoff rate
calculated by the applicant and reviewed by the Borough Engineer. The calculation of
this runoff rate shall take into account any land use and development regulations
including runoff controls in effect in the tributary areas.
Community Programs, Inc. 65
(n) The developer's Engineer shall also study the effect of the subdivision on existing
downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Such studies will be
subject to review and approval by the Borough Engineer. Authorized Borough drainage
studies together with such other studies as deemed appropriate, shall serve as a guide to
needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident related to
the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility,
the Borough Council may withhold approval of the development until provisions are made
to correct and/or mitigate potential adverse downstream drainage conditions.
( o) Any proposed or required storm drainage facilities or structures located on private
property shall require the submission and approval of a detailed maintenance plan to the
Borough Council. Included within said plan shall be the provision of an annual inspection
of such private storm drainage facilities of structures by the Borough. A written
agreement to reimburse the Borough for any cost incurred for such inspections shall be
submitted with the required maintenance plan. Any deficiencies determined as a result of
the required inspection shall be subject to correction within sixty (60) days upon receipt of
notification from the Borough.
SECTION 829 DRAINAGE EASEMENTS
Required drainage easements shall be provided in accordance to the following:
(a) Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of
drainage facilities within road right-of-ways, perpetual unobstructed easements twenty
(20') feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the
road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. A greater width may be required for
proper maintenance as determined by the Borough Engineer. A reduction in the width,
when warranted by the topography and circumstances, will be permitted, if approved by
the Borough Council after consulting with the Borough Engineer, but in no case shall the
width be less than fifteen (15') feet. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage
easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage
facilities.
(b) When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the
subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat.
(c) A drainage easement of twenty (20') feet from the recognized high-water mark of a
watercourse shall be provided, but in no case shall the required drainage easement be
less than twenty (20') feet from the top of the bank of the watercourse.
SECTION 830 STORM WATER DETENTION
It shall be the policy of the Borough Council to discourage areas of extremely poor drainage. The
developer shall use best engineering practices in developing a stormwater management plan. Innovated
designs in stormwater detention and/or retention shall be considered with the following provisions
applying:":
(a) Stormwater detention facilities shall be utilized whenever the Stormwater Management
Plan indicates post-development runoff rates for each point of discharge exceed the predevelopment
runoff rates.
Community Programs, Inc. 66
(b) The detention facilities shall be designed for 2 year, 10 year, 25 year, 50 year and 100
year storms.
(c) The developer shall verify that the operation of the detention facilities will not aggravate
potential downstream peaking conditions.
(d) Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided for detention facilities to handle runoff in
excess of design flows.
(e) If the lands of the proposed development will remain in common ownership, the developer
shall provide written assurances to the Borough Council that the detention ponds will be
properly maintained. The Borough Council shall hold sole discretion as to whether such
assurances are acceptable for guaranteeing proper maintenance.
(f) If the lands of the proposed development will be conveyed to two (2) or more separate
owners, the developer shall provide written assurances to the Borough Council that the
detention ponds will be properly maintained. The Borough Council shall hold sole
discretion as to whether such assurances are acceptable for guaranteeing proper
maintenance.
SECTION 831 DESIGN OF STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Storm drainage systems required by this Ordinance shall be designed to provide protection from a 10 to
100 year storm as determined by the Borough Engineer.
(a) Stormwater runoff calculations shall be calculated from methods described in the "Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Manual," April, 1990 edition as prepared by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection including any subsequent revisions
and /or amendments thereto shall apply.
(b) Stormwater control system design calculations shall be based on methods described in
the "Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual," April, 1990 edition as prepared by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection including any subsequent
revisions and /or amendments thereto shall apply.
(c) All inlets and manholes shall be either pre-cast or poured-in-place concrete. No block
construction will be allowed. Inlets and manholes shall be provided with grade adjustment
rings to facilitate raising or lowering as may be required.
(d) Storm sewers and related piping shall be fully coated corrugated metal, reinforced
concrete, polyethylene, PVC or other material approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation.
Co=unity Programs, Inc. 67
(e) Inlets shall be designed and/or localed to prevent hazardous conditions for vehicles,
bicycles or pedestrians. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried
across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than six hundred (600') feet
in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no
further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to
intercept flow at that point.
(f) All detention and retention basins shall be designed and constructed with silt post
detectors.
SECTION 832 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
832.1 General - If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial
purposes, the layout or the subdivision or land development with respect to such land shall make
such provisions as the Borough Council require.
832.2 A nonresidential subdivision or land development shall also be subject to all the requirements of
site plan approval set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. Site plan approval and nonresidential
subdivision plan approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the Borough Council.
A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations as well as
such additional standards required by the Borough Council and shall conform to the proposed
land use and standards established in the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and Zoning
Ordinance.
832.3 Standards - In addition to the requirements and standards in these regulations, which are
appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Borough Council that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to
the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and
standards shall be observed.
(a) Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in the types of industrial or commercial
development anticipated.
(b) Street right-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and
volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereon.
(c) Special requirements may be imposed by the Borough Council with respect to street,
curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction.
(d) Special requirements may be imposed by the Borough Council with respect to the
installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and storm drainage.
( e) Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance
from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra
depth in parcels backing on existing or potential residential development and provisions
for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary.
(f) Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be
extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing and potential residential areas.
Community Programs, Inc. 68
ARTICLE IX
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION 901 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
In accordance with Section 501 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended,
provisions regulating mobile home parks shall be separate and distinct. The standards and regulations
provided herein shall apply to both the development and expansion of mobile home parks. The
development and/or expansion of a mobile home park, shall be deemed as a subdivision or land
development and shall be subject to design standards within Article 8 and regulations provided within this
Article and all Sections and Subsections thereunder.
SECTION 902 SITE LOCATIONS
A. All mobile home parks shall have a total land area of not less than twenty (20) acres.
B. All mobile home parks shall be located on well drained land with the average natural slop not
exceeding ten (10%) percent. The site shall be free from fiooding from a one hundred (100) year
storm and other physical features which are generally considered detrimental to residential
development.
C. All mobile home parks shall have access to public streets or roads.
D. All mobile home parks shall be serviced by an off-site sewage disposal system and a central
water supply and distribution system.
E. Access to mobile home sites shall be from interior driveways, access drives or private streets and
shall not be from public street or roads. Entrance roads shall have a paved cartway width of at
least twenty-four (24') feet. All interior roads and cartways shall be paved and of sufficient width
to allow for access of emergency vehicles.
F. Every mobile home site shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces.
G. All mobile home parks shall be provided with pedestrian walkways on at least one side of every
street.
H. The minimum area of land per mobile home site shall be not less than 7,200 square feet with the
dimensions being sixty (60') feet by one hundred and twenty (120') feet. The minimum front, rear
and side setback for any mobile home shall be twenty (20') feet to property lines and/or the
defined site on which the mobile home is located.
I. Every mobile home park shall provide a defined recreational site or sites which shall contain an
area of land not less than five (5%) percent of the total gross land area within the boundaries of
the mobile home park. All recreational sites shall be located in areas which are readily accessible
to all residents of the mobile home park.
J. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a stand or pad consisting of two (2) concrete strips
to accommodate the supporting base or foundation of the mobile home.
Community Programs, Inc. 69
K. Every mobile home in the park shall be enclosed from the bottom of the mobile home to the
ground or stand using industry-approved skirting material compatible with the home.
L. Every mobile home shall be securely anchored or tied-down on at least the four (4) corners and/or
in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations furnished with each home.
M. An approved soils erosion and sedimentation plan and a stormwater management plan, which
limits the post development runoff rate to the pre-development rate, shall be required prior to the
final approval for the development or expansion of a mobile home park.
N. An approved Department of Environmental Protection Planning Module shall be required prior to
the final approval for the development or expansion of a mobile home park.
0. A letter of commitment for the provision of required utilities from all applicable utility companies.
Community Programs, Inc. 70