PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 687]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5 of the Borough Code (8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3301.5), the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Slippery
Rock, County of Butler, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 375, together with an Appendix, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the
Borough of Slippery Rock, which shall be known and is hereby designated
as the "Code of the Borough of Slippery Rock," hereinafter referred to as
the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-4, Legislation
saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or
parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code
adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as of the effective date given
in § 1-15; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of
such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Slippery Rock
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 2, 2015.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
§ 1-4 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall
be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.1
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
C. Nomenclature. The following revisions are made throughout the Code:
(1) "District Justice" and "District Magistrate" are changed to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(2) "Soil Conservation Service (SCS)" is changed to "Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)."
(3) "Department of Environmental Resources" is changed to
"Department of Environmental Protection."
(4) "Building Code Officer," "Code Official," "Code Officer," "Zoning
and Housing Officer" and "Zoning and Codes Officer" are changed
to "Code Enforcement Officer."
(5) References to the Borough Secretary are revised to refer to the
Borough Administrator/Secretary.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: [Amended (added, deleted) 10-6-2015 by Ord. No.
687]. Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Village offices.
§ 1-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 1-9
1:6
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Administrator/Secretary and
shall remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption,
such copy or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Administrator/
Secretary, as provided by law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain
on file in the office of the Borough Administrator/Secretary, available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in
effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Administrator/Secretary or someone
authorized and directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified
copy or copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the
office of the Borough Administrator/Secretary for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all legislation adopted by the Borough Council
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the Borough
Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally
adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
legislation are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Administrator/Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required a notice of the introduction and of the
adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the
publication of the notice of introduction, the availability of a copy or copies
of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing of an attested copy
of this ordinance with the county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held
and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code
for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers
or agents of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after October 13, 2015.
§ 1-13 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 8
COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 71, Art.
II.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9

ARTICLE I
Meetings
[Adopted 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 101, of the
1983 Code)]
§ 8-1. Time, day and place of meetings.
The regular meetings of the Borough Council of the Borough of Slippery
Rock shall convene on the first Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the
Municipal Building.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:11
Chapter 13
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
§ 8-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 8-1
1:12
ARTICLE I
Butler County COG
[Adopted 4-1-2008 by Ord. No. 641 (Ch. 1, Part 5, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 13-1. Statutory authority; intention to organize.
The Borough is authorized pursuant to the authority of the Act of December
19, 1996, P.L. 1158, as amended (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.) (hereinafter
the "Act"), to jointly cooperate with other local governments in the exercise
or performance of their respective governmental functions, powers or
responsibilities, and the Borough hereby signifies its intention and desire
to organize a council of governments under the provisions of law, including
but not limited to the Act. Said organization shall be known as the "Butler
County Council of Governments" (hereinafter the "Butler County COG").
§ 13-2. Membership.
A. The Borough Council hereby consents to joining the Butler County
COG, a council of governments formed under the provisions of 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq., for the purpose of providing various services,
including, but not limited to, the purposes identified in the bylaws of the
Butler County COG attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit
"A," as may be amended from time to time by the Butler County COG.2
The Butler County COG shall be supported by contributions from its
members, grants and fees for services. Real and personal property may
be purchased, sold or leased by the Butler County COG in accordance
with applicable law. No new entity is being created which would be
empowered by 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2307(7) to enter into contracts for policies
of group insurance and employee benefits, including social security.3
B. The Borough Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock is hereby
authorized to enter into contracts with the Butler County COG to
provide such services, programs and joint purchases as the Borough
Council of Slippery Rock shall, by resolution, determine from time to
time.
2. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, and any amendments thereto, is on file in the office of the
Borough Administrator/Secretary.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2
1:13
Chapter 22
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 22-1. Department and association recognized.
The Slippery Rock Volunteer Fire Department and the Slippery Rock
Firemen's Relief Fund Association are recognized officially in such
capacities by the Borough and shall have all the rights and enjoy all the
privileges ordinarily exercised by such company or association.
§ 22-2. Appropriation of foreign insurance funds to association.
All moneys appropriated and apportioned to the Fire Department of the
Borough of Slippery Rock, Pennsylvania, from the foreign insurance fund
of the State of Pennsylvania, or from any other source, shall be paid to
the said Slippery Rock Firemen's Relief Fund Association, at Slippery Rock,
Pennsylvania, and said fund is hereby so appropriated.
Chapter 35
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 48. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 71.
§ 13-2 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 22-2
1:14
ARTICLE I
Auditor
[Adopted 2-1-1972 by Ord. No. 280 (Ch. 1, Part 2, § 201, of the 1983
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 35-1. Office established.
There is hereby established the office of independent auditor, said
independent auditor to be a certified public accountant registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so
registered or a competent public accountant or a competent firm of public
accountants.
§ 35-2. Appointment.
The independent auditor shall be appointed annually by resolution of the
Borough Council, said resolution to be passed prior to the close of the fiscal
year.
§ 35-3. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the independent auditor shall be as defined in the
Borough Code, 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1059.11.
§ 35-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-3
1:15

ARTICLE II
Administrator/Secretary/Treasurer
[Adopted 12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 284 (Ch. 1, Part 2, § 202, of the
1983 Code)]
§ 35-4. Appointment of one person to both offices.
From and after the date of this article, the offices of Borough Administrator/
Secretary and Borough Treasurer may be held by the same person when
such an appointment is made by the Borough Council.
§ 35-5. Approval by majority of Council.
Such an appointment shall be made by a majority of the members of Council
attending the meeting at which the appointment is made, unless a different
vote is required by existing or hereinafter enacted statute.
§ 35-6. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the person so designated as Borough
Administrator/Secretary and Borough Treasurer shall be as hereinafter
fixed and from time to time changed by Borough Council.
§ 35-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-6
1:17

ARTICLE III
Assistant Treasurer
[Adopted 12-5-1972 by Res. No. 102 (Ch. 1, Part 2, § 203, of the
1983 Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 35-7. Creation of office.
There shall be created as an office of the Borough of Slippery Rock the office
of Assistant Treasurer. Council may appoint the Assistant Treasurer as the
Assistant Secretary.
§ 35-8. Qualifications.
The Assistant Treasurer/Assistant Secretary shall not be a member of the
Borough Council.
§ 35-9. Powers and duties.
The Assistant Treasurer shall assist the Treasurer in the performance of his
duties and, in case of absence or disability of the Treasurer, shall perform
the duties and may exercise the powers of the Treasurer.
§ 35-10. Appointment; compensation.
The Assistant Treasurer shall be appointed by the Borough Council at such
compensation as shall be established annually by the Borough Council. Said
appointment shall be at the will of Borough Council and until further action
of Council.
§ 35-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-10
1:19

ARTICLE IV
Borough Manager
[Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 693]
§ 35-11. Office created.
The Office of Borough Manager is hereby created, subject to the right of the
Borough by ordinance, at any time to abolish said office.
§ 35-12. Appointment; removal.
Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the Office of the Borough Manager, the
Borough Council, by a vote of a majority of all the members thereof, shall
appoint one person to the Office of Borough Manager, subject to removal by
the Council at any time by a vote of the majority of all the members thereof.
§ 35-13. Qualifications.
The Borough Manager shall be a citizen of the United States, at least 21
years of age,
§ 35-14. Manager's bond.
The Borough Manager is required to become bonded upon assuming the
appointed office. In the event the Borough Manager becomes ineligible
for bonding, his or her employment shall be immediately terminated. Any
premiums associated with said bond shall be paid by the Borough.
§ 35-15. Manager's salary.
The yearly salary of the Borough Manager of Slippery Rock Borough shall
be negotiated at the time of his/her hiring and thereafter during annual
budget preparation for each subsequent year as established by Council.
§ 35-16. Powers and duties.
Subject to recall or amendment at any time by resolution of Council, the
Borough Manager shall serve as the chief executive officer of the Borough
administration and operations and shall carry on the business of the
Borough under the direction of the Council exercising his/her powers and
duties as established by Resolution of Council and within the authority
vested under the Borough Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 35-17. Authority of Council to amend, modify or repeal.
The Borough reserves the right at any time, by ordinance, to amend or
otherwise modify or repeal this article.
§ 35-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-17
1:21
Chapter 42
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 207.
§ 42-1. Creation.
§ 42-2. Membership; terms; vacancies; rules and regulations.
The Park and Recreation Commission shall consist of nine members to be
appointed by Council. Appointment shall be for a five-year term, and no
more than two members' terms shall expire in any one year. An appointment
to fill a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of that term. The
Park and Recreation Commission shall make such rules and regulations for
its own organization and procedure, consistent with the ordinances of the
Borough and the laws of the commonwealth.
§ 42-3. Compensation; annual report; power to employ staff.
The members of the Park and Recreation Commission shall serve without
compensation and shall make annually to the Council a report of their
activities. They may employ such persons as are necessary to operate the
parks and recreation programs within the Borough, whose salaries and
wages and other necessary expenses of the Commission, where approved by
Council, shall be provided for through property appropriation by Council.
§ 42-4. Duties.
A. A Park and Recreation Commission shall be created within the Borough
of Slippery Rock for the purpose of supervising the existing parks and
creation of future parks as desired by Borough Council, to supervise,
maintain and operate recreation programs of the Borough, and such
other duties as the Borough Council shall from time to time designate to
the Park Commission.
B. The Park and Recreation Commission is created under the authority
granted by the General Assembly by the Act of May 4, 1927, P.L. 519,
Art. XI, Section 1150, and the Act of July 10, 1947, P.L. 1621, Section
38.
A. All parks and recreation programs in the Borough shall be operated and
maintained under the supervision of the Park and Recreation
Commission.
B. The Park and Recreation Commission shall see to the operation and
maintenance of recreation programs and the Borough parks and
§ 35-17 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 42-4
1:22
§ 42-5. Funding.
§ 42-6. Required reports.
The Park and Recreation Commission shall make full and complete reports
to the Borough of Slippery Rock and the school district of the Borough
of Slippery Rock at such times as may be designated or requested by the
Council and the Borough School Board. The fiscal year of the Commission
shall be the same as that of the Borough of Slippery Rock.
§ 42-7. Development and operation of recreational programs.
Such powers as are now or may hereafter be provided by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by ordinances of the Borough of Slippery
Rock relating to the development and operation of recreational programs
are hereby vested in the Park and Recreation Commission, to be exercised
supervise all employees engaged in the maintenance of such parks and
programs.
C. The Park and Recreation Commission shall make such rules and
regulations as are from time to time necessary for the operation and
use of the parks and recreation programs, and Council may enact such
rules and regulations as ordinances of the Borough where necessary
and desired by Council.
A. The Borough Council shall make an annual appropriation for the use of
the Park and Recreation Board. Said funds shall be disbursed by the
fiscal disbursing officer of the Park and Recreation Commission, upon
vouchers issued by the Commission and within the budget
appropriations. The Commission shall submit its annual budget to the
Borough Council at or prior to December 1 of each year for the next
calendar year. Any funds appropriated by the school district of the
Borough of Slippery Rock shall be included in said budget and shall be
disbursed as outlined above.
B. The Commission may receive any grant, gift, bequest or donation of
services, equipment, or money from any individual or group, to be used
as specified by the donor, or by the terms of acceptance. All gifts of real
estate must be accepted by the Borough Council on behalf of the
Borough. The use of the real estate may then be assigned to the
Commission. The Commission shall have no authority to enter into any
contract or incur any obligation binding upon the Borough of Slippery
Rock unless the same is included in the budget appropriation made by
the Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock.
C. Funds received by the Commission from sources other than budget
appropriations by the Borough of Slippery Rock shall be deposited by
the Commission to the credit and for the use of said Board and shall be
disbursed in accordance with the terms of such gift or bequest, or the
terms of the acceptance thereof.
§ 42-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-7
1:23
by it, subject to any and all restrictions contained in such powers and
ordinances.
Chapter 48
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 35.
Police Department — See Ch. 60.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 71.
§ 42-7 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 42-7
1:24
ARTICLE I
Municipal Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 6884]
§ 48-1. Participation in system.
Slippery Rock Borough (the Borough), being a member municipality of
the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the System), hereby elects
to amend its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the System in
accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law,
53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and
the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 48-2. Administration.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Borough effective October 1, 2015 (the contract).
§ 48-3. Acceptance of contract.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Borough is an official
acceptance of the contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the contract.
§ 48-4. Payment for prior services.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the contract shall be made by the Borough in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 48-5. Plan authorized; repealer.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
contract and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance No.
562 either immediately or on October 1, 2015, which is the effective date of
the contract, whichever is later.
§ 48-6. Copy on file.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed contract shall be filed
with the System.
4. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Municipal Employees
Retirement Fund, adopted 1-5-1999 by Ord. No. 568 (Ch. 1, Part 4B, of the 1983 Code).
§ 48-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-7
1:25
§ 48-7. (Reserved)
§ 48-7 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-7
1:26
ARTICLE II
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 4-1-2014 as Exhibit A of Ord. No. 590-RSTUV5]
§ 48-8. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used herein, shall have the meanings
set forth in this section, unless a different meaning is plainly required by
the context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given computation date, the participant's
monthly benefit determined in accordance with § 48-11B, calculated on the
basis of final monthly average compensation as of the date of determination
and multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the
participant's aggregate service determined as of such date and the
denominator of which shall be the projected aggregate service of the
participant as if the participant continues in employment until attainment of
normal retirement age. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, in no event shall the fraction exceed 1.0. In no event, however,
shall the accrued benefit exceed the maximum limitation, determined as
of the date of computation, provided under § 48-11F. All accrued benefits
are subject to all applicable limitations, reductions, offsets and actuarial
adjustments provided by the plan prior to the actual payment thereof.
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this fund or its predecessor by way of payroll deduction or
otherwise, plus interest credited at the rate of 3% per annum. Interest
shall be credited annually in the form of a compound interest rate from
the midpoint of the plan year during which the contributions were paid
to the first day of the month preceding the date on which a distribution
of accumulated contributions under § 48-13C or 48-14B shall be paid or
payment of benefits shall commence.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act
which was enacted as Act 205 of 1984, as amended, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et
seq.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date. The actuarial present value shall be
5. Editor's Note: The body of this ordinance provided as follows: "Section 1: The plan was
established as of December 29, 1975, pursuant to resolution and under the provisions of
Act 600 for the benefit of the Borough's police employees and has been amended and
restated, from time to time, by the enactment of amending ordinances of the Slippery
Rock Borough Council. The Slippery Rock Police Association has reviewed and agreed
upon the amendments and restatement. The plan shall be, and hereby is, restated,
amended and supplemented as set forth in Section 2. Section 2. The plan shall be restated
and amended by entirely substituting therefor the provisions of said plan attached hereto
as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein. Any ordinances, resolutions or parts of ordinances
or resolutions conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance shall be and hereby are
repealed so far as the same affect this ordinance; however, such repeal shall not affect any
act done or any right or liability accrued under such ordinance or resolution herein
repealed or superseded, and all such rights or liabilities shall continue and may be
enforced in the same manner as if such repeal or supersession had not been made but
only to the extent otherwise permitted under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Section 3. This ordinance shall be effective as of January 1, 2014."
§ 48-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-8
1:27
determined by use of the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table and sevenpercent
interest, unless otherwise specifically provided herein.
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at
any given time is serving as actuary, provided that such actuary must be an
approved actuary as defined in the Act.
AGGREGATE SERVICE — The total period or periods of the participant's
employment with the employer, whether or not interrupted.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should any such participant
receive a distribution of accumulated contributions with respect to a period
of employment, such period of employment shall not be included in the
aggregate service thereafter, unless, at the commencement of the next
period of employment, the participant repays to the fund the amount of
the distribution, plus interest. For purposes of this definition, interest shall
accrue as of the date the employee receives a distribution of accumulated
contributions and shall be computed at the same rate and in the same
manner as described in the definition of "accumulated contributions."
ATTENDING COLLEGE — The eligible children are registered at an
accredited institution of higher learning and are carrying a minimum course
load of seven credit hours per semester.
AUTHORIZED LEAVE OF ABSENCE — A leave of absence granted in
writing by the employer for reasons including, but not limited to, accident,
sickness, pregnancy, temporary disability, education, training, jury duty,
or such other reasons as may necessitate authorized leave from active
employment. "Authorized leave of absence" shall include a period of time
for active service with the armed forces of the United States of America,
provided that the participant shall return to employment within the time
prescribed by law following separation from such military service during
which the participant's reemployment rights are protected.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person designated by Slippery
Rock Borough Council who has the primary responsibility for the execution
of the administrative affairs for the plan.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
COMMITTEE — The Pension Plan Committee, as more fully described in
§ 48-15B, which may be appointed by the Council to administer the terms of
the plan.
COMPENSATION — The total remuneration of the employee, whether
salary or hourly wages, including overtime pay, holiday pay, longevity pay
and any other form of remuneration, excluding reimbursement for
expenses, paid by the employer for police services rendered. Compensation
shall be limited on an annual basis to the amount specified for government
plans pursuant to Code Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code Section
415(d).6
COUNCIL — The Slippery Rock Borough Council.
6. Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 401(a)(17) and 415(d).
§ 48-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-8
1:28
DEFERRED VESTED PARTICIPANT — A participant who has completed at
least 12 years of service, who has separated from employment for reasons
other than retirement, death or disability, and who has elected to receive
a vested retirement benefit pursuant to § 48-14C to commence at normal
retirement age.
DISABILITY DATE — The date when a participant is determined by the plan
administrator to be incapacitated due to total and permanent disability or
the date when the participant's employment terminates due to such total
and permanent disability, if later.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual employed by the employer on a regular, fulltime
basis as a police officer of the employer's police force.
EMPLOYER — Slippery Rock Borough, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT — For the purpose of determining aggregate service:
The period of time for which an employee is directly or indirectly
compensated or entitled to compensation by the employer for the
performance of duties as a police officer.
A.
Any period of time for which an employee is paid, either directly by
the employer or through a program to which the employer has made
contributions on behalf of the employee, a fixed, periodic amount in
the nature of salary continuation payments for reasons other than the
performance of duties (such as vacation, holidays, sickness, entitlement
to benefits under workers' compensation or similar laws).
B.
Any period during which an employee is entitled to disability benefits
under this plan, provided that the employee returns to employment
within three months of the date on which it is determined that the
employee is no longer totally and permanently disabled if such
determination occurs prior to the date a participant attains normal
retirement age.
C.
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the armed
forces of the United States of America, provided that the participant
has been employed as a regular, full-time member of the employer's
police force for a period of at least six months immediately prior to the
period of military service, and the participant returns to employment
within six months following discharge from military service or within
such longer period during which employment rights are guaranteed by
applicable law or under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement
with the employer, and provided that the participant is not entitled
to receive, eligible to receive now or in the future or is receiving
retirement benefits for such military service under a retirement system
administered and wholly or partially paid for by any other governmental
agency, except military retirement pay earned by a combination of
active and nonactive duty with a reserve or national guard component
of the armed forces which is payable upon the attainment of a specified
age and period of service under 10 U.S.C. Chapter 1223 (relating to
retired pay for nonregular service).7
D.
§ 48-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-8
1:29
FINAL AVERAGE MONTHLY COMPENSATION — The average monthly
compensation earned by the participant for services rendered as an
employee in employment during the consecutive thirty-six-month period
preceding termination or retirement. "Compensation" shall include the
employer's compensation (W-2) to which the employee is entitled for the
rendering of services in employment, but excludes lump sum payments,
paid upon retirement or otherwise, for any form of accrued but unused paid
leave. Compensation used to determine final average monthly compensation
shall be limited on an annual basis to the amount specified for government
Any period of qualified military service as determined under the
requirements of Chapter 43 of Title 38, United States Code, provided
that the participant returns to employment following such period of
qualified military service, and the participant makes payment to the
plan in an amount equal to the participant contributions that would
otherwise have been paid to the plan during such period of qualified
military service. The amount of participant contributions shall be based
upon an estimate of the compensation that would have been paid
to the participant during such period of qualified military service as
determined by the average compensation paid to the participant during
the 12 months immediately preceding the period of qualified military
service. The amount of participant contributions so calculated must be
paid into the plan before the end of the period that begins on the date
of reemployment and ends on the earlier of the date that ends the
period that has a duration of three times the period of qualified military
service, or the date that is five years after the date of reemployment.
E.
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the armed
forces of the United States of America not to exceed a total of five years
which occurred prior to the date on which a participant first became
employed as an employee of the employer, provided that the participant
shall purchase such credit and that such participant is not entitled to
receive, eligible to receive or is receiving retirement benefits for such
military service under a retirement system administered and wholly or
partially paid for by any other governmental agency, except military
retirement pay earned by a combination of active and nonactive duty
with a reserve or national guard component of the armed forces which
is payable upon the attainment of a specified age and period of service
under 10 U.S.C. Chapter 1223 (relating to retired pay for nonregular
service). The purchase price for such service shall be computed by
multiplying the average normal cost rate for the plan as certified by the
Public Employee Retirement Commission and not to exceed 10% times
the participant's average annual rate of compensation during the first
three years of employment and multiplying the result times the number
of years and fractions thereof being purchased. Interest shall be paid at
a rate of 4.75% compounded annually from the first date of employment
to the date of payment.8
F.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 48-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-8
1:30
plans in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code
Section 415(d).9
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY — A legal reserve life insurance
company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MINIMUM MUNICIPAL OBLIGATION — The minimum obligation of the
municipality as determined by the actuary pursuant to provisions of the Act.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The date on which the participant has
completed at least 25 years of service with the employer and has attained
age 50.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The day of attainment of normal
retirement age.
NOTICE or ELECTION — A written document prepared in the form
specified by the plan administrator. If such notice or election is to be
provided by the employer or the plan administrator, it shall be mailed in a
properly addressed envelope, postage prepaid, to the last known address
of the person entitled thereto, on or before the last day of the specified
notice or election period. If such notice or election is to be provided to the
employer or the plan administrator, it must be received by the recipient on
or before the last day of the specified notice or election period.
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has met the eligibility requirements to
participate in the plan as provided in § 48-9A and who has not for any
reason ceased to be a participant hereunder.
PENSION FUND or FUND — The pension fund administered under the
terms of this plan and which shall include all money, property, investments,
policies and contracts standing in the name of the plan.
PLAN — The plan set forth herein, as amended from time to time and
designated as "Slippery Rock Borough Police Pension Fund."
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The committee or individual appointed by the
Council for the purpose of supervising and administering the provisions
of the plan. In the event that no such appointment is made, the plan
administrator shall be the Council.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31 of each year.
POLICY or CONTRACT — A retirement annuity or retirement income
endowment policy (or a combination of both) or any other form of insurance
contract or policy which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with
the provisions of applicable law.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 2002, the date upon which this
amendment and restatement of the plan becomes effective.
RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with or next
following the date on which the participant retires from employment or
9. Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 401(a)(17) and 415(d).
§ 48-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-8
1:31
the first day of any month thereafter on which the payment of retirement
benefits pursuant to this plan shall commence.
SERVICE INCREMENT — The amount calculated pursuant to § 48-11D
on behalf of a participant for each completed year of aggregate service
accumulated in excess of 25 years.
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — A condition of physical or mental
impairment due to which a participant is unable to perform the usual
and customary duties of employment and which is reasonably expected to
continue to be permanent for the remainder of the participant's lifetime.
For purposes of this definition and § 48-12, a condition shall not be treated
as a total and permanent disability unless such condition is a direct result
of and occurs in the line of duty of employment. Therefore, an employee
whose physical or mental impairment does not occur in the line of duty or
which is a result of alcoholism, addiction to narcotics, willfully self-inflicted
injuries, or the perpetration of any criminal activity is not entitled to receive
disability benefits under the plan.
§ 48-9. Participation in plan.
§ 48-10. Contributions.
A. Eligibility requirements. Each employee who is employed as a regular,
full-time permanent member of the Police Department of the employer
shall participate herein as of the date on which such employee's
employment first commences or recommences, provided all
prerequisites to participation under this plan shall have been fulfilled,
including but not limited to completion of all forms required by the plan
administrator.
B. Notification of plan administrator. The Council shall furnish the plan
administrator with written notification of the appointment of any new
full-time permanent employee who is eligible for participation
hereunder.
C. Designation of beneficiary. Any new, full-time employee who becomes a
participant hereunder shall provide a written notice in the manner
prescribed by the plan administrator which designates a beneficiary at
the time participation commences. The participant's election of any
such beneficiary may be rescinded or changed, without the consent of
the beneficiary, at any time, provided the participant provides the
written notice of the changed designation to the plan administrator in
the manner prescribed by the plan administrator. Any designation of a
beneficiary made in any manner other than one acceptable to the plan
administrator shall be null and void and have no effect under the terms
of the plan.
A. Participant contributions. Each participant shall as a requirement of
participation pay regular contributions to the pension fund in an
amount equal to not less than 5% nor more than 8% of the participant's
annual compensation. The Council shall fix the annual rate of
§ 48-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-10
1:32
§ 48-11. Retirement benefits.
contribution. Each participant shall complete the necessary forms to
authorize the payment of participant contributions by way of payroll
deduction in equal and proportionate monthly installments.
B. Reduction of participant contributions. Notwithstanding the preceding
Subsection A, if an actuarial study performed by the actuary shows that
the condition of the pension fund is such that payments into the pension
fund by participants may be reduced below the minimum percentages
prescribed in Subsection A, or may be eliminated, and that if such
payments are reduced or eliminated, contributions by the employer will
not be required to keep the pension fund actuarially sound, the
employer may, on an annual basis, by ordinance or resolution, reduce or
eliminate payments into the pension fund by participants. No liability
under the Police Pension Fund, however, for retirement benefits or
death or disability payments shall be a charge on any other fund of the
Borough, save the Police Pension Fund as herein provided.
C. Employer contributions. The actuary, in accordance with the Act, shall
determine the minimum municipal obligation of the employer. The
employer shall pay into the pension fund, by annual appropriations or
otherwise, the contributions necessary to satisfy the minimum
municipal obligation.
D. State aid. General municipal pension system state aid, or any other
amount of state aid received by the employer in accordance with the
Act from the commonwealth, may be deposited into the pension fund
governed by this plan in amounts determined by the Council and shall
be used to reduce the amount of the minimum municipal obligation of
the employer.
E. Gifts. The Council is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or
otherwise any money or property, real or personal, for the benefit of the
plan and cause the same to be held as a part of the pension fund. The
care, management, investment and disposal of such amounts shall be
vested in the Council or its delegate, the plan administrator, subject to
the direction of the donor and not inconsistent with applicable laws and
the terms of the plan.
A. Normal retirement. Each participant shall be entitled to normal
retirement benefits after retirement on or after the participant has
attained normal retirement age.
B. Normal retirement benefit. Each participant who shall become entitled
to a benefit pursuant to Subsection A shall receive a benefit paid
monthly in an amount equal to not more than 50% of the participant's
final monthly average compensation as determined herein.
C. Late retirement. A participant may continue to work beyond the
attainment of normal retirement age, subject to the employer's rules
§ 48-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-11
1:33
and regulations regarding retirement age. If a participant who has met
the requirements of Subsection A continues to work beyond normal
retirement age, there shall be no retirement benefits paid until
employment ceases and retirement begins. The retirement benefit of
a participant who retires after attainment of normal retirement age
shall be calculated in accordance with Subsection B on the basis of
the final monthly average compensation as of such participant's actual
retirement date.
D. Service increment. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, a participant who shall retire after completion of at least 26
years of aggregate service may be entitled to receive a monthly service
increment benefit; provided, however, that the participant shall have
accrued sufficient service credit pursuant to this Subsection D. Such
service increment shall only be available to a participant who shall
retire on a retirement date after attainment of normal retirement age
and whose aggregate service for purposes of this Subsection D shall
only include periods of time when the participant actively renders
service in employment and periods of military service credit which the
participant has purchased under the definition of "employment" in
§ 48-8 but shall not include any period of time during which the
participant received a disability benefit under the terms of this plan or
was not otherwise in active employment. Such service increment shall
be an amount equal to $100 for each completed year of aggregate
service in excess of 25 years, but shall not exceed $100, and shall be
paid monthly in addition to the amount of normal retirement benefit
calculated pursuant to Subsection B hereof.
E. Payment of benefits. Retirement benefit payments shall be payable as of
the first day of the month coincident with or next following the
participant's retirement date and the first day of each month thereafter
during the participant's lifetime. A participant must complete an
application for benefit in the manner prescribed by the plan
administrator and deliver such application to the plan administrator at
least 30 days prior to the date on which benefit payments shall
commence. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary,
no retirement benefit payments nor any other payments shall be due or
payable on or before the first day of the month coincident with or next
following the date that is 30 days after the date the plan administrator
receives the application for benefits. Payment of benefits hereunder
shall cease as of the date of death of the participant.
F. Maximum benefit limitations. Notwithstanding any provision of this
plan to the contrary, no benefit provided under this plan attributable to
contributions of the employer shall exceed, as an annual amount, the
amount specified for government plans in Code Section 415(b)(1)(A), as
adjusted pursuant to Code Section 415(d),10 assuming the form of
benefit shall be a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits). The
10.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 415(b)(1)(A) and 415(d).
§ 48-11 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-11
1:34
limitations described in this Subsection F shall be governed by the
following conditions and definitions:
(1) Benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits) or where the employee contributes to
the plan or makes rollover contributions shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to determine the limitation contained
herein;
(2) In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the attainment of
age 62 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on
an actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined pursuant
to this subsection commencing at age 62; however, the reduction
shall not reduce the limitation below $75,000 for a benefit
commencing at or after age 55, or, if the benefit commences prior
to attainment of age 55, the amount which is actuarially equivalent
to a benefit of $75,000 commencing at age 55; however, in the case
of a qualified participant (a participant with respect to whom a
period of at least 15 years of service, including applicable military
service, as a full-time employee of a police or fire department is
taken into account in determining the amount of benefit), the
limitation contained herein shall not reduce the limitation to an
amount less than the amount specified for government plans
pursuant to Code Section 415(b)(2)(G), and such amount shall be
adjusted pursuant to Code Section 415(d);11
(3) In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of age
65 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined herein
commencing at age 65;
(4) Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000 from all
defined benefit plans maintained by the employer expressed as an
annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed the limitation of this
Subsection F, provided that the employer has not at any time
maintained a defined contribution plan in which the participant has
participated; however, in the case of a participant who is not
receiving a disability retirement benefit pursuant to § 48-12B with
fewer than 10 years of participation, the limitation expressed in
this Subsection F(4) shall be reduced by 1/10 for each year of
participation less than 10, but in no event shall this limitation be
less than $1,000;
(5) The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan years for
calculation purposes, shall be applied to all defined benefit plans
maintained by the employer as one defined benefit plan and to all
defined contribution plans maintained by the employer as one
defined contribution plan, and shall be applied and interpreted
consistent with Code Section 41512 and regulations thereunder as
11.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 415(b)(2)(G) and 415(d).
§ 48-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-11
1:35
applicable to government plans in general and this plan in
particular; and
(6) In the case of a survivor benefit under § 48-13C or a disability
retirement benefit under § 48-12B, the adjustment under
Subsection F(2) hereof shall not apply, and the applicable limitation
shall be the limitation contained herein without regard to the age of
the benefit recipient.
G. Required distributions.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the entire benefit
of any participant who becomes entitled to benefits prior to death
shall be distributed either:
(a) Not later than the required beginning date; or
(b) Over a period beginning not later than the required beginning
date and extending over the life of such participant or over the
lives of such participant and a designated beneficiary (or over a
period not extending beyond the life expectancy of such
participant, or the joint life expectancies of such participant
and a designated beneficiary).
(2) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies prior
to the date when the entire interest has been distributed after
distribution of benefits has begun in accordance with Subsection
G(1)(b) above, the remaining portion of such benefit shall be
distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution
being used under Subsection G(1)(b) as of the date of death.
(3) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies
before distribution of benefits has begun, the entire interest of such
employee shall be distributed within five years of the death of such
employee, unless the following sentence is applicable. If any
portion of the employee's interest is payable to (or for the benefit
of) a designated beneficiary, such portion shall be distributed over
the life of such designated beneficiary (or over a period not
extending beyond the life expectancy of such beneficiary), and such
distributions begin not later than one year after the date of the
employee's death or such later date as provided by regulations
issued by the Secretary of the Treasury, then for purposes of the
five-year rule set forth in the preceding sentence, the benefit
payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as distributed on the
date on which such distributions begin; provided, however, that
notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the designated
beneficiary is the surviving spouse of the participant, then the date
on which distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier
than the date upon which the employee would have attained age
70 1/2, and further provided that if the surviving spouse dies before
12.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415.
§ 48-11 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-11
1:36
the distributions to such spouse begin, this subsection shall be
applied as if the surviving spouse were the employee.
(4) For purposes of this Subsection G, the following definitions and
procedures shall apply:
(a) "Required beginning date" shall mean April 1 of the calendar
year following the later of the calendar year in which the
employee attains age 70 1/2, or the calendar year in which the
employee retires.
(b) The phrase "designated beneficiary" shall mean any individual
designated by the employee under this plan according to its
rules.
(c) Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it had been
paid to the surviving spouse if such amount will become
payable to the surviving spouse upon such child reaching
majority (or other designated event permitted under
regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury).
(d) For purposes of this Subsection G, the life expectancy of an
employee and/or the employee's spouse (other than in the case
of a life annuity) may be redetermined, but not more frequently
than annually.
H. Assignment. The pension benefit payments prescribed herein shall not
be subject to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal
process and shall be payable only to the participant or designated
beneficiary and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer unless the
subject of a domestic relations order, entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction, that provides for the proper distribution of the pension
benefit payments to an alternate payee [e.g., a former spouse of a
participant, child, etc., as provided by Code Section 414(p)(8)13] and
does not require any benefit to be paid in excess of the available earned
and accrued benefit under the plan.
I. Retired participants. Any participant who shall have retired prior to the
restatement date shall not have the benefit altered in any way by the
provisions of this amended and restated plan, except where otherwise
expressly provided herein. Such retired participants shall continue to
have their benefits governed by the terms of the plan in effect on the
day preceding the restatement date.
J. Cost-of-living adjustments. Each participant who shall retire on or after
January 1, 1999, and receive a retirement benefit determined pursuant
to Subsection B of this section or § 48-12B hereunder shall be entitled
to receive a cost-of-living adjustment to the amount of benefit payable
to such participant effective as of the first day of each plan year
following the date which is 12 months after the date benefit payments
13.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(p)(8).
§ 48-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-11
1:37
§ 48-12. Disability retirement.
commenced. No cost-of-living adjustment shall ever exceed any of the
following limits:
(1) The percentage increase in the consumer price index (urban wage
earners and clerical workers) from the year in which the
participant was last employed as an employee of the employer;
(2) The total retirement benefits payable under this plan shall not
exceed 75% of the participant's final monthly average
compensation;
(3) The total cost-of-living adjustment shall not exceed 30% of the
participant's retirement benefit under this plan; and
(4) The cost-of-living adjustment shall not impair the actuarial
soundness of the pension fund.
A. Disability retirement. A participant who shall incur a total and
permanent disability shall be entitled to a disability retirement benefit
as of the disability date.
B. Disability retirement benefit. A participant who shall be entitled to a
disability retirement benefit under Subsection A shall receive a benefit
in an amount equal to 50% of the participant's final monthly average
compensation determined as of the disability date multiplied by the
ratio of completed years of service at the disability date to the total
years of service the participant would have attained at normal
retirement age. The amount of disability retirement benefit payable
hereunder shall be reduced by any employer-provided disability
benefits to which the participant is entitled as a result of such
participant's total and permanent disability, including statutory benefits
such as workers' compensation, social security disability benefits and
other insured benefits.
C. Payment of disability benefits. Disability payments shall be made
monthly as of the first day of each month, commencing as of the first
day of the month coincident with or immediately following the date that
the participant incurs the total and permanent disability as certified by
a physician and continuing for the life of the participant, or terminating
earlier should a physician report and certify to Council that the
participant no longer has a total and permanent disability. A participant
who shall fail to return within three months to employment as an
employee of the employer upon cessation of total and permanent
disability prior to attainment of normal retirement age shall be deemed
to have terminated employment as of the disability date, shall be
entitled to either a distribution of accumulated contributions pursuant
to § 48-14B or a deferred vested benefit pursuant to § 48-14C and shall
not be entitled to any other benefits under the plan on account of any
aggregate service as of the disability date.
§ 48-11 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-12
1:38
§ 48-13. Death benefits.
D. Verification of disability. The plan administrator shall in its sole
discretion determine whether a participant shall have incurred a total
and permanent disability. The plan administrator shall rely on the
report of a physician acceptable to the plan administrator. If the plan
administrator shall determine that a participant who is totally and
permanently disabled has recovered sufficiently to resume active
employment as a police officer or if a participant refuses to undergo a
medical examination as directed by the plan administrator (such a
medical examination may not be required more frequently than once in
any given twelve-month period), the participant shall cease to be
considered totally and permanently disabled.
E. Cessation of disability. A participant must notify the plan administrator
of any change which may cause a cessation of entitlement to receipt of
any disability retirement benefit hereunder. If a participant fails to
provide immediate notice to the plan administrator of any such change
in status and receives payment of benefits hereunder to which the
participant is not entitled, then the plan may take whatever action is
necessary to recover any amount of improperly paid amounts, including
legal action or offsetting such amounts against any future payments of
retirement or other benefits under the plan, including the costs of such
actions.
A. Death of participant. Upon the occurrence of the death of a participant,
there shall be benefits payable in accord with the following subsections
of this section. There shall be no duplication of benefits payable
hereunder, therefore only one benefit shall be payable as a result of the
death of a participant.
B. Killed in service. If the participant dies in the line of duty, survivor
benefits shall be paid by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
accordance with Act 51 of 2009.14 Such benefits shall not be the
responsibility of the employer.
C. Survivor benefit. The surviving spouse of a participant who, prior to
April 18, 2002, retired on pension and dies subsequent to retirement or
who, after April 16, 2002, retires on pension and dies subsequent to
retirement, or, if no spouse survives or if the spouse survives and
subsequently dies, the child or children under the age of 18 years or, if
attending college, under or attaining the age of 23 years of such
participant, shall, during his/her lifetime in the case of a surviving
spouse, or until reaching the age of 18 years or, if attending college,
under or attaining the age of 23 years in the case of a child or children,
be entitled to receive a pension calculated at 50% of the pension the
participant was receiving or would have been receiving had the
participant been retired at the time of the participant's death. Payments
shall commence as of the first day of the month following the
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 891.
§ 48-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-13
1:39
§ 48-14. Termination of employment.
participant's date of death. The survivor benefit shall be paid monthly
to the surviving spouse of the participant, if any, until the date of death
of the surviving spouse. Upon the death of the surviving spouse, or if
there is no surviving spouse, the survivor benefit shall be paid monthly
in equal shares to the surviving dependent children of the deceased
participant if under the age of 18 or, if attending college, under or
attaining the age of 23 years of age. The shares payable to the surviving
dependent children shall be adjusted as each child ceases to be eligible
to receive a share of the benefit hereunder.
D. Death of participant prior to retirement. If a participant shall die before
payment of a benefit has commenced and without eligibility for
payment of a survivor benefit under § 48-13C, the beneficiary shall be
eligible to receive a distribution in an amount equal to the accumulated
contributions of the participant, plus interest as provided in the
definition of "accumulated contributions" in § 48-8 or other increases in
value of the participant's investment in the pension fund, as of the date
of death of the participant or as of the first of the month in which the
death occurred.
A. Rights of terminated employees. A participant who shall cease to be an
employee except as otherwise hereinbefore provided shall have all
interest and rights under this plan limited to those contained in the
following subsections of this section.
B. Distribution of accumulated contributions. A participant whose
employment with the employer shall terminate for any reason other
than death or total and permanent disability prior to attainment of
normal retirement age shall be entitled to receive a distribution of
accumulated contributions with interest at the rate of 3% per annum.
Upon receipt of such accumulated contributions, said participant and
beneficiary shall not be entitled to any further payments from the plan.
C. Deferred vested benefit. A participant who has completed at least 12
years of aggregate service and whose employment with the employer
shall terminate from a full-time position for any reason other than death
or total and permanent disability prior to attainment of normal
retirement age shall be entitled to elect to receive a deferred vested
benefit in lieu of a distribution of accumulated contributions under
Subsection B. The participant must declare his election in writing
within 90 days of the day he ceases to be a full-time police officer with
the Borough. Such a deferred vested benefit shall commence after
application pursuant to § 48-11E as of the first day of the month
coincident with or next following the date on which the participant's
normal retirement age would be attained if the participant continued in
employment until such date. Upon reaching the normal retirement date
and following the participant's application, the participant shall be paid
a partial superannuation retirement allowance determined by applying
the percentage his years of service bears to the years of service which
§ 48-13 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-14
1:40
§ 48-15. Administration.
he would have rendered had he continued to work until his normal
retirement date to the gross pension, using, however, the final monthly
average compensation. Such pension or retirement benefits for any
month shall be computed at no more than 1/2 the final monthly average
compensation of the participant.
A. Plan administrator. The plan administrator shall be the committee or
the individual appointed by the Council who shall have the power and
authority to do all acts and to execute, acknowledge and deliver all
instruments necessary to implement and effectuate the purpose of this
plan. The plan administrator may delegate authority to act on its behalf
to any persons it deems appropriate. If a plan administrator is not
appointed, the Council shall be the plan administrator.
B. Police Pension Committee. If the Council shall appoint a Police Pension
Committee to administer the affairs of the plan, the Council shall
delegate such authority as it shall deem appropriate to the Committee.
The Committee shall consist of not more than five members who shall
be appointed by the Council. Each member of the Committee shall
serve in that capacity until death, resignation, removal or otherwise.
Each member may be removed at any time, with or without cause, by
the Council. Each member may resign by delivering written notice to
the Council and other members of the Committee. Vacancies on the
Committee shall be filled in the same manner as the position was
originally filled. The Council is not required to appoint a Police Pension
Committee.
C. Authority and duties of the plan administrator.
(1) The plan administrator shall have full power and authority to do
whatever shall, in its judgment, be reasonably necessary for the
proper administration and operation of the plan. The interpretation
or construction placed upon any term or provision of the plan by
the plan administrator or any action of the plan administrator taken
in good faith shall, upon the Council's review and approval thereof,
be final and conclusive upon all parties hereto, whether employees,
participants or other persons concerned. By way of specification
and not limitation and except as specifically limited hereafter, the
plan administrator is authorized:
(a) To construe this plan;
(b) To determine all questions affecting the eligibility of any
employee to participate herein;
(c) To compute the amount and source of any benefit payable
hereunder to any participant or beneficiary;
(d) To authorize any and all disbursements;
§ 48-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-15
1:41
(e) To prescribe any procedure to be followed by any participant
and/or other person in filing any application or election;
(f) To prepare and distribute, in such manner as may be required
by law or as the plan administrator deems appropriate,
information explaining the plan;
(g) To require from the employer or any participant such
information as shall be necessary for the proper administration
of the plan; and
(h) To appoint and retain any individual to assist in the
administration of the plan, including such legal, clerical,
accounting and actuarial services as may be required by any
applicable law or laws.
(2) The plan administrator shall have no power to add to, subtract from
or modify the terms of the plan or change or add to any benefits
provided by the plan, or to waive or fail to apply any requirements
of eligibility for benefits under the plan. Further, the plan
administrator shall have no power to adopt, amend, or terminate
the plan, to select or appoint any trustee or to determine or require
any contributions to the plan, said powers being exclusively
reserved to the Council.
D. Police Pension Committee organization. If the Council appoints a
Committee, it may organize itself in any manner deemed appropriate to
effectuate its purposes hereunder, subject to the following:
(1) The Committee shall act by a majority of its members at the time in
office, and such action may be taken either by vote at a meeting or
in writing without a meeting.
(2) The Committee shall, from time to time, appoint a Chairman, a
Secretary who may, but need not, be a Committee member and
such other agents as it may deem advisable.
(3) The Committee may, from time to time, authorize any one or more
of its members to execute any document or documents, including
any application, request, certificate, notice, consent, waiver or
direction, and shall notify the Council, in writing, of the name or
names of the member or members so authorized. In the absence of
a designation, the Chairman shall be deemed to be so authorized.
Any trustee or other fiduciary appointed hereunder shall accept
and be fully protected in relying upon any document executed by
the designated member or members (or the Chairman in the
absence of a designation) as representing a valid action by the
Committee until the Committee shall file with such fiduciary a
written revocation of such designation.
(4) The Committee, or its delegate, shall maintain and keep such
records as are necessary for the efficient operation of the plan or as
§ 48-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-15
1:42
may be required by any applicable law, regulation or ruling and
shall provide for the preparation and filing of such forms or reports
as may be required to be filed with any governmental agency or
department and with the participants and/or other persons entitled
to benefits under the plan.
E. Plan administrator costs. The plan administrator shall serve without
compensation for services unless otherwise agreed by the Council in
writing. All reasonable expenses incident to the functioning of the plan
administrator, including, but not limited to, fees of accountants,
counsel, actuaries and other specialists and other costs of
administering the plan, may be paid from the pension fund upon
approval by the Council to the extent permitted under applicable law
and not otherwise paid by the employer.
F. Hold harmless. No member of the Council, the plan administrator, the
enrolled actuary, nor any other person involved in the administration of
the plan shall be liable to any person on account of any act or failure to
act which is taken or omitted to be taken in good faith in performing
their respective duties under the terms of this plan. To the extent
permitted by law, the employer shall, and hereby does agree to,
indemnify and hold harmless the plan administrator and each successor
and each of any such individual's heirs, executors and administrators,
and the delegates and appointees (other than any person, bank, firm or
corporation which is independent of the employer and which renders
services to the plan for a fee) from any and all liability and expenses,
including counsel fees, reasonably incurred in any action, suit or
proceeding to which he is or may be made a party by reason of being or
having been a member, delegate or appointee of the plan administrator,
except in matters involving criminal liability, intentional or willful
misconduct. If the employer purchases insurance to cover claims of a
nature described above, then there shall be no right of indemnification
except to the extent of any deductible amount under the insurance
coverage or to the extent of the amount the claims exceed the insured
amount.
G. Approval of benefits. The plan administrator shall review and approve
or deny any application for retirement benefits within 30 days following
receipt thereof or within such longer time as may be necessary under
the circumstances. Any denial of an application for retirement benefits
shall be in writing and shall specify the reason for such denial.
H. Appeal procedure. Any person whose application for retirement
benefits is denied, who questions the amount of benefit paid, who
believes a benefit should have commenced which did not so commence
or who has some other claim arising under the plan ("claimant") shall
first seek a resolution of such claim under the procedure hereinafter set
forth.
(1) Any claimant shall file a notice of the claim with the plan
administrator which shall fully describe the nature of the claim.
§ 48-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-15
1:43
The plan administrator shall review the claim and make an initial
determination approving or denying the claim.
(2) If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the plan administrator
shall, within 90 days (or such other period as may be established by
applicable law) from the time the application is received, mail
notice of such denial to the claimant. Such ninety-day period may
be extended by the plan administrator, if special circumstances so
require, for up to 90 additional days by the plan administrator's
delivering notice of such extension to the claimant within the first
ninety-day period. Any notice hereunder shall be written in a
manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and, if a notice
of denial, shall set forth the specific plan provisions on which the
denial is based; an explanation of additional material or
information, if any necessary to perfect such claim, and a statement
of why such material or information is necessary; and an
explanation of the review procedure.
(3) Upon receipt of notice denying the claim, the claimant shall have
the right to request a full and fair review by the Council of the
initial determination. Such request for review must be made by
notice to the Council within 60 days of receipt of such notice of
denial. During such review, the claimant or a duly authorized
representative shall have the right to review any pertinent
documents and to submit any issues or comments in writing. The
Council shall, within 60 days after receipt of the notice requesting
such review (or, in special circumstances, such as where the
Council in its sole discretion holds a hearing, within 120 days of
receipt of such notice), submit its decision in writing to the person
or persons whose claim has been denied. The decision shall be
final, conclusive and binding on all parties, shall be written in a
manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and shall
contain specific references to the pertinent plan provisions on
which the decision is based.
(4) Any notice of a claim questioning the amount of a benefit in pay
status shall be filed within 90 days following the date of the first
payment which would be adjusted if the claim is granted unless the
plan administrator allows a later filing for good cause shown.
(5) A claimant who does not submit a notice of a claim or a notice
requesting a review of a denial of a claim within the time
limitations specified above shall be deemed to have waived such
claim or right to review.
(6) Nothing contained herein is intended to abridge any right of a
claimant to appeal any final decision hereunder to a court of
competent jurisdiction under 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 752. No decision
hereunder is a final decision from which such an appeal may be
taken until the entire appeal procedure of this Subsection H has
been exhausted.
§ 48-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-16
1:44
§ 48-16. Pension fund.
A. Operation of the pension fund.
(1) The Council is hereby authorized to hold and supervise the
investment of the assets of the pension fund, subject to the
provisions of the laws of the commonwealth and of this plan and
any amendment thereto.
(2) The pension fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the
plan and, to the extent not paid directly by the employer, to pay the
expenses of administering the plan pursuant to authorization by the
employer.
(3) The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the
exclusive benefit of its employees. It expects to make the
contributions to the pension fund required under the plan. The
employer shall not be liable in any manner for any insufficiency in
the pension fund; benefits are payable only from the pension fund,
and only to the extent that there are monies available therein. The
pension fund will consist of all funds held by the employer under
the plan, including contributions made pursuant to the provisions
hereof and the investments, reinvestments and proceeds thereof.
The pension fund shall be held, managed, and administered
pursuant to the terms of the plan. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in the plan, the employer has exclusive authority and
discretion to manage and control the pension fund assets. The
employer may, however, appoint a trustee, custodian and/or
investment manager at its sole discretion.
B. Powers and duties of employer. With respect to the pension fund, the
employer shall have the following powers, rights and duties, in addition
to those vested in it elsewhere in the plan or by law, unless such duties
are delegated:
(1) To retain in cash so much of the pension fund as it deems advisable
and to deposit any cash so retained in any bank or similar financial
institution (including any such institution which may be appointed
to serve as trustee hereunder), without liability for interest
thereon. The Council may deposit funds in a federally insured bank
up to the insured limit; however, the Council may deposit pension
funds in excess of the FDIC limit if the excess deposit is secured by
pledge of the Bank of Federal Securities to the satisfaction of the
Borough.
(2) To invest and reinvest the principal and income of the fund and
keep said fund invested, without distinction between principal and
income, in securities which are at the time legal investments for
fiduciaries under the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act,15 or
as the same may be subsequently modified or amended.
15.Editor's Note: See now 20 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq.
§ 48-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-16
1:45
(3) To sell property held in the fund at either public or private sale for
cash or on credit at such times as it may deem appropriate; to
exchange such property; to grant options for the purchase or
exchange thereof.
(4) To consent to and participate in any plan of reorganization,
consolidation, merger, extension or other similar plan affecting
property held in the fund; to consent to any contract, lease,
mortgage, purchase, sale or other action by any corporation
pursuant to any such plan.
(5) To exercise all conversion and subscription rights pertaining to
property held in the fund.
(6) To exercise all voting rights with respect to property held in the
fund and in connection therewith to grant proxies, discretionary or
otherwise.
(7) To place money at any time in a deposit bank deemed to be
appropriate for the purposes of this plan no matter where situated,
including in those cases where a bank has been appointed to serve
as trustee hereunder, the savings department of its own
commercial bank.
(8) In addition to the foregoing powers, the employer shall also have all
of the powers, rights, and privileges conferred upon trustees by the
Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or as the same may be
subsequently modified or amended, and the power to do all acts,
take all proceedings and execute all rights and privileges, although
not specifically mentioned herein, as the employer may deem
necessary to administer the pension fund.
(9) To maintain and invest the assets of this plan on a collective and
commingled basis with the assets of other pension plans
maintained by the employer, provided that the assets of each
respective plan shall be accounted for and administered separately.
(10) To invest the assets of the pension fund in any collective
commingled trust fund maintained by a bank or trust company,
including any bank or trust company which may act as a trustee
hereunder. In this connection, the commingling of the assets of this
plan with assets of other eligible, participating plans through such
a medium is hereby specifically authorized. Any assets of the plan
which may be so added to such collective trusts shall be subject to
all of the provisions of the applicable declaration of trust, as
amended from time to time, which declaration, if required by its
terms or by applicable law, is hereby adopted as part of the plan, to
the extent of the participation in such collective or commingled
trust fund by the plan.
(11) To make any payment or distribution required or advisable to carry
out the provisions of the plan, provided that if a trustee is
§ 48-16 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-16
1:46
appointed by the employer, such trustee shall make such
distribution only at the direction of the employer.
(12) To compromise, contest, arbitrate, enforce or abandon claims and
demands with respect to the plan.
(13) To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without
liability for the payment of interest thereon, and to decline to make
payment or delivery thereof until final adjudication is made by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(14) To pay, and to deduct from and charge against the pension fund,
any taxes which may be imposed thereon, whether with respect to
the income, property or transfer thereof, or upon or with respect to
the interest of any person therein, which the fund is required to
pay; to contest, in its discretion, the validity or amount of any tax,
assessment, claim or demand which may be levied or made against
or in respect of the pension fund, the income, property or transfer
thereof, or in any matter or thing connected therewith.
(15) To appoint any persons or firms (including but not limited to
accountants, investment advisors, counsel, actuaries, physicians,
appraisers, consultants, professional plan administrators and other
specialists) or otherwise act to secure specialized advice or
assistance as it deems necessary or desirable in connection with
the management of the fund; to the extent not prohibited by
applicable law, the employer shall be entitled to rely conclusively
upon and shall be fully protected in any action or omission taken by
it in good faith reliance upon the advice or opinion of such persons
or firms, provided such persons or firms were prudently chosen by
the employer, taking into account the interests of the participants
and beneficiaries and with due regard to the ability of the persons
or firms to perform their assigned functions.
(16) To retain the services of one or more persons or firms for the
management of (including the power to acquire and dispose of) all
or any part of the fund assets, provided that each of such persons
or firms is registered as an investment advisor under the
Investment Advisors Act of 1940,16 is a bank (as defined in that
Act), or is an insurance company qualified to manage, acquire or
dispose of pension trust assets under the laws of more than one
state; in such event, the employer shall follow the directions of such
investment manager or managers with respect to the acquisition
and disposition of fund assets, but shall not be liable for the acts or
omissions of such investment manager or managers, nor shall it be
under any obligation to review or otherwise manage any fund
assets which are subject to the management of such investment
manager or managers. If the employer appoints a trustee, the
16.Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 80b-1 et seq.
§ 48-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-16
1:47
§ 48-17. Amendment and termination of plan.
trustee shall not be permitted to retain such an investment
manager except with the express written consent of the employer.
C. Common investments. The employer shall not be required to make
separate investments for individual participants or to maintain separate
investments for each participant's account, but may invest
contributions and any profits or gains therefrom in common
investments.
D. Compensation and expenses of appointed trustee. If a trustee is
appointed, the trustee shall be entitled to such reasonable
compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon by the
employer and the trustee, unless such compensation is prohibited by
law. Such compensation, and all expenses reasonably incurred by the
trustee in carrying out its functions, shall constitute a charge upon the
employer or the pension fund, which may be executed at any time after
30 days' written notice to the employer. The employer shall be under no
obligation to pay such costs and expenses, and, in the event of its failure
to do so, the trustee shall be entitled to pay the same, or to be
reimbursed for the payment thereof, from the pension fund.
E. Periodic accounting. If a trustee is appointed, the pension fund shall be
evaluated annually, or at more frequent intervals, by the trustee and a
written accounting rendered as of each fiscal year end of the fund, and
as of the effective date of any removal or resignation of the trustee, and
such additional dates as requested by the employer, showing the
condition of the fund and all receipts, disbursements and other
transactions effected by the trustee during the period covered by the
accounting, based on fair market values prevailing as of such date.
F. Value of the pension fund. All determinations as to the value of the
assets of the pension fund, and as to the amount of the liabilities
thereof, shall be made by the employer or its appointed trustee, whose
decisions shall be final and conclusive and binding on all parties hereto,
the participants and beneficiaries and their estates. In making any such
determination, the employer or trustee shall be entitled to seek and rely
upon the opinion of or any information furnished by brokers, appraisers
and other experts and shall also be entitled to rely upon reports as to
sales and quotations, both on security exchanges and otherwise as
contained in newspapers and in financial publications.
A. Amendment of the plan. The employer may amend this plan at any time
or from time to time by an instrument in writing executed in the name
of the employer under its municipal seal by officers duly authorized to
execute such instrument and delivered to the Council; provided,
however:
(1) That no amendment shall deprive any participant or any
beneficiary of a deceased participant of any of the benefits to which
§ 48-16 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-17
1:48
he is entitled under this plan with respect to contributions
previously made;
(2) That no amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held
under this plan other than for the benefit of employees, and no
funds contributed to this plan or assets of this plan shall, except as
provided in Subsection E, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by
the employer; and
(3) That no amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit
modification shall be made unless the cost estimate described in
§ 48-18C has been prepared and presented to the Council in
accordance with the Act.
B. Termination of the plan. The employer shall have the power to
terminate this plan in its entirety at any time by an instrument in
writing executed in the name of the employer.
C. Automatic termination of contributions. Subject to the provisions of the
Act governing financially distressed municipalities, the liability of the
employer to make contributions to the pension fund shall automatically
terminate upon liquidation or dissolution of the employer, upon its
adjudication as a bankrupt or upon the making of a general assignment
for the benefit of its creditors.
D. Distribution upon termination. In the event of the termination of the
plan, all amounts of vested benefits accrued by the affected participants
as of the date of such termination, to the extent funded on such date,
shall be nonforfeitable hereunder. In the event of termination of the
plan, the employer shall direct either that the plan administrator
continue to hold the vested accrued benefits of participants in the
pension fund in accordance with the provisions of the plan (other than
those provisions related to forfeitures) without regard to such
termination until all funds have been distributed in accordance with the
provisions; or that the plan administrator immediately distribute to
each participant an amount equal to the vested accrued benefit to the
date. If there are insufficient assets in the pension fund to provide for
all vested accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority
shall first be given to the distribution of any amounts attributable to
mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are
applied to the distribution of any vested benefits attributable to other
sources hereunder. All other assets attributable to the terminated plan
shall be distributed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
applicable law and the terms of any instrument adopted by the
employer which effects such termination. In accordance with Section
401(a)(8) of the code,17 any forfeiture shall not be applied to increase
the benefits that any employee would otherwise receive under the plan.
17.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 401(a)(8).
§ 48-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-17
1:49
§ 48-18. Minimum financing requirements.
E. Residual assets. If all liabilities to vested participants and any others
entitled to receive a benefit under the terms of the plan have been
satisfied and there remain any residual assets in the pension fund, such
residual assets remaining shall be returned to the employer insofar as
such return does not contravene any provision of law, and any
remaining balance, in excess of employer contributions, shall be
returned to the commonwealth.
F. Exclusive benefit rule. In the event of the discontinuance and
termination of the plan as provided herein, the employer shall dispose
of the pension fund in accordance with the terms of the plan and
applicable law; at no time prior to the satisfaction of the all liabilities
under the plan shall any part of the corpus or income of the pension
fund, after deducting any administrative or other expenses properly
chargeable to the pension fund, be used for or diverted to purposes
other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants in the plan, their
beneficiaries or their estates.
A. Actuarial valuations. The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial
valuation at least biennially unless the employer is applying or has
applied for supplemental state assistance pursuant to Section 603 of
the Act,18 whereupon actuarial valuation reports shall be made
annually. Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of
the beginning of each plan year occurring in an odd-numbered calendar
year, beginning with the year 1985. Such actuarial valuation shall be
prepared and certified by an approved actuary, as such term is defined
in the Act. The Council may request an actuarial valuation report to be
conducted at any other time as, in its opinion, is necessary to ascertain
the soundness of the fund. The expenses attributable to the preparation
of any actuarial valuation report or investigation required by the Act or
any other expense which is permissible under the terms of the Act and
which are directly associated with administering the plan shall be an
allowable administrative expense payable from the assets of the
pension fund. Such allowable expenses shall include but not be limited
to the following:
(1) Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized investments
and investment management fees;
(2) Accounting expenses;
(3) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
(4) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or to
defend the fund; and
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.603.
§ 48-17 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-18
1:50
§ 48-19. Miscellaneous provisions.
(5) Legitimate travel and education expenses for plan officials;
provided, however, that the municipal officials of the employer, in
their fiduciary role, shall monitor the services provided to the plan
to ensure that the expenses are necessary, reasonable and benefit
the plan, and further provided that the plan administrator shall
document all such expenses item by item and, where necessary,
hour by hour.
B. Duties of chief administrative officer.
(1) Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the
supervision of the chief administrative officer.
(2) The chief administrative officer of the plan shall determine the
financial requirements of the plan on the basis of the most recent
actuarial report and shall determine the minimum municipal
obligation of the employer with respect to funding the plan for any
given plan year. The chief administrative officer shall submit the
financial requirements of the plan and the minimum municipal
obligation of the employer to the Council annually and shall certify
the accuracy of such calculations and their conformance with the
Act.
C. Benefit plan modifications. Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan
modification by the employer, the chief administrative officer of the plan
shall provide to the Council a cost estimate of the proposed benefit plan
modification. Such estimate shall be prepared by an approved actuary,
which estimate shall disclose to the Council the impact of the proposed
benefit plan modification on the future financial requirements of the
plan and the future minimum municipal obligation of the employer with
respect to the plan.
A. Employment rights. No employee of the employer nor anyone else shall
have any rights whatsoever against the employer or the plan
administrator as a result of this plan except those expressly granted to
them hereunder. Participation in this plan shall not give any right to any
employee to be retained in the employ of the employer, nor shall it
interfere with the right of the employer to discharge any employee and
to deal with such employee without regard to the effect that such
treatment might have upon participation in this plan.
B. Meaning of certain words. For purposes of this plan, the masculine
gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the
plural, and vice versa, in all cases wherever the person or context shall
plainly so require. Headings of sections and subsections are included
solely for convenience of reference, and if there be any conflict between
such headings and the text of the plan, the text shall control.
§ 48-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-19
1:51
C. Construction of document. This plan may be executed and/or
conformed in any number of counterparts, each of which shall be
deemed an original and shall be construed and enforced according to
the laws of the commonwealth, excepting such commonwealth's choice
of law rules.
D. Information to be furnished by the employer. The employer shall furnish
to the plan administrator (and, where applicable, the trustee)
information in the employer's possession as the plan administrator and
the trustee shall require from time to time to perform their duties under
the plan.
E. Severability of provisions. Should any provisions of this plan be held
illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not
affect the remaining parts of this plan, and the plan shall be construed
and enforced as if said illegal and invalid provisions had never been
inserted herein.
F. Incapacity of participant. If any participant shall be physically or
mentally incapable of receiving or acknowledging receipt of any
payment of pension benefits hereunder, the plan administrator, upon
the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such participant is so
incapacitated and that another person or institution is maintaining the
participant and that no guardian or committee has been appointed for
the participant, may provide for such payment of pension benefits
hereunder to such person or institution so maintaining the participant,
and any such payments so made shall be deemed for every purpose to
have been made to such participant.
G. Personal liability. Subject to the provisions of the Act and unless
otherwise specifically required by other applicable laws, no past,
present or future officer or agent of the employer shall be personally
liable to any participant, beneficiary or other person under any
provision of the plan.
H. Assets of the fund. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give
any participant or beneficiary any interest in any specific property of
the pension fund or any right except to receive such distributions as are
expressly provided for under the plan.
I. Pension fund for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal
of the pension fund are for the sole use and benefit of the participants
covered hereunder and, to the extent permitted by law, shall be free,
clear and discharged from and are not to be in any way liable for debts,
contracts or agreements, now contracted or which may hereafter be
contracted, and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter incurred
by any participant or beneficiary.
J. Military service.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary,
contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified
§ 48-19 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 48-19
1:52
military service will be provided in accordance with Code Section
414(u).19
(2) Heroes Earning Assistance Tax Relief Act of 2008 (HEART Act).
Except where otherwise specifically provided to the contrary in this
plan, effective for deaths occurring on or after January 1, 2007, the
plan will provide benefits and service credit to the extent that the
plan is required and mandated by the HEART Act to provide said
benefits and/or service credit.
(3) Differential wage payments. Effective as of January 1, 2009, to the
extent required by the HEART Act, differential wage payments
shall be included in compensation for purposes of determining
benefits.
K. Distributions for health insurance. An eligible retired public safety
officer may elect, in accordance with Code Section 402(l),20 that a
portion of his annuity benefit that would otherwise be paid to him under
the plan instead may be used to purchase health insurance, subject to
the following conditions:
(1) The term "eligible retired public safety officer" means an individual
who, by reason of disability or attainment of normal retirement age,
is separated from service as a public safety officer with the
employer and is a participant in this plan. The term "public safety
officer" shall have the same meaning given such term by Section
1204(9)(A) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of
1968 [42 U.S.C. § 3796b(9)(A)]. Any participant who terminated
employment prior to normal retirement age for any reason other
than disability is not eligible to make the election. Beneficiaries are
not eligible to make the election.
(2) Payments shall be made only for qualified health insurance
premiums as that term is used in Code Section 402(l).
(3) An eligible public safety operator may elect to have no more than
$3,000 of his benefit used to pay insurance premiums per calendar
year. The dollar amount is periodically adjusted, without formal
amendment, in accordance with Code Section 402(l).
(4) Any election under this section shall become void at the death of
the eligible retired public safety officer.
19.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(u).
20.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 402(l).
§ 48-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-19
1:53
Chapter 54
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
350.
Zoning — See Ch. 375.
§ 54-1. Creation; composition; compensation.
§ 54-2. Appointment; terms; vacancies; qualifications; removal.
A. Under and pursuant to the provisions of Section 201 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10201, there is
hereby created a Borough Planning Commission to be composed of
seven members appointed in accordance with the provisions hereof.
B. All members of the Borough Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable
expenses. However, elected or appointed officers or employees of the
municipality shall not, by reason of membership thereon, forfeit the
right to exercise the powers, perform the duties or receive the
compensation of a municipal office held by them during such
membership.
A. All members of the Borough Planning Commission shall be appointed by
the Borough Council. The term of each of the members of the
Commission shall be for four years, or until his successor is appointed
and qualified, except that the terms of the present members shall not be
affected by the provisions of this chapter. The Chairman of the Planning
Commission shall promptly notify the Borough Council concerning
vacancies in the Commission, and such vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term.
B. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
C. All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the
municipality. At least five of the members of the Planning Commission
shall be citizen members and hold no other Borough office.
D. Any member of a Planning Commission once qualified and appointed
may be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance, or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Borough Council, taken after the member has received 15 days'
advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held
in connection with the vote, or the member shall request it in writing.
Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal shall be only for
the unexpired term.
§ 48-19 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 54-3
1:54
§ 54-3. Officers; powers and duties; procedures.
Chapter 60
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police pension fund — See Ch. 48, Art. II.
§ 60-1. Establishment.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of
Slippery Rock.
§ 60-2. Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive of the Police Department. He
shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of the police force and
has supervision over its members in the exercise of their powers, duties and
authority.
§ 60-3. Subordinate classifications; priority of authority;
compensation.
Subordinate to the Chief of Police in the Police Department is the patrolman
and such other classifications as the Council shall at any specific time have
appointed. The priority of authority among such subordinate classifications
shall be in the order fixed by resolution of the Council. The number of
persons to serve in each of such subordinate classifications on a full-time
A. The Borough Planning Commission shall elect its own Chairman and
Vice Chairman and create and fill such other offices as it shall
determine. Such officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed
themselves.
B. The Borough Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties as
are designated to municipal planning commissions by Section 209.1 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10209.1, and
as such section is hereinafter amended.
C. The operating procedures, responsibility and jurisdiction of the
Planning Commission shall be governed by Article II, Section 201 et
seq., of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,21 and as it may
be hereinafter amended, or by such rules and regulations as the
Planning Commission itself shall adopt, not inconsistent with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.
§ 54-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-3
1:55
and/or a part-time basis and the compensation of each shall be as
determined by resolution of the Borough Council from time to time.
§ 60-4. Special policemen.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special policemen during emergencies.
Chapter 71
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council — See Ch. 8.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 35.
Pensions — See Ch. 48.
§ 60-3 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 60-4
1:56
ARTICLE I
Mayor
[Adopted 2-6-1973 by Ord. No. 285; amended in its entirety
12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 616 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 102, of the 1983 Code)]
§ 71-1. Compensation established.
The Mayor of Slippery Rock Borough shall be paid a salary of $1,200 per
year, payable at the rate of $100 per month.
§ 71-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-1
1:57

ARTICLE II
Council
[Adopted 2-6-1973 by Ord. No. 285; amended in its entirety
12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 616 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 103, of the 1983 Code)]
§ 71-2. Compensation established.
A Councilperson shall be paid $1,200 per year.
§ 71-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-2
1:59

ARTICLE III
Tax Collector
[Adopted 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 104, of the
1983 Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 71-3. Compensation established.
The Tax Collector for the Borough of Slippery Rock shall receive the
following percentage of taxes collected:
Tax Percentage
Real estate taxes, streetlighting tax, fire
tax and per capita tax
4% (combined)
§ 71-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-3
1:61
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 93
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 71-3 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 71-3
1:62
ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 6-5-2012 by Ord. No. 665]
§ 93-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Slippery
Rock False Alarm Ordinance."
§ 93-2. Findings; intent.
False alarms that are triggered negligently, accidentally or intentionally
cause unnecessary disruption to Borough emergency services and waste
Borough resources, endangering Borough residents. The Borough intends
to adopt a policy and regulations which will minimize this disruption.
§ 93-3. Purpose.
This article is adopted for the following purposes:
§ 93-4. Word usage; definitions.
A. To provide for fees and penalties to principal owners, operators,
tenants, and other individuals responsible for false alarms resulting in
unwarranted response by emergency services.
B. To encourage the use of appropriate alarm installation practices to
prevent or minimize false alarms that require the response of
emergency services.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future. The singular
shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. The word "person"
includes a corporation and unincorporated association.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALARM AGENT — Any firm, corporation or person who conducts the
business of owning, operating, maintaining, installing, leasing, or
selling alarm systems and whose duties include any of the following:
selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving, or installing in or on any building, place or premises any
automatic protection device, as defined in this article, within Slippery
Rock Borough.
ALARM DEVICE — A communication to the police, fire, or emergency
medical service departments indicating that a crime, fire, or other
emergency situation has occurred or is occurring warranting
immediate action by the police, fire, or emergency medical service
departments.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any electrically operated instrument composed
of sensors and related hardware that automatically signals by wire,
§ 93-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-4
1:63
§ 93-5. Operational standards.
telephone, radio signal, or other means to a person who, in turn,
notifies the Butler County Emergency Services (911) of the alarm.
Alarm systems also include equipment to activate a bell or sounding
device to be heard outside a building which is intended to alert the
police or others to the existence of a crime, fire, or other emergency
situation warranting action by emergency services, upon receipt of a
stimulus from a sensor that has detected a physical force or condition
characteristic of a fire, intrusion, or other emergency.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn, or siren which is attached to
the interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible
outside the building, which signal is designed to attract attention when
activated by an intrusion or other emergency requiring police or service
response.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM — Any protective system or group or
group of systems operated privately for customers by an alarm agent;
a firm; or a corporation that accepts messages or signals from alarm
systems at a central station having operators in attendance at all times
who have the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal
or message, including the relaying of messages by designated or direct
trunk line to the Butler County Emergency Management Services.
EMERGENCY SERVICES — A public or private agency, corporation
or volunteer company that provides emergency police, fire or medical
services or that dispatches or coordinates such services, including the
personnel of such public or private agency, corporation or volunteer
company.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm to which police, fire, or other emergency
services respond resulting from the activation of an alarm or alarm
system when a crime, fire, or other emergency warranting immediate
action has not in fact occurred.
INADVERTENT FALSE ALARM — An alarm system activated in the
absence of an emergency, whether by inadvertence, negligence, or
unintentional act, including any mechanical or electrical malfunction of
the alarm system, to which emergency services actually responds.
INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — A false alarm resulting from the
intentional activation of an alarm device by an individual(s) under
circumstances where the individual(s) has/have no reasonable basis to
believe that a crime, fire, or other emergency warranting immediate
action has occurred or is occurring.
SILENT ALARM — A alarm system that does not emit an audible signal
or tone when activated at a protected site and is monitored by a central
station system.
A. Audible alarms, other than fire alarms, must be equipped with a timing
mechanism that will disengage the audible alarm after a maximum
§ 93-4 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 93-5
1:64
§ 93-6. Administration and enforcement.22
period of 10 minutes if the system activates on or near the premises.
Exceptions shall be made for certified systems requiring longersounding
alarms for insurance purposes, providing that certification
and policy requirements are documented with the Borough, and further
providing that these devices are equipped with timers to disengage the
audible alarm after the minimum time required for certification.
B. The sensory mechanism used in conjunction with an alarm device must
be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or intrusion, so that the
alarm device will not be activated by impulse due to transient pressure
changes in waterlines, short flashes of light, wind effects such as
rattling or vibration of doors or windows, vehicular noises adjacent to
the premises, or other forces unrelated to genuine alarm situations.
C. The alarm device or system must be maintained in good repair to assure
reliable operation.
D. No person shall conduct or test any alarm device or system without first
notifying the alarm agent to ensure that the alarm or signal is not
related to emergency services.
E. All alarm devices or systems installed or used in the Borough of
Slippery Rock shall meet the most current applicable standards of the
Underwriters Laboratories, the National Fire Protection Association
and/or any other applicable recognized standards in the industry.
A. The Borough Council shall develop and implement by resolution the
necessary procedures for the effective administration and enforcement
of this article.
(1) The Chief of Police or his designee shall ensure that a report is
submitted for each alarm activation requiring emergency service
response.
(2) The Chief of Police or his designee will read the report, review the
records to confirm the number of prior alarms at the address, and
determine if a false alarm fine is due under this article.
B. False alarms.
(1) The principal owner, operator, tenant, or other individual
responsible for the facility from which a false alarm emanated shall
pay to the Borough a fine for each and every false alarm after the
first three false alarms within the same consecutive twelve-month
period to which emergency services respond. The fine for each
false alarm shall be in an amount as established from time to time
by ordinance, not to exceed $300.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 93-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-6
1:65
(2) The fines imposed by Subsection B(1) of this section shall not apply
in the following circumstances:
(a) The false alarm is due to weather conditions.
(b) For new installations, documentation has been provided that
the alarm system was initially installed within six months prior
to the false alarm, no more than three false alarms have
occurred since the installation, and the false alarm is due to a
system malfunction.
(c) For installations not covered by Subsection B(2)(b), the false
alarm is the first through third reported at the subject address
during the calendar year.
(d) An event occurred on the alarmed premises that could not have
been anticipated, and the alarm system detected the
occurrence. Examples might be a ceiling tile falling, a water
pipe bursting, or a repairman causing an inadvertent false
alarm. Leaving a pet loose or a fan on in a room protected by
motion detection would not be events that would be excused.
(e) Multiple alarms emanating from an alarmed facility in a
twelve-hour period shall be treated as a single alarm.
(3) When a fourth false alarm occurs within a consecutive twelvemonth
period, the Slippery Rock Borough Administrator shall notify
the principal owner, operator, tenant, or other individual
responsible for the alarm system from which the false alarm
emanated that a false alarm fine is due and the amount thereof. The
amount of the fine (if any) will be determined in accordance with
Subsection B(1) of this section. Such notice shall be in writing and
mailed to the last known address by regular mail, postage prepaid,
of the principal owner, operator, tenant or other individual
responsible for the alarm system.
(4) The principal owner, operator, tenant, or other individual
responsible for the facility where the false alarm emanated may
provide information in writing to the Slippery Rock Borough
Administrator, providing evidence that one of the circumstances
explained in Subsection B(2) (above) applied.
(5) A false alarm fine shall be due and payable to the Borough 30 days
from the date of the notice of the fine. If the amount is not paid
within the thirty-day period, a certified letter shall be sent by the
Slippery Rock Borough Administrator to the principal owner,
operator, tenant, or other individual responsible for the alarm
system of the alarmed facility demanding payment within 30 days.
If payment is still not made, a law enforcement officer will file a
citation with the Magisterial District Judge.
§ 93-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 93-6
1:66
§ 93-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-6-2015 by Ord. No.
687]
False alarm violations shall be subject to § 93-6; any person, firm,
partnership, or corporation who shall violate any other provisions of this
article or who shall fail to pay a fine for a false alarm, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues or each section of this article which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(6) Failure of a person responsible for the alarm system that originated
the false alarm to pay a false alarm fine on or before the date due
shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject said
person to the penalties set forth in § 93-7.
C. Intentional false alarms. No individual shall create an intentional false
alarm. Violators shall be punishable pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4905.
§ 93-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-7
1:67

ARTICLE II
Knox Boxes
[Adopted 10-10-2017 by Ord. No. 703]
§ 93-8. Knox Box requirements.
A Knox Box is required for:
§ 93-9. Knox Box contents.
All Knox Boxes shall contain labeled keys, easily identified in the field to
provide access into the property and/or building and to any locked areas
within the said building as the Borough Fire Marshal may direct.
§ 93-10. Locked gates or driveways.
Any locked gates or driveways which allow access to a commercial business
are required to place a fire department access lock on the said access point
to allow immediate emergency access to the commercial property. All locks
are to be approved by the Borough Fire Marshal.
A. New commercial buildings. All new commercial buildings shall have
installed a Knox Box, of an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) type and size
approved by the Borough Fire Marshal, in a location specified by the
Borough Code Enforcement Office prior to the issuance of the permit to
occupy.
B. Existing commercial buildings with improvements. All existing
commercial buildings constructing improvements that require Planning
approval shall have installed a Knox Box, of an Underwriters Laboratory
(UL) type and size approved by the Borough Fire Marshal, in a location
specified by the Borough Code Enforcement Office prior to the issuance
of the construction permit.
C. Existing commercial buildings. All existing commercial buildings
equipped with automatic fire detection and/or suppression system shall
have installed a Knox Box, of a UL type and size approved by the
Borough Fire Marshal, in a location specified by the Borough Code
Enforcement Office within six months of the effective date of this
article.
D. All new construction of multifamily residential structures. All new
construction of multifamily residential structures that have restricted
access through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to
the living units shall have installed a Knox Box, of a UL type and size
approved by the Borough Fire Marshal, in a location specified by the
Borough Code Enforcement Office within six months of the effective
date of this article.
§ 93-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-11
1:69
§ 93-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 93-11 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 93-11
1:70
Chapter 98
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 98-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases
shall be construed according to the definitions set forth below:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2% of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage
purposes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages
are contained.
§ 98-2. Public consumption.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon
any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, stairway, thoroughfare, or other public
property within the Borough of Slippery Rock, nor shall any person consume
any alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or thoroughfare
while on a private stairway, doorway or other private property open to
public view without the express or implied permission of the owner, his
agent or other party in lawful possession thereof.
§ 98-3. Possession of open containers.
No person shall possess any container or alcoholic beverage, whether
wrapped or unwrapped, which has been opened or on which the seal has
been broken in any manner on any public street, avenue, alley, thoroughfare
or other public property within the Borough, nor shall any person possess
any container or alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or
thoroughfare while on a private stairway, doorway, or other private property
open to public view without the express or implied permission of the owner,
his agent, or other person in lawful possession thereof.
§ 98-4. Exceptions.
Provided, however, that the provisions of §§ 98-2 and 98-3 above shall not
apply to interior portions of any private dwelling, habitat or building, nor
to the consumption or possession by persons in the areas herein designated
of any duly prescribed and dispensed medication having alcoholic content
as set forth in § 98-1 hereof; and provided further that the provisions of
said §§ 98-2 and 98-3 above shall not apply to premises duly licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and to persons then and there patrons
of said licensee.
§ 93-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-5
1:71
§ 98-5. Violations deemed disorderly conduct.
Whoever shall possess, consume or use upon any public street, sidewalk,
alley or public grounds of the Borough of Slippery Rock any alcoholic
beverage, beer, wine or liquor is guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct.
§ 98-6. Violations and penalties.23
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Borough
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 10 days or to the county
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition
to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County.
Chapter 105
ANIMALS
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 98-5 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 98-6
1:72
ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted 11-3-1992 by Ord. No. 544 (Ch. 2, Part 1, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 105-1. Owner responsibilities.
Any person who owns, harbors, keeps or is in charge of any dog within or
frequenting the Borough shall be subject to a notice of violation and penalty
or the impoundment of the dog, or both, if:
§ 105-2. Vicious or dangerous dogs.24
Vicious or dangerous dogs shall be regulated in accordance with Article V-A
of the Dog Law, 3 P.S. § 459-502-A et seq.
§ 105-3. Impoundment procedure.
A. Such dog is not confined by a leash or other humane device of control,
so it cannot stray beyond the premises on which it is secured.
B. Such dog is off the property of the owner or of the person who is
keeping or harboring the dog, unless such dog is restrained on a leash
of no more than six feet in length and under immediate control of a
competent person.
C. Owners or persons keeping or harboring such dog allow such dog to
deposit feces on property other than that of the owner or person
keeping or harboring such dog or do not immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog while on public or on private property where
express permission of the owner has been secured or remove feces
within 12 hours on the property of the owner or person keeping or
harboring such dog. Feces shall be disposed of in the owner's or
person's keeping or harboring such dogs garbage or disposed of in
another sanitary method. The deposit shall be packaged or protected so
as to prevent unsanitary disposal, offensive smells or other interference
to the health and welfare of the community.
A. Any Borough police officer shall immediately upon impounding any dog
make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such dog
and whether licensed, if known, and if licensed, he shall enter the name
and address of the owner and the number of the license tag, if known,
and if bearing an inoculation tag, the number of such tag shall be
recorded. When any licensed animal shall be impounded, any Borough
police officer shall give immediate notice, either personally or by
certified mail, to the owner of such licensed dog, informing such owner
of the impounding of his dog and the reason therefor.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-3
1:73
§ 105-4. Dogs in heat; nuisances; humane care required.
§ 105-5. Enforcement.
For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this article and for
violation of the 1982 Pennsylvania Dog Law26 and enforcing the provisions
of same, any Slippery Rock Borough officer is hereby empowered to enter
upon any private property for the purpose of enforcing this article and to
ascertain whether any dog is present, kept, harbored or cared for thereon,
whether the owner has secured a current-calendar-year Pennsylvania dog
license and tag and to issue notices of violation to owners of dogs running at
large and/or to impound dogs that are found to be in violation of this article,
B. The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded
unlicensed dog upon payment of $50, plus impoundment costs and daily
board fees, and compliance with the rabies vaccination and licensing
requirements. The owner of a licensed dog shall be entitled to resume
possession on payment of the aforementioned charges, provided that
application for such possession with payment of all the aforementioned
charges is made within five days after obtaining the postal return
receipt.25
C. Any unlicensed dog impounded and not reclaimed by the owner after
being held at least 48 hours after impoundment and any licensed dog
impounded and not reclaimed by the owner after being held five days
after impoundment and notice as required herein may be sold or
destroyed in some humane manner.
A. Female dogs in heat shall be confined by the owner or persons keeping
or harboring such dog in a closed building so that the dog cannot come
into contact with another except by planned breeding.
B. Every owner or person keeping or harboring a dog shall exercise proper
care and control of the dog to prevent the dog from becoming a
nuisance. Excessive or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing
vehicles, attacking other domestic animals and damaging property shall
be deemed a nuisance, and such act shall be considered a violation of
this article.
C. The owner or person keeping or harboring any dog shall provide the
dog with sufficient food and water, proper shelter, veterinary care when
needed to prevent suffering and with humane care and treatment. Any
owner or person keeping or harboring such dog found not providing
humane care for their dog will be considered in violation of this article.
No person shall poison or ill-treat a dog, nor may a dog be abandoned in
the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania, and such
act shall be considered a violation of this article.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
26.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 105-3 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 105-5
1:74
and said officers are hereby authorized to be vested with all powers, duties
and responsibilities authorized in the Pennsylvania Dog Law.
§ 105-6. Dogs in Borough parklands.
§ 105-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable or apply to dogs
accompanying visually impaired persons or hearing ear dogs accompanying
hearing impaired persons or to dogs used by authorized federal, state or
local law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
§ 105-8. Violations and penalties.27
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Borough
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 10 days or to the county
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to
or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this
article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County.
A. No dogs shall be permitted on or within the Borough parklands unless
restrained by a leash of no more than six feet in length and under the
immediate control of a competent person.
B. The Slippery Rock Area Park and Recreation Commission may
designate areas of the Borough parklands as closed to dogs and other
pets in accordance with § 105-1.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-8
1:75
Chapter 114
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 217. Solid waste — See Ch. 246.
§ 114-1. Growth restricted.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation owning or having a present
interest in any real estate within Slippery Rock Borough shall permit grass
or weeds or vegetation, except as may be provided in § 114-4, to grow or
remain on such premises, including any portion of the premises within a
Borough right-of-way, occupied by a street or alley, or abutting or adjacent
to an intersection, so as to exceed a height of eight inches or to throw
off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to
create or to produce pollen. All such vegetation is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of
the inhabitants of Slippery Rock Borough.
§ 114-2. Responsibility of property owner.
The owner of any such premises, whether occupied by the owner or not,
shall remove, trim or cut, or cause to be removed, trimmed or cut, all such
vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of § 114-1.
§ 114-3. Word usage; definitions.
A. All words are to be given their common, ordinary, dictionary definition,
unless specifically defined herein.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WALKING/BIKING PATHS OR TRAILS — Paths or trails used for
walking, cycling, cross-country skiing, or other activities, which have
been improved with some type of routinely maintained media such as
wood or rubber mulch or asphalt.
WEED — Any undesired, uncultivated plant, especially one growing in
profusion so as to crowd out a desired plant or crop, disfigure a lawn,
cover an accumulation of trash or filth or throw off a noxious odor.
WETLANDS — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
§ 105-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 114-3
1:76
§ 114-4. Exemptions and limitations.
The terms of this chapter are subject to the following exemptions or
limitations:
§ 114-5. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this chapter will be carried out by the Slippery Rock
Borough Municipal Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 114-6. Violations and penalties.28
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Butler County.
§ 114-7. Failure to comply; work performed by Borough.
Upon failure of the owner to cut or destroy weeds after service of a notice
violation, he or she shall be subject to prosecution as set forth in § 114-6 and
as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY — A tract of land set aside by law for the
protection of wildlife.
A. Property or portions of property maintained for agricultural purposes.
This subsection includes any portion of property on which is grown,
continuously or seasonally, agricultural crops for harvest (e.g.,
soybeans, corn, hay, Christmas trees), provided that the perimeter of
such agricultural property is maintained within 200 feet of any abutting
property line in accordance with § 114-1.
B. Conservation areas, such as wetlands, wildlife sanctuaries, and
walking/biking trails; provided, however, that these areas are to be
maintained in a way appropriate for their use and in accordance with
applicable state and federal laws.
C. Gardens, flowers, shrubs, bushes, trees, and ornamental plantings that
are purposefully groomed and maintained and which are not within the
Borough's right-of-way.
D. Wooded areas where trees exist or are grown and which cannot be
mowed or maintained by a push or riding lawn mower.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 114-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-7
1:77
with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of Slippery Rock
Borough or contractor hired by Slippery Rock Borough shall be authorized
to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds
growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner
or agent responsible for the property.
Chapter 121
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor wood-fired boilers — See Ch. 200. Solid waste — See Ch. 246.
§ 121-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Slippery
Rock Burning/Open Burning Ordinance."
§ 121-2. Statutory authority.29
The Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock, under and by virtue of and
pursuant to the authority granted by the Borough Code, 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., does hereby enact and ordain this chapter.
§ 121-3. Findings; purpose.
Whereas the Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock has determined that
air pollution from open burning may be detrimental to the health, comfort,
living conditions, use and enjoyment of property, welfare, and safety of the
citizens of the Borough, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the Borough
to safeguard citizens of the Borough from such air pollution.
§ 121-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
AIR BASIN — A geographic area of this commonwealth as designated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR — A mechanical device which forcefully
projects a curtain of air across a pit in which open burning is being
conducted so that combustion efficiency is increased and smoke and other
particulate matter are contained.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 114-7 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 121-4
1:78
BURNING — The act of consuming by fire; to flame, char, scorch, or blaze.
As used in this chapter, "smoldering" shall have the same meaning as
"burning," and any smoldering shall be deemed a burning.
CLEARING AND GRUBBING WASTES — Trees, shrubs, and other native
vegetation which are cleared from land during or prior to the process of
construction. The term does not include demolition wastes and dirt-laden
roots.
COMPOSTING — The process by which organic solid waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled anaerobic or aerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough of Slippery Rock.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION — The commonwealth
agency responsible for enforcement of the commonwealth's environmental
laws.
DOMESTIC REFUSE — Waste which is generated from the normal
occupancy of a structure occupied solely as a dwelling by two families
or less. The term does not include appliances, carpets, demolition waste
(insulation, shingles, siding, etc.), furniture, mattresses or box springs,
paint, putrescible waste, solvents, tires or treated wood.
OPEN BURNING — A fire, the air contaminants from which are emitted
directly into the outdoor atmosphere and not directed thereto through a
flue.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, for profit or not
for profit, association, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth or the federal government, political
subdivision, municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL — Person designated by the Borough to be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, garden residue, tree trimmings,
chipped shrubbery, and other vegetative material.
§ 121-5. Open burning prohibited; exceptions.
A. After the effective date of this chapter, no person may permit the open
burning of material, with the exception of the following:
(1) A fire set to prevent or abate a fire hazard, when approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection's Regional Air Quality
Program office and set by or under the supervision of the Fire
Chief, or his or her designee.
(2) Any fire set for the purpose of instructing personnel in firefighting,
when approved by the Department of Environmental Protection's
Regional Air Quality Program office.
§ 121-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-5
1:79
§ 121-6. Enforcement; notice of violation.
(3) A fire set for the prevention and control of disease or pests, when
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection's
Regional Air Quality Program office.
(4) A fire set for the purpose of burning clearing and grubbing waste. If
within an air basin as designated by the Department of
Environmental Protection, an air curtain destructor must be used
and must be approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection's Regional Air Quality Program office.
(5) A fire set in conjunction with the production of agricultural
commodities in their unmanufactured state on the premises of the
farm operation.
(6) A fire set solely for cooking food.
(7) A fire set solely for recreational or ceremonial purposes.
B. Burning that occurs pursuant to Subsection A(6) and (7) above must
comply with the following:
(1) Any fire not restrained by a container or fire ring shall not exceed a
five-foot radius; and
(2) Any fire must be maintained at least 25 feet from any building or
structure.
A. The Borough of Slippery Rock shall have the power to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
B. The Borough of Slippery Rock may issue such notices of violation as are
necessary to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
These notices shall include but shall not be limited to notices requiring
persons to cease unlawful open burning which, in the course of its
occurrence, is in violation of any provisions of this chapter; notices to
take corrective action or to abate a public nuisance; notices requiring
the testing, sampling, or monitoring of any open burning; or notices
requiring production of information. Such notices may be issued if the
Borough of Slippery Rock finds that any condition existing in or on the
facility or source involved is causing or contributing to open burning or
if the Borough finds that any person is in violation of any provision of
this chapter.
C. The Borough of Slippery Rock may, in its notices of violation, require
compliance with such conditions as are necessary to prevent or abate
open burning or effect the purposes of this chapter.
D. The authority of the Borough of Slippery Rock to issue a notice of
violation under this section is in addition to any remedy or penalty
which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter or under applicable
§ 121-5 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 121-6
1:80
§ 121-7. Responsibility of owners and operators.
§ 121-8. Criminal penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter commits a summary
offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $2,500 for each separate offense and, in default
of the payment of such fine, may be sentenced to imprisonment for 90
days for each separate offense. Employees of the Borough of Slippery Rock
authorized to conduct inspections or investigations are hereby declared
to be law enforcement officers authorized to issue or file citations for
summary violations under this chapter, and the Borough's Solicitor, or other
designated legal counsel, is hereby authorized to prosecute these offenses.
For purposes of this section, a summary offense may be prosecuted before
any Magisterial District Judge in the Borough of Slippery Rock. There is no
accelerated rehabilitative disposition authorized for a summary offense.
§ 121-9. Civil penalties.
federal or state laws. The failure to comply with any such notice of
violation is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
A. Whenever the responsible official finds that open burning is occurring
in the Borough of Slippery Rock, other than those exceptions noted in
§ 121-5 above, the responsible official may require the owner or
operator to take corrective action in a manner satisfactory to the
Borough of Slippery Rock, or the responsible official may require the
owner or operator to allow access to the land by the responsible official
or a third party to take such action.
B. For purposes of collecting or recovering the costs involved in taking
corrective action or pursuing a cost-recovery action pursuant to a
notice of violation or recovering the cost of litigation, oversight,
monitoring, sampling, testing, and investigation related to a corrective
action, the Borough of Slippery Rock may collect the amount in the
same manner as civil penalties are assessed and collected following the
process for assessment and collection of a civil penalty contained in
§ 121-9 of this chapter.
A. In addition to proceeding under any other remedy available at law or in
equity for a violation of a provision of this chapter, the Borough of
Slippery Rock may assess a civil penalty for the violation. The penalty
may be assessed whether or not the violation was willful. The civil
penalty so assessed shall not exceed $5,000 per day for each violation.
In determining the amount of the penalty, the Borough shall consider:
(1) The willfulness of the violation;
(2) Damage to air, soil, water, or other natural resources of the
Borough or their uses;
§ 121-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-9
1:81
(3) Financial benefit to the person as a result of the violation;
(4) Deterrence of future violations;
(5) Cost to the Borough;
(6) The size of the source;
(7) The compliance history of the source;
(8) The severity and duration of the violation;
(9) Degree of cooperation in resolving the violation;
(10) The speed with which compliance is ultimately achieved;
(11) Whether the violation was voluntarily reported;
(12) Other factors unique to the owners or operators of the source; and
(13) Other relevant factors.
B. When the Borough of Slippery Rock proposes to assess a civil penalty, it
shall inform the person of the proposed amount of the penalty. The
person charged with the penalty shall then have 30 days to pay the
proposed penalty in full, or if the person wishes to contest the amount
of the penalty or the fact of the violation to the extent not already
established, the person shall forward the proposed amount of penalty to
the Borough within the thirty-day period for placement in an escrow
account with the State Treasurer or any commonwealth bank or post an
appeal bond to the Council within 30 days in the amount of the
proposed penalty, provided that such bond is executed by a surety
licensed to do business in the commonwealth. If, through administrative
or final judicial review of the proposed penalty, it is determined that no
violation occurred or that the amount of the penalty shall be reduced,
the Council shall, within 30 days, remit the appropriate amount to the
person with any interest accumulated by the escrow deposit. Failure to
forward the money or the appeal bond at the time of the appeal shall
result in a waiver of all legal rights to contest the violation or the
amount of the civil penalty unless the appellant alleges financial
inability to prepay the penalty or to post the appeal bond. The Borough
Council shall conduct a hearing to consider the appellant's alleged
inability to pay within 30 days of the date of the appeal. The Council
may waive the requirement to prepay the civil penalty or to post an
appeal bond if the appellant demonstrates and the Council finds that
the appellant is financially unable to pay. The Council shall issue an
order within 30 days of the date of the hearing to consider the
appellant's alleged inability to pay. The amount assessed after the
administrative hearing or after waiver of administrative hearing shall
be payable to the Borough of Slippery Rock and shall be collectible in
any manner provided by law for the collection of debts, including the
collection of interest on the penalty amount computed in accordance
with Section 6621(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,30 from
§ 121-9 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 121-9
1:82
§ 121-10. Unlawful conduct.
It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with or to cause to assist in the
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or to fail to comply with any
notice of violation of the Borough of Slippery Rock or to hinder, obstruct,
prevent, or interfere with the Borough of Slippery Rock or its personnel in
their performance of any duty hereunder, including denying the responsible
official access to the source.
§ 121-11. Public nuisances.
A violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. The Borough
of Slippery Rock shall have the authority to require any person causing
a public nuisance to abate the public nuisance. In addition, when abating
a public nuisance, the Borough may recover the expenses of abatement
following the process for assessment and collection of a civil penalty
contained in § 121-9. Whenever the nuisance is maintained or continued
contrary to this chapter, the nuisance may be abatable in the manner
provided by this chapter. Any person who causes the public nuisance shall
be liable for the cost of abatement.
Chapter 137
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 142.
§ 137-1. Curfew established; exceptions. [Amended 12-7-1983 by
Ord. No. 328]
It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain in or upon any public
highway, park or other public place within the Borough, or in any enclosure
the date of assessment of the penalty. If any person liable to pay any
such penalty neglects or refuses to pay the same after demand, the
amount, together with interest and any costs that may accrue, shall
constitute a debt of such person, as may be appropriate, to the Borough
of Slippery Rock. The debt shall constitute a lien on all property owned
by said person when a notice of lien incorporating a description of
the property of the person subject to the action is duly filed with the
Prothonotary of the Butler County Court of Common Pleas.
C. Hearings under this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the
Local Agency Law.31
30.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 6621(a)(2).
31.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. 751 et seq.
§ 121-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-1
1:83
or vehicle which is on or in close proximity to any such public place within
the Borough, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on the
following day. Exceptions to the above are the following:
§ 137-2. Parental responsibility.
It is hereby made unlawful for any parent or guardian to allow or permit
any such minor under the age of 18 years, while in such legal custody, to
go or be in and upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or public places in
said Borough after the time prohibited in § 137-1 of this chapter, unless they
accompany such minor.
§ 137-3. Procedure upon violation. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
328]
Any minor found upon the streets, alleys, parks or public places within
the Borough in violation of § 137-1 shall be taken into custody by the
Borough police or legally deputized individual, be delivered to his parent(s),
guardian, or person having the legal custody of said minor, and be given
a copy of this chapter. A report shall be filed and kept in a book for that
specific purpose. If said parent, guardian or person having the legal custody
of said minor shall again allow him to be on the streets, alleys, parks or
public places in violation of § 137-1, said parent, guardian, or person having
the legal custody of said minor so offending shall, upon the second offense,
be called along with the offender and be so advised once again as to the
penalty provisions contained in this chapter. Upon the third violation, said
parent, guardian or person will be remanded to the Magisterial District
Judge for disposition.
§ 137-4. Repeated violations. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328]
Any minor who shall violate this chapter more than three times may, at
the discretion of the proper Borough officials, be reported to a society or
organization the purpose of which is to take charge of incorrigibles and
delinquents, and proceedings shall then be taken in the proper court for
A. A minor accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other person having
legal care or custody of such minor.
B. A minor possessing a written statement dated that day and signed by
the parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care or custody
of such minor, which statement specifies the time, place, purpose and
necessity of the minor being in a public place contrary to this chapter.
C. A minor lawfully employed making it necessary to be on or in highways,
streets, parks, etc., as stated above and possessing a current letter
certifying the same and signed by the employer, parent or guardian.
D. A minor on an emergency errand.
E. A minor traveling to and from church, school or a municipal activity,
with the parental permission statement as in Subsection B above.
§ 137-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 137-4
1:84
the permanent welfare of such minor, and a like procedure may be taken in
cases where the arrest of the parent is not effective, or where for any other
reason the provisions of § 137-2 of this chapter cannot be made effective by
the imposition of fines and penalties.
§ 137-5. Police discretion in age determination.
The police officers of the Borough of Slippery Rock, in taking any minor into
custody under this chapter, shall use their discretion in determining age
and, in doubtful cases, may require positive proof of age, and unless such
proof is furnished, the judgment of the arresting officer shall be decisive.
§ 137-6. Emergency powers of Mayor.
The provisions of this chapter may be extended by the Mayor as to age of
persons prohibited and hours for coverage in the event there is a riot, public
demonstration, or breach of the peace which creates an actual or imminent
danger to person or property within the Borough. In no case shall such
extension be for more than 48 hours, unless enacted by Borough Council.
§ 137-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
328]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and/or
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 142
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 137. Disorderly houses — See Ch. 145.
§ 142-1. Prohibited acts. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328]
Whoever makes or causes to be made any act, word or deed causing
or tending to cause any disturbance of the peace and good order of the
Borough or causing or tending to cause any danger, discomfort or
annoyance to any of the inhabitants of the Borough or the traveling public
or who shall wilfully make any loud, boisterous or unseemly noise or
disturbance or who shall fight or quarrel or incite others to fight or quarrel
or who shall publicly use obscene or indecent language or who shall loaf or
loiter or congregate upon any of the public streets, alleys or public grounds
of the Borough whereby the peaceable residents or the traveling public are
annoyed, or may tend to be annoyed, is guilty of the offense of disorderly
conduct.
§ 137-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-2
1:85
§ 142-2. Bail.
Persons arrested for any violation of this chapter shall be entitled to give
bail for their appearance according to the practice in cases of summary
conviction.
§ 142-3. Warrant and summons.
All proceedings for the violation of this chapter and for the collection of
fines and penalties imposed thereby may be commenced by warrant or by
summons at the discretion of the Magisterial District Judge before whom
the proceedings are commenced, but no warrant shall be issued except on
oath or affirmation specifying the ordinance for the violation of which the
same is issued, and all process may be directed to and be served by any
policeman of the Borough, who may execute the same anywhere within the
commonwealth.
§ 142-4. Warrants returnable.
Warrants shall be returnable forthwith, and upon such return, like
proceedings shall be had as in cases of summary conviction, with the same
right of appeal from any final judgement.
§ 142-5. Proceedings.
When any person is arrested on view, a complaint on oath or affirmation
shall be made immediately, whereupon like proceedings shall be had as
provided in § 142-4.
§ 142-6. Violators may be jailed.
Any person arrested for the violation of this chapter may be committed
to the Borough lockup, pending a hearing or trial, but in case there is no
suitable lockup in which to detain prisoners, the person arrested may be
committed to the county jail.
§ 142-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
328]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and/or
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 145
DISORDERLY HOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 137. Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 142.
§ 142-2 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 142-7
1:86
§ 145-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Disorderly House
Ordinance."
§ 145-2. Definitions. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328]
As used in this chapter, unless the context indicates clearly a different
meaning, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as set
forth below:
DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any place within the Borough where persons
gather or abide and where the owner, lessee, or person in charge permits,
encourages, or tends to encourage drunkenness, illegal consumption,
boisterous conduct, unseemly noise, fighting or other conduct which
disturbs the public peace or decorum, or promotes disorder and lessens
the dignity of the community. Said definition shall apply whether the place
is public or private, a building or any lot or land in the Borough. All such
places within the Borough of Slippery Rock are hereby declared a public
nuisance.
INMATE OF A DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any person, not the keeper of
a disorderly house, who lives and abides in such disorderly house or is
employed at or attends a gathering in such a house, lot or other place,
knowing that such house is a disorderly house as defined herein.
KEEPER OF A DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any person who is the owner,
lessee, or person in charge of any such house at the time when any of the
acts defined above are permitted or encouraged.
§ 145-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall permit, keep, maintain, or be an inmate of a disorderly
house within the Borough. Violators are subject to the penalties of this
chapter upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge having
jurisdiction.
§ 145-4. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough to suppress and to
close and keep closed any disorderly house and to arrest all persons found
therein. If the keeper or any other persons within such disorderly house
refuse to permit any officer of the Borough to enter the same, the officer
may enter the disorderly house or cause the same to be entered by whatever
force is necessary and arrest, by issuance of citations or otherwise, all
persons found therein.
§ 142-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-5
1:87
§ 145-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
32832]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Borough
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 10 days or to the county
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition
to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County.
Chapter 152
ENTERTAINMENT
§ 152-1. Permit required.
A. No person, group of persons, partnership, association, or corporation,
or any combination thereof, or any owner of real estate situated within
said municipality shall maintain or construct, promote, permit to be
operated or operate on any lands or premises within the Borough of
Slippery Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania, other than in established
theaters, auditoriums, or other places licensed, constructed, regulated,
or permitted by public occupancy in accordance with local and state
regulations, ordinances and fire codes, any public theatrical or musical
performance, including but not limited to pop festivals, rock music
festivals, rock festivals, jazz festivals, rock-and-roll music festivals, or
any combination thereof, except pursuant of a permit issued therefor by
the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania, as
hereinafter provided.
B. No owner, lessee, licensee, or any other person, partnership,
association or corporation having any right to or interest in, by deed,
lease, easement, or any other manner, any real property within the
municipality of Slippery Rock Borough, Butler County, Pennsylvania,
shall license, rent, lease, or permit the use of such real property, or any
part thereof, for the use of public theatrical or musical entertainment or
participation therein, other than in established theaters, auditoriums,
or other places licensed, constructed and established for public
occupancy in compliance with local and state regulations, except
pursuant to a permit issued as hereinafter provided.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 145-5 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 152-2
1:88
§ 152-2. Application for permit.
A. The Administrator/Secretary of the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler
County, Pennsylvania, may issue a permit upon written application
made by such person, partnership, association or corporation, or
combination thereof, who proposed to maintain, construct, promote, or
operate any public musical or theatrical entertainment or participation
therein, and the owner, lessor, or licensor who proposes to rent, lease,
license, or otherwise permit such musical or theatrical entertainment
or participation therein on real estate which he controls, and such
applicants shall jointly be responsible for the operation of any such
performance and for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The applicants for a permit as herein provided shall file a verified
application with the Administrator/Secretary of Slippery Rock Borough,
Butler County, Pennsylvania, at least 60 days prior to the dates upon
which said event is to take place.
C. Before any person, group of persons, partnership, association,
corporation, owner of real estate, lessor, or licensor shall be issued a
permit for performance of musical or theatrical entertainment, in
accordance with provisions of this chapter, it will pay to Slippery Rock
Borough, Butler County, Pennsylvania, a permit fee in an amount as set
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. Said permit fee
shall cover the costs of inspection of premises and enforcement of this
chapter. All requirements of this chapter shall be completed at least 10
days prior to the scheduled event so that health, law enforcement,
zoning and building and plumbing inspectors can complete their
inspection prior to issuance of the permit.33
D. The applicants shall show:
(1) The number of persons expected to attend such event and a plan of
the location thereof. Said plan shall conform to the requirements
herein.
(2) The date or dates of said performance or gathering.
(3) The duration of the event.
(4) Facilities for toilet and other personal sanitary needs for men and
women, with one separate toilet facility for each 100 persons to be
accommodated. Said toilet facilities shall be connected to the
municipality sewer services and water supply.
(5) Parking space shall be designated on the plan to be submitted with
the application, with at least one parking space for every five
persons to be accommodated. Said parking spaces shall be
adequately lighted, of gravel or paved surface to prevent creation
of dust clouds and with ingress and egress roadways adequate to
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 152-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:89
§ 152-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not be applicable in cases where there are to be less than
500 people attending any event and where such event does not continue
beyond 12:00 midnight, and provided further that the Borough of Slippery
Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania, Police Department is notified of said
event at least 48 hours in advance thereof by written notice and approves
such event.
§ 152-4. Compliance with other laws required; bond.
The owner, lessor, or licensor of any performance or gathering covered by
this chapter shall comply with all local ordinances, state and federal laws
and shall ensure by bond posted that local and state laws are not violated
by said gathering or any participation therein.
prevent excessive traffic accumulation on public thoroughfares of
the municipality.
(6) Emergency first aid facilities shall be provided with a registered
medical doctor, at least one nurse and ambulance available at the
scene.
(7) Sleeping accommodations and shelters shall be provided for any
performance or function which is to be continued from 12:00
midnight until 6:00 a.m.
(8) Restaurant and food facilities and services shall be provided, and
such facilities shall comply with state and local health laws, and all
necessary permits shall be obtained.
(9) Adequate safety guards and special police shall be hired and under
contract to supervise the persons attending the event and to
provide traffic direction and control within the parking area and at
exits and entrances from roadways of the municipality.
(10) A copy of the written lease, permit or license from the landowner to
the sponsor of the performance shall be attached to the application.
(11) A cash bond in the amount of $10,000 shall be posted with the
municipality to insure compliance with all of the terms of this
chapter and the complete cleanup and restoration of the area after
the performance has been held.
(12) Proof of liability coverage insurance by both the owner, lessor or
licensor of the land and the sponsor of the event shall be provided
to the municipality with coverage up to $300,000 for each claim
and $1,000,000 total coverage.34
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 152-2 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 152-5
1:90
§ 152-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
32835]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Butler County.
Chapter 160
FIREWORKS
§ 160-1. Storage restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to store any fireworks in the Borough of Slippery Rock,
excepting as may be necessary for the performance of a licensed public
exhibition of pyrotechnics; any such storage must be under the supervision
of and subject to the approval of the Fire Chief of the Slippery Rock Borough
Volunteer Fire Company or some person designated by him.
§ 160-2. Sale prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any fireworks or pyrotechnics in
the Borough of Slippery Rock, provided that public exhibition of fireworks
and pyrotechnics may be given if a permit therefor be granted by the
Mayor and Borough Council. Such exhibitions shall be given subject to the
supervision of the Fire Chief of the Slippery Rock Borough Volunteer Fire
Company or some person designated by him.
§ 160-3. Discharge restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to ignite, discharge, explode or display any fireworks or
pyrotechnic materials in the Borough, except in a licensed public exhibition
approved by the Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 160-4. Public exhibitions.
A public exhibition of pyrotechnics within the Borough of Slippery Rock
may be displayed or performed, provided that a license for such purpose is
obtained from the Borough of Slippery Rock and such display is approved
by the Mayor and Borough Council. Such exhibition shall be given subject
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:91
to the supervision of the Fire Chief of the Slippery Rock Borough Volunteer
Fire Company or some person designated by him.
§ 160-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
32836]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Borough
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 10 days or to the county
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition
to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County.
Chapter 186
MISSILES AND WEAPONS
§ 186-1. Prohibited acts.
§ 186-2. Violations and penalties.37
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and
A. The throwing of snowballs, stones or any other missile upon or into any
of the public streets, alleys or sidewalks in the Borough of Slippery
Rock is hereby prohibited.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or airgun, BB gun, or any
toy gun, projecting lead or any missiles, excepting in a regularly
established shooting gallery, provided that this subsection shall not be
construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm
in the performance of his duty, nor to any citizen from discharging a
firearm when lawfully defending person or property.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 160-4 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 186-2
1:92
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Borough
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 10 days or to the county
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition
to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County.
Chapter 193
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 93.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 142.
Disorderly houses — See Ch. 145.
§ 186-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-2
1:93

ARTICLE I
Loud, Disturbing and Unnecessary Noise
[Adopted 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 573 (Ch. 6, Part 8, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 193-1. Unlawful acts.
A. It is unlawful for any person to make or continue to make, or cause to be
made or continued, within the Borough, any loud or unnecessary noise
or any noise which may reasonably be anticipated to annoy, disturb,
injure or endanger the comfort, repose, peace, health or safety of
others, whether due to volume or duration, or both.
B. Without limitation as to the types of noise-producing acts which are in
violation of this article, noise produced by the following acts is declared
to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in violation of this article:
(1) Radios and other amplified music: use or operation of, or
permitting the use or operation of, any radio, CD player, television
set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device
designed to or intended to produce or reproduce sound in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of residential
inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing by the person or persons who are in the room,
vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operating
and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operating of any such
machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from
the residential property line or vehicle in which it is located shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this article.
(2) Loudspeakers and/or amplifiers upon public streets: use or
operation of or permitting the use or operation of any radio, CD
player, television set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device designed
or intended to produce or reproduce sound which is audible upon
the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any thing or activity or to
any building or structure.
(3) Yelling, shouting, etc.: yelling, shouting, whistling or singing on the
public streets between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or at
any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling or residence or of
any person in the vicinity.
(4) Construction or repair activities: the performance of any
construction or repair work of any kind upon or excavating for any
building or structure, where any such work entails the use of any
air compressor, jackhammer, power-driven drill, riveting machine,
excavator, hand hammer on steel or iron or any other machine, tool,
§ 193-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-1
1:95
§ 193-2. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
device or equipment which makes loud noises to the disturbance
of persons occupying sleeping quarters in a dwelling, hotel or
apartment or other place of residence. The above use of machinery
or equipment that produces such unnecessary noise shall be
prohibited on any Sunday or any other day between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The provisions of this subsection do
not apply to any person, firm, partnership or corporation who
performs any construction, repair or excavation pursuant to the
express written permission of the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee. Such person, firm, partnership or corporation must first
apply for a permit for permission and pay a fee to the Borough
of Slippery Rock which shall be set pursuant to a resolution of
the Borough of Slippery Rock. Upon receipt of an application in
writing, stating the reasons for the request and the fact upon
which such reasons are based, the Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee may issue a permit if the activity is not otherwise
prohibited by law or other regulation and he finds that:
(a) The work proposed to be done is in the public interest.
(b) Hardship or injustice or unreasonable delay would result from
the interruption thereof during the hours and days specified
above.
(5) Rubbish collection: the performance of any rubbish collection
utilizing any mechanical equipment in any residential zone or
within 500 feet of any residential zone between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(6) Landscape maintenance activities: use of weedblowers, powered
lawn mowers and/or other powered landscape maintenance
equipment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any day.
A. The construction, repair or excavation during prohibited hours as may
be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such
necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the Borough are
closed or where such necessity requires immediate action prior to the
time at which it would be possible to obtain required permits, provided
that the persons doing such construction, repair or excavation obtain a
permit therefor within one day after the office of the Code Enforcement
Officer is first opened subsequent to the undertaking of such
construction, repair or excavation.
B. The construction, repair or excavation by a public utility which is
subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, provided
such work is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
§ 193-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 193-2
1:96
§ 193-3. Appeals; hearing.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee under § 193-1B(4) of this article may request and shall then
be granted a hearing before the Slippery Rock Board of Appeals, provided
he files with the Code Enforcement Officer within 10 days after making
the decision a written notice requesting such hearing and setting forth
a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The hearing shall commence
not later than 30 days after the date on which the request was filed,
unless postponed for sufficient cause. After such hearing, the Slippery Rock
Building Board of Appeals shall sustain, modify or overrule the action of the
Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
§ 193-4. Violations and penalties.38
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Borough
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 10 days or to the county
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to
or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this
article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County.
§ 193-5. Remedies available.
The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated by the Borough through civil process by
means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in
any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this article, or any
remedy provided by law, shall not be mutually exclusive, rather they may
be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of Slippery Rock
Borough.
health, safety or welfare and where such necessity makes it necessary
to construct, repair or excavate during the prohibited hours.
C. In any area of the Borough which is classified an industrial district and
which is not less then 500 feet from any residential zone.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 193-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-5
1:97

ARTICLE II
Engine Brakes
[Adopted 10-2-2012 by Ord. No. 671]
§ 193-6. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Slippery Rock Borough Engine Brake
Ordinance 671."
§ 193-7. Warranted location.
This article is warranted on SR 108 from Segment 90, Offset 0075 (Slippery
Rock Township/Slippery Rock Borough line), east to Segment 120, Offset
1175 (near Dollar General Store entrance, approximately 300 feet west of
the intersection with Normal Avenue).
§ 193-8. Findings.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County,
Pennsylvania, finds as a fact that the operation of an engine brake on
a gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle not equipped with
exhaust mufflers, or equipped with defective or modified exhaust mufflers,
so as to create excessive noise through the use of said engine brake
adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Borough of Slippery Rock and, therefore, is a nuisance in fact.
§ 193-9. Prohibited acts.
No gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle shall be operated on
the streets, roads, alleys or highways identified in § 193-7 herein, utilizing
in said operation an engine brake without exhaust mufflers or with defective
or modified exhaust mufflers permitting excessive noise to be created by
said motor vehicle.
§ 193-10. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring the
utilization of an engine brake to protect the safety and property of the
residents of Slippery Rock Borough, other motor vehicle operators,
pedestrians, and the operator and passengers of the motor vehicle involved
in said emergency situation.
§ 193-11. Violations and penalties.39
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay the fines and penalties set forth in the appropriate
section of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), plus
costs.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 193-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-11
1:99
Chapter 200
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 121.
§ 200-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Slippery
Rock Outdoor Wood-Fired Boiler Ordinance."
§ 200-2. Statutory authority.40
The Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock, under and by virtue of and
pursuant to the authority granted by the Borough Code, 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., does hereby enact and ordain this chapter.
§ 200-3. Applicability.
This chapter applies to the installation and use of all outdoor wood-fired
boilers within the Borough of Slippery Rock.
§ 200-4. Findings; purpose.
The Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock has determined that air
pollution from outdoor wood-fired boilers may be detrimental to the health,
comfort, living conditions, use and enjoyment of property, welfare, and
safety of the citizens of the Borough. It is hereby declared to be the policy of
the Borough to safeguard the citizens of the Borough from such nuisance.
§ 200-5. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
A. This chapter does not apply to grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood,
propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
B. This chapter does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or
other heating device within a building used for human or animal
habitation.
C. This chapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural
gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction
or maintenance activities.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 193-11 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 200-5
1:100
CLEAN WOOD — Natural wood that has no paint, stains or other types of
coatings, and natural wood that has not been treated with, including but not
limited to, copper chromium arsenate, creosote, or pentachlorophenol.
COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough of Slippery Rock.
EPA — United States Environmental Protection Agency.
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER — Also known as "outdoor wood-fired
furnaces," "outdoor wood-burning appliances," or "outdoor hydronic
heaters," "water stoves," etc. A fuel-burning device:
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, for profit or not
for profit, association, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth or the federal government, political
subdivision, municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PHASE 2 OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER — An outdoor wood-fired boiler
that has been certified or qualified by EPA as meeting a particulate matter
emission limit of 0.32 pound per million British thermal units (BTU) output
and is labeled accordingly. Phase 2 outdoor wood-fired boiler models are
identified with a white hang tag.
RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL — The person designated by the Borough Council
to be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
STACK — Any vertical structure enclosing a flue or flues that carry off
smoke or exhaust from a wood-fired boiler or furnace, especially that part
of a structure extending above a roof.
§ 200-6. Installation, use and operation regulations.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, an outdoor wood-fired boiler
may be installed, used or operated in the Borough of Slippery Rock only in
accordance with the following provisions:
A. Designed to burn clean wood or other approved solid fuels;
Specified by the manufacturer for outdoor installation or for installation
in structures not normally intended for habitation by humans or
domestic animals, including structures such as garages and sheds; and
B.
Designed to heat building space and/or water through the distribution,
typically through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water
or a mixture of water and antifreeze.
C.
A. Particulate standard requirements for new outdoor wood-fired boilers.
No person shall install an outdoor wood-fired boiler that is not a Phase 2
outdoor wood-fired boiler.
B. Setback requirements for new outdoor wood-fired boilers. No person
shall install an outdoor wood-fired boiler unless it is installed at least
150 feet from the nearest property line.
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-6
1:101
C. Stack height requirements for new outdoor wood-fired boilers. No
person shall install an outdoor wood-fired boiler unless it has a
permanent attached stack with a minimum stack height of 10 feet above
the ground.
D. Fuel requirements for new and existing outdoor wood-fired boilers. No
person that operates a new or existing outdoor wood-fired boiler shall
use a fuel other than the following:
(1) Clean wood.
(2) Wood pellets made from clean wood.
(3) Home heating oil, natural gas, or propane that complies with all
applicable sulfur limits and is used as a starter or supplemental fuel
for dual-fired outdoor wood-fired boilers.
E. Prohibited fuels for new and existing outdoor wood-fired boilers. No
person shall burn any of the following items in an outdoor wood-fired
boiler:
(1) Any material not listed in Subsection D.
(2) Treated or painted wood.
(3) Furniture.
(4) Garbage.
(5) Tires.
(6) Lawn clippings or yard waste.
(7) Material containing plastic.
(8) Material containing rubber.
(9) Waste petroleum products.
(10) Paints and paint thinners.
(11) Chemicals.
(12) Any hazardous waste.
(13) Coal.
(14) Glossy colored paper.
(15) Construction and demolition debris.
(16) Plywood.
(17) Particleboard.
(18) Saltwater driftwood.
§ 200-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 200-6
1:102
§ 200-7. Enforcement; notice of violation.
§ 200-8. Responsibility of owners and operators.
(19) Manure.
(20) Animal carcasses.
(21) Asphalt products.
F. Prohibition of operation for new and existing outdoor wood-fired
boilers. No person shall use or operate a new or existing outdoor woodfired
boiler between the dates of May 1 and September 30.
G. Prohibition in certain zoning districts. The use of outdoor wood-fired
boilers may be restricted in certain zoning districts within the Borough
of Slippery Rock as specified in Chapter 375, Zoning, as amended and
codified.
A. The Borough of Slippery Rock shall have the power and duty to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Borough of Slippery Rock may issue such notices of violation as are
necessary to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
These notices shall include but shall not be limited to notices requiring
persons to cease unlawful use of outdoor wood-fired boilers which is in
violation of any provision of this chapter; notices to take corrective
action; and notices requiring production of information. Such notices
may be issued if the Borough of Slippery Rock finds that any person is in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
C. The Borough of Slippery Rock may, in its notices of violation, require
compliance with this chapter.
D. The authority of Borough Council to issue a notice of violation under
this section is in addition to any remedy or penalty that may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter. The failure to comply with any such notice is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
A. Whenever the responsible official finds that illegal operation of an
outdoor wood-fired boiler is occurring in the Borough of Slippery Rock,
in contravention of the requirements of § 200-6 above, the responsible
official may require the owner or operator to take corrective action in a
manner satisfactory to the Borough of Slippery Rock, or the responsible
official may require the owner or operator to allow access to the land by
the responsible official or a third party to take such action.
B. For the purpose of collecting or recovering the costs involved in taking
corrective action or pursuing a cost-recovery action pursuant to a
notice of violation or recovering the cost of litigation, oversight,
monitoring, sampling, testing, and investigation related to a corrective
action, the Borough of Slippery Rock may collect the amount in the
§ 200-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-8
1:103
§ 200-9. Criminal penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter commits a summary
offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $2,500 for each separate offense and, in default
of the payment of such fine, may be sentenced to imprisonment for 90
days for each separate offense. Employees of the Borough of Slippery Rock
authorized to conduct inspections or investigations are hereby declared
to be law enforcement officers authorized to issue or file citations for
summary violations under this chapter, and the Borough's counsel is hereby
authorized to prosecute these offenses. For purposes of this section, a
summary offense may be prosecuted before any Magisterial District Judge
in the Borough of Slippery Rock. There is no accelerated rehabilitative
disposition authorized for a summary offense.
§ 200-10. Civil penalties.
same manner as civil penalties are assessed and collected following the
process for assessment and collection of a civil penalty contained in
§ 200-10 of this chapter.
A. In addition to proceeding under any other remedy available at law or in
equity for a violation of a provision of this chapter, the Borough of
Slippery Rock may assess a civil penalty for the violation. The penalty
may be assessed whether or not the violation was willful. The civil
penalty so assessed shall not exceed $5,000 per day for each violation.
In determining the amount of the penalty, the Borough of Slippery Rock
shall consider:41
(1) The willfulness of the violation;
(2) Damage to air, soil, water or other natural resources of the
Borough of Slippery Rock or their uses;
(3) Financial benefit to the person as a result of the violation;
(4) Deterrence of future violations;
(5) Costs to the Borough of Slippery Rock;
(6) The compliance history of the source;
(7) The severity and duration of the violation;
(8) Degree of cooperation in resolving the violation;
(9) The speed with which compliance is ultimately achieved;
(10) Whether the violation was voluntarily reported;
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 200-10
1:104
(11) Other factors unique to the owners or operators of the source or
facility; and
(12) Other relevant factors.
B. When the Borough of Slippery Rock proposes to assess a civil penalty, it
shall inform the person of the proposed amount of the penalty. The
person charged with the penalty shall then have 30 days to pay the
proposed penalty in full, or if the person wishes to contest the amount
of the penalty or the fact of the violation to the extent not already
established, the person shall forward the proposed amount of the
penalty to the Council within the thirty-day period for placement in an
escrow account with the State Treasurer or any commonwealth bank,
or post an appeal bond to the Council within 30 days in the amount of
the proposed penalty, provided that such bond is executed by a surety
licensed to do business in the commonwealth. If, through administrative
or final judicial review of the proposed penalty, it is determined that no
violation occurred or that the amount of the penalty shall be reduced,
the Council shall, within 30 days, remit the appropriate amount to the
person with any interest accumulated by the escrow deposit. Failure to
forward the money or the appeal bond at the time of the appeal shall
result in a waiver of all legal rights to contest the violation or the
amount of the civil penalty, unless the appellant alleges financial
inability to prepay the penalty or post the appeal bond. The Council
shall conduct a hearing to consider the appellant's alleged inability to
pay within 30 days of the date of the appeal. The Council may waive the
requirement to prepay the civil penalty or to post an appeal bond if the
appellant demonstrates and the Council finds that the appellant is
financially unable to pay. The Council shall issue an order within 30
days of the date of the hearing to consider the appellant's alleged
inability to pay. The amount of penalty assessed after administrative
hearing or after waiver of administrative hearing shall be payable to the
Borough of Slippery Rock and shall be collectible in any manner
provided by law for the collection of debts, including the collection of
interest on the penalty amount computed in accordance with Section
6621(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,42 from the date of the
assessment of the penalty. If any person liable to pay any such penalty
neglects or refuses to pay the same after demand, the amount, together
with interest and any costs that may accrue, shall constitute a debt of
such person, as may be appropriate, to Slippery Rock Borough. The
debt shall constitute a lien on all property owned by said person when a
notice of lien incorporating a description of the property of the person
subject to the action is duly filed with the Prothonotary of the Butler
County Court of Common Pleas.
C. Hearings under this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the
Local Agency Law.43
42.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 6621(a)(2).
43.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. 751 et seq.
§ 200-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-11
1:105
§ 200-11. Unlawful conduct.
It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with or to cause or assist in the violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter or to fail to comply with any notice
of violation of the Borough of Slippery Rock. It shall also be unlawful to
hinder, obstruct, prevent, or interfere with the Borough of Slippery Rock or
its personnel in their performance of any duty hereunder, including denying
the responsible officer access to the source or facility.
§ 200-12. Public nuisances.
A violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. The Borough
of Slippery Rock shall have the authority to require any person causing a
public nuisance to abate the public nuisance. In addition, when abating a
public nuisance, the Borough of Slippery Rock may recover the expenses
of abatement following the process for assessment and collection of civil
penalty contained in § 200-10. Whenever the nuisance is maintained or
continued contrary to this chapter, the nuisance may be abatable in the
manner provided by this chapter. Any person who causes a public nuisance
shall be liable for the cost of abatement.
Chapter 207
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
42.
§ 207-1. Responsibility for operation and maintenance of park.
[Amended 6-5-1979 by Ord. No. 256A]
The operation and maintenance of the Slippery Rock Municipal Park shall
be the responsibility of the Slippery Rock Park and Recreation Commission,
as from time to time appointed and reappointed by the Borough Council of
Slippery Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
§ 207-2. Applicability. [Amended 6-5-1979 by Ord. No. 256A]
The Slippery Rock Municipal Park shall be governed by the rules and
regulations as set forth in this chapter, as well as Slippery Rock Borough
ordinances governing municipal property.
§ 207-3. Time of operation. [Amended 6-5-1979 by Ord. No. 256A]
The park shall be open to the public daily from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Any use of said park at times other than said times shall only be permitted
upon approval of the Park and Recreation Commission. In no instance shall
§ 200-11 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 207-3
1:106
the permitted use extend beyond the hour of 12:00 midnight. It shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to occupy or be present in said park
during any hours in which the park is not open to the public. Any section
or part of the park may be declared closed to the public by the Park and
Recreation Commission, or its duly appointed employee, at any time and for
any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals, at
the discretion of the Park and Recreation Commission.
§ 207-4. Rules and regulations. [Amended 6-7-1977 by Res. No.
139; 6-5-1979 by Ord. No. 256A; 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328]
A. No person in the park shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or
cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay
or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary,
stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance,
matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution
of said waters.
B. No person in the park shall have brought in or have dumped, deposited
or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt,
rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or
trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left
anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles provided for this purpose. In the event receptacles are not
immediately available in any given area, such rubbish or waste shall be
removed from the park by the person responsible for bringing or having
it in the park and disposed elsewhere.
C. Fires are to be built only in fireplaces provided for this purpose. The
area around and adjacent to fireplaces shall at all times be kept free of
refuse and any combustible materials. All fires are to be extinguished
before persons using the fires leave the fireplace areas.
D. No person shall at any time for any reason, unless under the direction of
the Park and Recreation Commission, cut, mutilate, remove or take
away any trees, shrubs, flowers or plants growing within the park area.
E. No person shall wash dishes, pans or silverware or any kitchen items at
drinking fountains within the park.
F. No person shall remove or deface any sign, poster, building or
equipment or any other property within the park area.
G. The maximum speed limit for motor vehicles traveling within the park
shall be 15 miles per hour. The Park and Recreation Commission shall
cause to be erected within the park signs indicating the speed limit at
such intervals as the Park and Recreation Commission shall determine.
Said speed limit shall also be posted in a prominent location at all
entrances to the park.
H. All licensed motor vehicles, including motorcycles and recreational
vehicles, shall drive only on roadways and streets. They shall be parked
§ 207-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-4
1:107
§ 207-5. Group reservations.
Any group in excess of 50 persons shall make a reservation with the Park
and Recreation Commission and obtain permission for such group to use
the park. Any group desiring specific dates and/or specific facilities shall
make an advance reservation with the Park and Recreation Commission.
The Park and Recreation Commission shall take reservations and allot park
facilities on a first-come-first-served basis. Where no reservations are made
in advance, the use of the park facilities shall be used jointly with other
visitors or as they become available.
§ 207-6. Liability.
Persons using the park facilities will do so at their own risk. The Park and
Recreation Commission shall cause to be erected, at various places within
the park, notice that users are using the park at their own risk. No agent,
employee or servant has the authority either express or implied to bind the
Park and Recreation Commission or the Borough of Slippery Rock in any
manner whatsoever.
§ 207-7. Deposits and fees. [Amended 6-5-1979 by Ord. No. 256A]
§ 207-8. Regulations to be posted. [Amended 6-5-1979 by Ord. No.
256A]
The Park and Recreation Commission may cause to be posted within the
park from time to time regulations for the use of the park and conduct
within the park, including conduct of the visitors thereto, discarding of
only in designated parking areas. No unlicensed motor vehicle shall be
on the park at any time.
I. No unlicensed motorized bicycle, minibike, trail bike, terrain vehicle or
any similar motorized vehicle shall be operated within the park area of
the Slippery Rock Municipal Park or any other park area of the Borough
of Slippery Rock, whether now existing or hereinafter created, at any
time.
A. Nonprofit organizations sponsoring any fund-raising activities within
the Slippery Rock Municipal Park shall pay a deposit as set from time to
time by resolution of the Park and Recreation Commission to the
Slippery Rock Park and Recreation Commission. Said deposit shall be
returned to the organization after inspection of outdoor facilities and
grounds by the Recreation Director or a Park and Recreation
Commission staff member, to insure that facilities and grounds are free
of damage and accumulated refuse.44
B. Profit-making groups shall negotiate the terms for use of the park with
the Park and Recreation Commission.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-4 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 207-8
1:108
trash, use of alcoholic and controlled substances, camping, athletic
activities, animals, use of firearms, commercial traffic and other vehicular
traffic, selling or soliciting and any other matters, including but not limited
to subjects previously set forth in this chapter.
§ 207-9. Enforcement. [Added 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328]
The Borough police shall enforce this chapter. They shall check information
received and violations observed.
§ 207-10. Signs to be posted. [Added 6-7-1977 by Res. No. 139]
Slippery Rock Borough shall cause to be posted at the entrances to the
Slippery Rock Municipal Park a prominently displayed sign setting forth the
restrictions and penalty contained in this chapter.
§ 207-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
32845]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Butler County.
Chapter 213
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-11
1:109

ARTICLE I
Peddling
[Adopted 4-3-2001 by Ord. No. 582 (Ch. 13, Part 3, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 213-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling as below defined.
PEDDLING — Anyone engaging in canvassing, soliciting, peddling, or
selling on the streets or sidewalks or on a door-to-door basis without
previous appointment for the purpose of taking orders for books,
magazines, pictures, home improvements, products, or offering of services,
or anyone gratuitously seeking monetary contributions for themselves or
others.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
§ 213-2. License required.
As Slippery Rock Borough has determined that it is necessary for reasons
of crime prevention and protection of the citizens' privacy, no person shall
engage in peddling within the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County,
without first having been granted a license as provided herein for each
individual peddler.
§ 213-3. Application for license.
Every person desiring to engage in peddling within the Borough of Slippery
Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania, shall first make application to the
Borough Mayor and/or Chief of Police. Such application shall state the name
of the person applying, his address, the name of the person for whom he
works, and the type of books, magazines, home improvements, pictures,
products or services he wishes to peddle, the length of time for which
he desires to be licensed, the type of vehicle he uses, with owner's name
and license plate number, and what, if any, crimes the individual has been
convicted of as an adult. No license issued shall be transferred from one
person or organization to another.
§ 213-4. Fees; issuance of license.
A. No license shall be issued under this article until the proper fee shall be
paid to the Mayor or Chief of Police, which fee shall be for the use of the
general fund of the Borough, as follows:
(1) For each individual peddler:
(a) Daily charge: $2 per day.
§ 213-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-4
1:111
§ 213-5. Hours and days restricted.
No person licensed as a peddler shall engage in peddling at any time on
Sunday, or on any other day of the week before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
§ 213-6. Recordkeeping requirements.
The Mayor or Chief of Police shall keep a record of all licenses issued, and
the Chief of Police shall supervise the activities of holders of such licenses.
§ 213-7. Refusal of license.
The Mayor of the Borough of Slippery Rock is hereby authorized to refuse to
issue any license and to suspend any license already issued when he deems
such refusal or suspension to be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of may suspend licenses
or refuse to issue a license for violation of any of these provisions or for the
giving of false information upon any application for a license hereunder.
§ 213-8. Violations and penalties.46
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Borough
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 10 days or to the county
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
(b) Monthly charge: $10 per month.
(c) Annual charge: $25 per year.
(2) Business or organization: $50 in addition to charge for individual
peddler.
B. Nonprofit corporations or associations whose primary purpose is the
promotion of youth activities, such as scouting and sports groups, shall
be exempt from the fees to be collected under this provision so long as
the individual peddlers are 17 years of age or younger. Such exemption
from fees does not relieve any individual or organization from
compliance with other provisions of this article.
C. Upon making application and following approval by the Mayor or the
Chief of Police and payment of the permit fees, the Borough shall issue
a license to the peddler and/or organization.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-4 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 213-8
1:112
article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to
or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this
article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County.
§ 213-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-8
1:113

ARTICLE II
Solicitors and Temporary Businesses
[Adopted 6-6-2007 by Ord. No. 636 (Ch. 13, Part 1, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 213-9. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Slippery Rock Borough
Solicitors and Temporary Business Ordinance."
§ 213-10. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.47
§ 213-11. Purpose.
This article is enacted to monitor and control the activities of solicitors and
temporary businesses that would not be covered by the zoning process so
as to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the Borough residents.
§ 213-12. Permit required.
Any solicitor or temporary business, as defined in this article, must obtain a
permit from Slippery Rock Borough.
§ 213-13. Definitions; excluded activities.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE EVENT — An event sponsored by an IRS 501(c)(3)
organization with its sole purpose to benefit a community or charitable
cause.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Organizations which are exempt from
taxation by the United States Treasury Department, such as religious
or charitable organizations.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner(s) of land, including the holder
of an option or contract to purchase, whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any condition.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Subject to the provisions under Subsection
B, Exclusions, of this section, "public right-of-way" shall be defined as
the width of the paved roadway and all berms and sidewalks adjacent
thereto in which the public has the right to travel thereover.
SOLICITOR — Any person or group engaging in the activity of
canvassing, peddling or soliciting for the sale or purchase of goods,
47.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 213-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-13
1:115
§ 213-14. Requirements for solicitors and temporary businesses.
services or contributions within the municipality, whether by foot, from
a structure, from the use of a vehicle or telephone, or in any other
manner.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS — Any person or group engaging on a limitedtime
basis, not to exceed 13 weeks, in the purchase or sale of goods,
services or solicitation of contributions at a fixed location within the
Borough.
B. Exclusions. The foregoing definitions shall be deemed not to include
any of the following activities and are excluded from permits and fees,
except that such activities shall be subject to § 213-14C(3)(b) and (c):
(1) Campaigning for political office, whether conducted in person, in
public, by telephone or by mail.
(2) The solicitation of donations by mail or by telephone.
(3) Any sale, collection of money, taking of orders for personal property
or rendering of services at a prearranged appointment at a
properly zoned location.
(4) Produce that was grown on the premises.
(5) Yard sales or garage sales which occur solely on an individual's
private property and are conducted for no more than six days total
per year.
(6) Outdoor, on-premises, business displays (sidewalk sales), not to
exceed three feet from the front wall of the business and arranged
to minimize obstruction of the walkway.
(7) A fund-raising activity conducted by an organization, on its own
property, for a charitable event.
(8) A promotional activity conducted by a business that involves
celebrities, such as sports or entertainment celebrities, or
costumed individuals, such as Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny and
various other costumed animals, that are used solely to attract
customers, as long as such activity does not occur within the public
right-of-way or does not block vehicular or sidewalk access.
(9) Any temporary business that is conducted within the interior of an
existing store or business office. Note: such temporary businesses
are responsible for obtaining a zoning permit if a change of use is
to occur.
(10) Any official event as recognized by the Slippery Rock Borough
Council, such as parades, street fairs or similar events.
A. Issuance and display of permit.
§ 213-13 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 213-14
1:116
(1) Prior to the beginning of any activity, a solicitor or temporary
business must submit an application to the Slippery Rock Borough
Code Enforcement Office and obtain a permit. When the Borough
has approved the solicitor's or temporary business application, the
applicant shall be issued a permit. The permit shall contain the
information required on the application and the expiration date,
and a photograph of the applicant, which was submitted with the
application, shall be attached. The permit shall be carried by each
solicitor or openly displayed by each temporary business at all
times when engaged in such activity and shall be exhibited for
inspection to any person approached for purposes of soliciting or
temporary business sales.
(2) A temporary business operator who wishes to utilize a temporary
structure and temporary signs in association with the temporary
business operations is required to obtain a license from the
Slippery Rock Borough Code Enforcement Office or its designee.
The license will be a consolidated permit/license authorizing
business operations in accordance with all applicable codes and
ordinances of Slippery Rock Borough and will include signs
licensed on a temporary basis and temporary structure installation
in accordance with all applicable codes and ordinances of Slippery
Rock Borough. The license term will not exceed the maximum 60
days permitted by this article. Temporary sign display area shall
not exceed the maximum 50 square feet at any given time and shall
run consecutively with the valid license period of the temporary
business. All temporary structures must obtain a permit, where
applicable, and comply with all Building Code and Fire Prevention
Code requirements.
B. Permit terms and fees.
(1) The term of each solicitor's or temporary business permit shall be
specified on the permit.
(2) The fees for a solicitor's or temporary business permit shall be set
by resolution of the Borough Council.
(3) There shall be no fee for nonprofit organizations.
(4) Licenses for temporary businesses shall be authorized on a weekly
basis, not to exceed 13 weeks.
C. Limitations and restrictions. The permit for soliciting and temporary
business sales shall be valid in all permitted districts, in accord with
Chapter 375, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Slippery Rock.
(1) Solicitors.
(a) Sundays. Soliciting is not permitted at any time on Sundays.
§ 213-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-14
1:117
§ 213-15. Requirements for charitable events.
(b) Mondays through Saturdays. Soliciting shall be permitted in all
residential districts and at residential structures and in
commercial zoning districts between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. Soliciting shall be permitted in commercial and
industrial zoning districts between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
(c) No soliciting shall be conducted during federal legal holidays.
(d) A solicitor shall not be permitted to make or cause to be made
any loud noise to attract attention or for any other purpose.
Such noises may include but shall not be limited to shouting,
the use of loudspeakers, horns, drums, etc.
(e) A permit only allows access to entrance points to all private
property. Property owners shall remain in complete control of
internal access to their properties.
(2) Temporary businesses.
(a) Temporary businesses are not permitted in residential
districts.
(b) The property owner is responsible for ensuring that a
temporary business obtains a permit prior to the start of any
activity.
(3) Solicitors and temporary businesses.
(a) There shall be no physical contact by the solicitor or temporary
business without the person's consent. This shall be deemed to
include not only physical force or restraint but also the act of
placing objects on the person, clothing, property or vehicle of
the potential buyer or contributor.
(b) A solicitor or temporary business shall not block or interfere
with the movement of any pedestrian or vehicle on any public
sidewalk or street.
(c) A solicitor or temporary business shall not conduct any activity
within public rights-of-way.
(d) Sign permits or temporary sign permits must be obtained in
accordance with Chapter 375, Zoning, Article XX, Signs, if
signs are to be erected.
A. Issuance and display of permit. Prior to beginning any charitable event,
the sponsoring organization must submit an application with a
photograph of the applicant to Slippery Rock Borough and obtain a
permit. When the Borough has approved the submitted application, the
applicant shall be issued a permit. The permit shall contain the
§ 213-14 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 213-15
1:118
§ 213-16. Prohibited acts.
It shall be a violation for any person to fail to observe this article, with fines
and penalties for failure to observe this article, which shall pertain to a
person or business who violates any portion of this article, including but not
limited to one who:
§ 213-17. Notice of violation.
information required on the application and the expiration date. The
permit shall be retained by the applicant at all times when engaged
in such activity and shall be available for inspection to any person
approached for purposes of sales or event activities.
B. Permit terms and fees.
(1) There shall be no fee for a charitable events permit. However, there
may be charges for municipal services, such as police services, if
they are needed.
(2) The term of each charitable event shall be specified on the issued
permit.
C. Limitations and restrictions. The permit for the charitable event shall
be subject to the following limitations:
(1) The time limit for a charitable event shall be limited to a period of
15 consecutive days.
A. Makes a false or untrue statement on the application.
B. Fails to display the permit upon request.
C. Fails to obtain a permit.
D. Fails to cease operations after the expiration of the permit.
E. Does not comply with the provisions of this article.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee
determines that there has been a violation of this article or has grounds
to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in writing,
and it shall include the following:
(1) A statement of the violation and why the notice is being issued.
(2) A correction order.
(3) Penalties.
B. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
(1) Delivered personally;
§ 213-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-17
1:119
§ 213-18. Violations and penalties.48
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Butler County.
§ 213-19. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on June 6, 2007.
(2) Sent by certified mail or first-class mail addressed to the last known
addressee; or
(3) Posted on the affected property.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-17 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 213-19
1:120
Chapter 217
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 114. Solid waste — See Ch. 246.
§ 217-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Zoning and
Codes Office of the Borough of Slippery Rock, being marked and designated
as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition," as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Slippery Rock, in
the State of Pennsylvania, County of Butler, for regulating and governing
the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures,
by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of
such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code on file in the Zoning and Codes Office are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 217-2 of this
chapter.
§ 217-2. Modifications.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1: insert "the Borough of Slippery Rock."
B. Section 106.4, Violation Penalties: insert "Any person, firm or
corporation who shall violate any provision of this code shall, upon
conviction therefor, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 and not
more than $300 and/or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
Every day that a violation of this code continues shall constitute a
separate offense."
C. Section 103.5: insert "Fees may be established when deemed
appropriate by Borough Council."
D. Insert Section 302.2.3 (Temporary Storage of Furniture): "The
temporary relocation or storage of furniture designed and constructed
for indoor use, including but not limited to upholstered couches, stuffed
chairs, sectional sofas, davenports or recliners, on the exterior of any
lot is hereby prohibited."
§ 213-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-2
1:121
§ 217-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of this code within the Borough of Slippery
Rock shall be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the
Borough Council of Slippery Rock from time to time by resolution:
§ 217-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock in conformity with the
requirements of the relevant provisions of this code, as amended from time
to time, and for the purpose set forth therein.
Chapter 221
RENTAL PROPERTY
E. Section 302.4: insert "six inches to eight inches."
F. Section 304.14: insert "from April 1 through October 1."
G. Section 602.3: insert "from October 1 through April 1."
H. Section 602.4: insert "from October 1 through April 1."
A. By the designation of an employee of Slippery Rock to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Slippery Rock Borough;
B. By retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party
agencies to act on behalf of Slippery Rock Borough.
§ 217-2 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 217-4
1:122
ARTICLE I
Tenant Registration
[Adopted 3-7-1972 by Ord. No. 279 (Ch. 11, Part 1, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 221-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT FOR OWNER — Any person who can show written proof that he has
authority to act for the property owner.
DORMITORIES TO INCLUDE FRATERNITY AND SORORITY HOUSES —
A building designed for or used solely or primarily to provide housing for
college or university students. The building may be publicly or privately
owned, leased, operated, managed or otherwise controlled. Staff or
monitors may also reside therein. The term "primarily" shall be construed
to mean over 75% of the total design capacity of the building as permitted
by local or state regulations, whichever is the more stringent.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY, TO INCLUDE GARDEN APARTMENTS —
A building or portion thereof containing or designed to contain three or
more separate dwelling units with or without common access facilities.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed for or occupied by
one family for living purposes and containing cooking, living, sanitary and
sleeping facilities for use solely by one family. All rooms comprising a
dwelling unit shall have access through an interior door to other parts of
the dwelling unit.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A tract of land in single ownership upon which
are placed two or more mobile homes, which has been developed with all
necessary facilities and services in accordance with a site development plan
meeting all the requirements of this article, and which is intended for the
express purpose of providing a satisfactory living environment for mobile
home residents on a long-term occupancy basis.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot size,
bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in the district where planned residential
development is permitted.
ROOMING HOUSE, TO INCLUDE A BOARDING, LODGING OR TOURIST
HOME — A building other than a dormitory, hotel, fraternity or sorority
house containing not more than one dwelling unit occupied by a family and
providing, for compensation, rooming units for the lodging of not more than
10 individuals in addition to the family.
ROOMING UNIT — A room or rooms constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping unit that is physically separated from any other rooms,
dwelling units, or rooming units in the same structure. The rooming unit
§ 221-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-1
1:123
shall contain living and sleeping facilities but not cooking or eating facilities
and shall be occupied by no more than one family.
TOWNHOUSE or ROW HOUSE — Three to eight separate dwelling units
attached to each other by party or common walls, with each unit having
individual access and rear common or private garden orientation.
§ 221-2. Information to be provided.
§ 221-3. Fraternities and sororities.
The officers of any fraternities or sororities, the owner of any rooming house
or private home in which rooms are rented shall maintain within said home
at all times a registry containing the names, local mailing address and home
mailing address of all tenants or occupants. Such registry shall be kept
current at all times and shall be available for inspection by the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer at any time during normal business hours. In
addition to such registry, the officers of a fraternity or sorority, rooming
house, owner or agent for owner shall comply with the provisions of § 221-2
hereof.
§ 221-4. Mobile home parks.49
Any owner, operator, manager or agent for owner of a mobile or
manufactured home park established in accordance with Chapter 350,
Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter 375, Zoning, shall, in
addition to complying with § 221-2 hereof, also maintain a registry in
accordance with § 221-3 hereof and, in addition, shall notify the Borough
Administrator/Secretary of the type, make and model of any mobile home
moved into such mobile home park. Within 10 days of the date of removal of
any mobile home from a mobile home park within the Borough of Slippery
Rock, the owner, operator, manager or agency for owner shall notify the
A. Whoever, as owner, landlord, manager, or agent for owner, rents any
dwelling unit or room or rooms for a period in excess of 30 days shall
supply the Borough Administrator/Secretary with the following
information:
(1) The dwelling unit number or street address.
(2) The name or names of all persons to occupy such dwelling unit.
(3) The mailing address of the room or dwelling unit.
(4) The period of time for which the rental is made.
B. Such information shall be supplied to the Borough Administrator/
Secretary within 10 days of the renting, leasing or subleasing of any
dwelling unit or rooms.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 221-4
1:124
Borough Administrator/Secretary of the intention to move said mobile home
and the destination of the mobile home.
§ 221-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
32850]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Butler County.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-5
1:125

ARTICLE II
Rental Operating License
[Adopted 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 629 (Ch. 11, Part 2, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 221-6. Licensing requirements.
There are hereby established regulations for the issuance of a rental
operating license:
A. No person shall operate as a rental unit a single-family dwelling unit,
multiple dwelling, apartment building, townhouse, conversion unit, or
dormitory unless he holds a current unrevoked operating license issued
by the Code Enforcement Officer in his name for the specified rental
unit.
B. Upon completed application, all rental units shall be inspected for
compliance with this article. Violations will be noted and processed
according to this section prior to issuance of the operating license.
C. Every operating license shall be issued for a period of two years, unless
sooner revoked, and may be renewed for successive periods not to
exceed two years. The initial operating license may be issued for a
period of one year at the discretion of the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer, in order to bring a dwelling unit into compliance with the
Property Maintenance Code or to maintain the inspection sequence of
the rental operating license program.
D. Each rental unit will be inspected and shall comply in full with Slippery
Rock Borough's Property Maintenance Code, designated as the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition (or currently
adopted edition), as published by the International Code Council, as
adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Slippery
Rock,51 for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of
all property, buildings and structures by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupancy and use.
E. Right of entry. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to
constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. Prior
to entering into a space not otherwise open to the general public, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall make reasonable effort by telephone or
letter to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of
the premises, present proper identification and request entry. If
requested entry is refused or not obtained, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall pursue recourse as provided by law.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 217, Property Maintenance.
§ 221-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-6
1:127
§ 221-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FAMILY — As defined in Chapter 375, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of
Slippery Rock.53
§ 221-8. Administration and enforcement.
Rental units shall be inspected and approved for occupancy as follows.
The administration and enforcement of this Code within the Borough of
Slippery Rock shall be undertaken in either or both of the following ways,
as determined by Borough Council of Slippery Rock from time to time by
resolution:
§ 221-9. Violations and penalties.54
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
F. The cost for the license to operate a rental dwelling shall be established
by Borough Council from time to time by resolution,52 based on the type
of residential structure and number of dwelling or rooming units.
G. The owner or agent of the owner of a residential rental property
licensed as per the provisions of this article shall file with the Code
Enforcement Officer a completed unverified condition report for those
intervening years when an inspection is not scheduled. Such report
shall be on a form provided by the Borough. Failure to file such report
within 30 days, upon notice, shall constitute a violation of this article
and subject the owner or agent of the owner to all applicable penalties.
H. Responsibility. The owners of the premises shall maintain the structures
in accord with all legal requirements, guarantee occupancy as defined
in § 221-7 of this article, and insure that the property is in compliance
with these requirements.
A. By the designation of an employee of Slippery Rock to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Slippery Rock Borough;
B. By retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party
agencies to act on behalf of Slippery Rock Borough.
52.Editor's Note: The current Fee Resolution is on file in the office of the Borough
Administrator/Secretary.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 221-9
1:128
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Butler County.
§ 221-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-9
1:129
Chapter 235
SEXUAL CONDUCT AND OBSCENE MATERIALS
§ 221-9 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 221-9
1:130
ARTICLE I
Sexual Conduct and Nudity in Public Places
[Adopted 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 571 (Ch. 6, Part 9A, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 235-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the
exposure of any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of
or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, perineum anal region; or the exposure
of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female
breast, which device simulates and give the realistic appearance of the
nipples and/or areola.
PUBLIC PLACE — All outdoor places owned by or open to the general public
and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general
public, including such places of entertainment, restaurants, clubs, theaters,
dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific members,
restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not an
admission charge is levied.
§ 235-2. Public indecency prohibited; exceptions.
A. A person who knowingly or intentionally does any of the following in a
public place commits public indecency, a summary offense:
(1) Engages in sexual intercourse.
(2) Engages in deviate sexual intercourse as defined by the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code.55
(3) Appears in a state of nudity.
(4) Fondles the genitals of himself, herself or another person.
B. A person who knowingly or intentionally promotes or maintains any
acts of public indecency as a property owner, proprietor or manager of
a business commits public indecency, a summary offense.
C. The prohibition set forth in Subsection A(3) hereof shall not apply to:
(1) Any child under seven years of age.
(2) Any mother breastfeeding her child in any location where the
mother is otherwise authorized to be.
55.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-3
1:131
§ 235-3. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to the specific penalties provided in this article, it is hereby
declared that any building, portion of building or enclosed place regularly
used for prohibited display of public nudity is a public nuisance, subjecting
the owner, proprietor or other operator thereof to any and all actions
authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the abatement of
public nuisances.
§ 235-4. Violations and penalties.56
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Borough
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 10 days or to the county
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to
or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this
article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County.
56.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-3 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 235-4
1:132
ARTICLE II
Obscene and Other Sexual Material
[Adopted 5-4-1999 by Ord. No. 572 (Ch. 6, Part 9B, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 235-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the contemporary community
standards in this article, "community" means the state.
HARMFUL TO MINORS — As used in § 235-6, means that quality of any
description or representation in whatever form of nudity, sexual conduct,
sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
KNOWING — As used in § 235-6, means having general knowledge of or
reason to know or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further
inspection or inquiry of the character and content of any material or
performance described therein which is reasonably susceptible of
examination by the person charged with violation of this article.
MATERIAL — Any literature, including any book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, bumper sticker, comic book or writing, any figure, visual
representation or image, including any drawing, photograph, picture,
videotape or motion picture.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NUDE/NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or showing the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance, if:
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of
minors.
A.
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as
a whole with respect to what is suitable materials for minors.
B.
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational
or scientific value for minors.
C.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest.
A.
The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive way
sexual conduct of a type described in this article.
B.
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
C.
§ 235-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-5
1:133
PERFORMANCE — Any play, dance or other live exhibition performed
before an audience.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — In a sexual context, flagellation or torture
by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or in
a bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one who is nude or so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
sexual intercourse, anal or oral sodomy and sexual bestiality, and patently
offense representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory
functions, sadomasochistic abuse and lewd exhibitions of the genitals.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of the human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance, premises or place used
for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether by air,
rail, motor vehicle or any other method, including aircraft, watercraft,
railroad cars, buses, and air, boat, railroad and bus terminals and stations.
§ 235-6. Prohibited acts.
No person, knowing the obscene character of the materials or performances
involved, shall, within the Borough of Slippery Rock:
A. Display or cause or permit the display of any explicit sexual materials as
defined in Subsection B hereafter in or on any window, showcase,
newsstand, display rack, billboard, display board, viewing screen,
motion-picture screen, marquee or similar place in such manner that
the display is visible from any public street, highway, sidewalk,
transportation facility or other public thoroughfare or in any business
or commercial establishment where minors, as a part or the general
public or otherwise, are or will probably be exposed to view all or any
part of such materials.
B. Knowingly disseminate by sale, loan or otherwise explicit sexual
materials to a minor. "Explicit sexual materials," as used in this
subsection, means materials which are obscene, or:
(1) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film,
videotape or similar visual representation or image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse as defined herein and which is harmful to
minors.
(2) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter
enumerated in Subsection A or explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual
conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is
harmful to minors.
§ 235-5 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 235-6
1:134
§ 235-7. Admission of minors to shows.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for monetary
consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission
ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor for a monetary consideration
to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion-picture show or other
presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse as defined herein and which is harmful to minors.
§ 235-8. Exemption.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any recognized historical society or
museum accorded charitable status by the federal government, any public
library, any library of any school, college or university or any archive or
library under the supervision and control of the commonwealth or a political
subdivision.
§ 235-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to a fine of not more than $500, plus costs, and to
serve a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day on which a
violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter, publish or in any manner
manufacture or prepare any obscene materials.
D. Write, print, publish, utter or cause to be written, printed, published or
uttered any advertisement or notice of any kind giving information
directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state where, how, from
whom or by what means any obscene materials can be purchased,
obtained or had.
E. Produce, present or direct any obscene performance or participate in a
portion thereof that is obscene or that contributes to its obscenity.
F. Hire, employ, use or permit any minor child to do or assist in doing any
act or thing mentioned in this section.
§ 235-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-9
1:135
Chapter 241
SMOKING
§ 241-1. Public buildings.
All persons are prohibited at all times from lighting, smoking, chewing or
inhaling any tobacco product while in any enclosed, indoor area owned or
operated by the Borough of Slippery Rock and which serves as a place of
work for public employees or a meeting place for a public body.
§ 241-2. Borough vehicles.
All persons are prohibited at all times from lighting, smoking, chewing or
inhaling in any vehicle owned by, used by or under the control of Slippery
Rock Borough.
§ 241-3. Borough employees.
All Borough employees are prohibited from lighting, smoking, chewing or
inhaling during their scheduled work hours, except when they are having
their meal or on rest breaks, provided that they do not light, smoke, chew
or inhale in any facility or vehicle as defined above.
§ 241-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
civil fine of not more than $50 for each violation.
§ 241-5. Effect of other provisions.
This chapter incorporates all provisions of state law which in any way
amend, modify or affect the provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to the Clean Indoor Air Act.57
Chapter 246
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 114.
Open burning — See Ch. 121.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 217.
57.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 637.1 et seq.
§ 235-9 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 246-1
1:136
§ 246-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Slippery Rock
Borough Municipal Solid Waste Management and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 246-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 1988-101, July 28, 1988), as amended.58
APPROVED WASTE CONTAINER — Waste containers provided by the
hauler in approximately thirty-five- or ninety-five-gallon capacity, either
hinged or tight-fitting, with handles or equipped for remote equipment to
lift.
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — A person, firm, partnership, corporation, or
public agency with whom the Borough has contracted to collect municipal
waste or recyclable materials from residential establishments.
BULK WASTE — Quantities of waste greater than that which will fit into the
approved waste container(s) with the lid closed.
BULKY WASTE — Individual municipal waste items generated within
residential dwelling units that are too large to fit within the selected waste
container, including but not limited to furniture, appliances, mattresses and
carpet.
COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or public
agency licensed to collect municipal waste and/or recyclable materials from
multifamily, commercial, municipal, or institutional establishments.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes. Any building used for commercial
purposes on the first floor or level shall be considered a commercial
building in its entirety for purposes of the within regulations. Any
residential units located on additional floors or levels of the building shall
be considered part of the commercial establishment for purposes of this
chapter.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals, including, but not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials,
picnics, and organized sporting events attended by 30 or more individuals
per day.
COVERED COMPUTER DEVICE — A desktop or notebook computer or
computer monitor or peripheral, marketed and intended for use by a
consumer. The term does not include a covered television device.
58.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 246-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-2
1:137
COVERED DEVICE — A covered computer device and covered television
device marketed and intended for use by a consumer. The term does not
include:
COVERED TELEVISION DEVICE — An electronic device that contains a
tuner that locks on to a selected carrier frequency and is capable of
receiving and displaying television or video programming via broadcast,
cable or satellite, including, without limitation, any direct view or projection
television with a viewable screen of four inches or larger whose display
technology is based on cathode ray tube, plasma, liquid crystal, digital light
processing, liquid crystal on silicon, silicon crystal reflective display, light
emitting diode or similar technology marketed and intended for use by a
consumer primarily for personal purposes. The term does not include a
covered computer device or a mobile telephone.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A solid waste, or combination of solid wastes,
which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating
reversible, illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported or disposed of or otherwise managed (42 U.S.C. § 6903). This
term includes but is not limited to materials which are ignitable
A device that is a part of a motor vehicle or any component part of a
motor vehicle assembled by or for a vehicle manufacturer or franchised
dealer, including replacement parts for use in a motor vehicle;
A.
A device that is functionally or physically a part of or connected to or
integrated within equipment or a system designed and intended for use
in an industrial, governmental, commercial, research and development
or medical setting, including, but not limited to, diagnostic, monitoring,
control and medical products as defined under the federal Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act (52 Stat. 1040, 21 U.S.C. § 301 et seq.), or equipment
used for security, sensing, monitoring, antiterrorism, emergency
services purposes or equipment designed and intended primarily for
use by professional users;
B.
A device that is contained within a clothes washer, clothes dryer,
refrigerator, refrigerator and freezer, microwave oven, conventional
oven or range, dishwasher, room air conditioner, dehumidifier, air
purifier or exercise equipment; or
C.
Any of the following:
(1) Telephone of any type, including a mobile phone.
(2) Personal digital assistant.
(3) Global positioning system.
D.
§ 246-2 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 246-2
1:138
(flammable), corrosive (capable of dissolving metals or burning skin),
reactive (unstable or react violently with water) and toxic (poisonous,
containing heavy metals or man-made chemical pesticides, except those
specific pesticides officially designated as nonhazardous by the United
States EPA and the PA DEP and the Borough of Slippery Rock).
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages,
schools and universities.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING — Properties having more than four residential
dwelling units per structure. Dwelling units located above a commercial
establishment shall be excluded from this definition.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the Borough
and other governmental and quasi-governmental agencies.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of "residual or hazardous waste"
hereunder from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution control facility.
"Municipal waste" does not include covered devices, electronic waste, or
yard waste.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Slippery Rock.
OPEN DUMP — Any facility or site where solid waste is disposed of which is
not a sanitary landfill which meets the criteria promulgated under Section
4004 of the Solid Waste Act (42 U.S.C. § 6944) and which is not a facility for
disposal of hazardous waste.
PERIPHERAL — A keyboard, printer or any other device sold exclusively for
external use with a computer that provides input into or output from the
computer. The term does not include adaptive or assistive technologies.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution and agency (including, but not limited to, the
Department of General Services and the State Public School Building
Authority), or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provision of this chapter
prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of the
foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of any
corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PUBLIC WASTE RECEPTACLE — A collection container designed to collect
loose items of solid waste, such items to be no larger than the container
itself, generated by persons while in close proximity to the container. Such
§ 246-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-2
1:139
containers are, by definition, accessible to an unlimited population, as in
public places (e.g., malls, streets, parks, commercial establishments, etc.).
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Material generated by residential, commercial,
municipal, and institutional establishments for which recycling markets
exist and for which there is a recycling agent. Recyclable materials may
include aluminum, steel, and bimetallic containers, high-grade office paper,
newspapers, corrugated paper, plastics, and any other item selected by the
Borough or county, or specified in amendments to Act 101. "Recyclable
materials" does not include covered devices, and is subject to change as
necessary or permitted to adapt to market conditions.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a
fuel for the operation of energy.
REFRIGERANT — A chemical used in refrigerator systems, such as air
conditioners and refrigerators, that is an ozone depleting substance (ODS)
such as chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) or hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC)
refrigerant.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — A single-family, duplex, or structure
with four or fewer dwelling units. This shall not include residential units
located above commercial businesses, which shall be considered
commercial for purposes of this chapter.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or containing
gaseous materials. The term does not include coal ash or drill cuttings.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
grass clippings and similar material.
§ 246-3. Solid waste storage and collection standards.
A. Any person generating municipal waste shall deposit the same into
approved containers for municipal waste and recyclable materials.
B. All municipal waste shall be stored in approved containers until
collection by the hauler. Approved containers shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) Approved containers shall be leakproof and constructed of durable,
watertight, rust- and corrosion-resistant material, and shall be kept
in a sanitary condition at all times. The interior of the containers
shall be kept clean by thoroughly rinsing, draining, and disinfecting
as often as necessary.
(2) Approved containers shall not present an offensive odor extending
beyond 10 feet from the exterior of the container. Any cracked or
rusted container shall be condemned by the Borough, tagged as a
§ 246-2 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 246-3
1:140
§ 246-4. Solid waste collection service.
public nuisance, and arrangements shall be made with the waste
collector to remove the containers by the next collection day.
(3) Approved containers for residences shall have tight-fitting covers,
suitable lifting handles, and shall have a capacity of either
approximately 35 or 95 gallons, as supplied by the waste collector.
(4) Containers shall be closed or sealed at all times, and waste shall
not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(5) Bulky items that do not fit inside the approved containers shall be
stored in a manner that will prevent the accumulation or collection
of water, the harboring or breeding of vectors, insects or rodents,
or the creation of safety and fire hazards, and shall not be placed at
the curb for collection earlier than the day prior to the published
pickup date.
C. Municipal waste may be placed curbside for collection no more than 24
hours prior to scheduled collection, and must be removed from the
curbside within 24 hours following the scheduled collection date.
D. The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily housing,
commercial, institutional, and municipal establishments and industrial
lunchrooms and office wastes shall comply with the regulations and
standards set forth in this chapter. The type, size, and placement of
detachable containers for these establishments shall be determined by
the waste generator and the collector and are subject to approval by the
Borough.
A. All residential establishments, defined as those with four or fewer
residential units, shall use the authorized collector contracted by the
Borough for the collection of municipal waste, and shall be subject to
the conditions and requirements of such contract.
B. Each commercial, multifamily, institutional, municipal, and industrial
establishment shall use a collector of its own choice in accordance with
this chapter.
C. All municipal waste from residential establishments shall be collected
at least once per week, with the exception that collection of bulky items
shall occur once monthly on the same weekday as municipal waste,
except in the month of May, during which bulky waste shall be collected
once each week.
D. All municipal waste from commercial, multifamily, institutional,
municipal, and industrial establishments shall be collected at least once
per week and more often if required in order to control health hazards,
odors, or unsightly conditions.
E. Collection schedule.
§ 246-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-4
1:141
§ 246-5. Vehicles used for collection.
§ 246-6. Collection and disposal charges.
(1) Each collector shall establish a regular collection schedule for all
collections in the Borough and shall so notify the Borough of the
days and times. If a regular collection day falls on a holiday, the
collector or authorized collector shall notify all customers and the
Borough as to when collection will be made.
(2) The collector shall publish and distribute to each residential
establishment a schedule for residential waste collection.
(3) Each commercial, institutional, multifamily, municipal, and
industrial establishment shall have all waste collection conducted
from Monday through Saturday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. No collection service of any kind shall be permitted on
Sunday.
F. All collectors operating within the Borough shall comply with the Butler
County Solid Waste Management Ordinance with regard to the
licensing of authorized collectors and the transportation of waste to the
county-designated disposal facility.
A. Any vehicles used for collection of solid waste shall be equipped with
compacting devices or equivalent types of closed bodies, shall have
enclosed cargo space, and shall be constructed so as to be leakproof,
fireproof and to prevent littering and nuisances.
B. It shall be unlawful in the Borough to collect, haul, transport, or convey
solid waste in open, unenclosed vehicles.
A. The cost of collecting municipal waste within the Borough of Slippery
Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania, shall be assessed against each
residential establishment at the rate specified in the contract between
the Borough of Slippery Rock and the authorized collector.
B. The cost set forth in the contract between the Borough of Slippery Rock
and the authorized collector shall include the disposal of one container
of approximately thirty-five- or ninety-five-gallon capacity, one biweekly
collection of recyclables in the approved container provided by the
Borough, and bulky waste collection once per month and once weekly
through the month of May.
C. Residential establishments may contract directly with the authorized
collector for additional services, and the authorized collector shall
publish a list of additional services and pricing available.
(1) Bulk waste that cannot fit in the approved container for pickup may
be collected curbside through the use of additional bag stickers.
Additional bag stickers may be purchased by the resident from
either the Borough office or directly from the waste collector. All
§ 246-4 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 246-6
1:142
§ 246-7. Exclusions from collection.
additional bags must bear an additional bag sticker in order to be
collected.
D. Unoccupied dwelling units.
(1) Residents seeking a temporary, but long-term, discontinuation of
garbage services shall submit an application to Slippery Rock
Borough. If approved, such resident shall not be billed for monthly
service or charged a collection fee during the absence or vacancy
from the residence. Once approved by the Borough, the hauler will
be advised as to which residences are to be considered vacant for
billing purposes. Unoccupied dwelling units include the following:
(a) Units that are for sale and not under contract for purchase;
(b) Units that are not contracted to any person (or legal entity) for
rent/lease;
(c) Units that are contracted but empty for at least 90 continuous
calendar days (tenant travels or will be out of town for an
extended period of time);
(d) Units that are usually owner-occupied but empty for at least 90
continuous calendar days;
(e) Units that are contracted but tenant is involuntarily
unavailable to occupy (health, legal, family, or similar reasons);
(f) Units that are unavailable (for more than 90 days) for
contracted occupancy (maintenance issues, safety, utility,
damage, etc.);
(g) Units that are without water/sewer or other utility service for
an extended period of time (long-term, more than a few days).
(2) All such applications shall be submitted to the Borough
Administrator and will be approved or denied at the discretion of
Council or an individual designated by Council. Abuse of the ability
to seek such discontinuance will result in the denial of fixture
requests.
E. Commercial, institutional, municipal, and industrial establishments
shall select a collector and negotiate directly with the collector for, at a
minimum, collection of municipal waste and recyclables. Residential
units located above commercial establishments shall be considered part
of the commercial establishment for purposes of this chapter.
A. Automotive waste.
(1) No person shall place a used lead acid battery in municipal waste,
discard or otherwise dispose of a lead acid battery, except by
§ 246-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-7
1:143
delivery to a designated facility authorized under the laws of
Pennsylvania.
(2) No person shall place used motor oil in municipal waste, discard or
otherwise dispose of used motor oil, except in accordance with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Refrigerants shall be handled and disposed of only by persons who
recycle used coolants.
C. Hazardous and potentially threatening waste.
(1) Hazardous waste is regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and is not to be disposed of in connection
with the collection of municipal waste or recyclable materials.
(2) The Borough or its agent reserves the right to refuse collection and
disposal of all threatening or potentially threatening waste
generated by any person within the Borough, said waste to include,
but not be limited to, sharps (sharp objects which could cut or
puncture the skin when grasped or brushed against), radioactive
materials (from medical facilities, smoke detectors, etc.), and
infectious waste (waste which may be contaminated by a diseaseproducing
microorganism or material).
D. Covered devices; e-waste.
(1) Covered devices shall not be disposed of with municipal waste or
recyclable materials and must be disposed of in accordance with
the Covered Device Recycling Act.59
(2) The Borough or its authorized collector may provide notice of
special covered-device collection dates.
E. Potentially threatening waste. The following regulations do not
supersede county and commonwealth laws applicable to any
establishment within the Borough and may be added to or altered as
more affordable methods of disposal become available. The following
regulations shall be adhered to by persons within the Borough:
(1) Sharps (razor blades, syringe needles, broken glass or other sharp
objects) shall be placed in an opaque, tightly sealed container with
a screw-on lid. The full container of sharps may be placed in a
reusable solid waste collection container, not with recyclables.
Syringe needles shall be broken before placing them in the sharps
container.
(2) Infectious waste shall be placed in securely fastened, nonleaking
plastic bags (doubled if necessary) before being stored in reusable
solid waste collection containers.
59.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6031.101 et seq.
§ 246-7 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 246-8
1:144
§ 246-8. Establishment of recycling program.
§ 246-9. Separation and collection of recyclables.
A. The Borough hereby establishes a recycling program for the mandatory
separation from municipal waste and collection of recyclable materials
by all residential, multifamily, commercial, municipal, industrial and
institutional establishments located in the Borough.
B. Recyclable materials shall be collected at such times and dates, at least
twice per month, as may be hereinafter established by regulation or
resolution.
A. Persons in residential establishments shall separate recyclable
materials from other solid waste. Recyclable materials shall be placed
at the curbside or at a site designated by the Borough. Recyclable
materials shall be prepared for collection according to the within,
regulations and shall be placed in containers provided by the Borough.
Each owner of a residential establishment shall be notified by mail of
any changes in the recycling program. Owners of rental units are
responsible to provide copies of the notice to their tenants.
(1) All containers provided by the Borough to residential
establishments for recyclable materials shall be the property of the
Borough.
(2) Use of the recycling container for any purpose other than the
storage and collection of recyclable materials shall be a violation of
this chapter.
B. It shall be the privilege of the collector to reject improperly prepared
recyclable materials at any establishment, and it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or occupants to correct the problem before
the recyclable material will be collected.
C. It shall be the privilege of the authorized collector or collector to refuse
to collect municipal waste in which recyclable materials are included. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupants to correct the
problem before the municipal waste is collected.
D. An owner, landlord, or agent of the owner or landlord, of multifamily
housing shall comply with the recycling program by establishing a
collection program for the tenants at each property. The collection
system shall include suitable containers for sorting and collection of
recyclable materials. The containers shall be placed in easily accessible
locations, and written instructions shall be provided to the tenants
concerning use and availability of the collection system.
(1) Owners, landlords, or agents of multifamily establishments who are
in compliance with this chapter shall not be liable for
noncompliance by the occupants of their property with regard to
recycling.
§ 246-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-9
1:145
§ 246-10. Designated recyclable materials.
§ 246-11. Separation and storage of recyclable materials.
(2) If changes in the collection program are made, a description of the
changes shall be given to each resident or occupant.
E. The authorized collector shall submit to the Borough an annual report
by no later than January 31 of each year reporting the tonnage of
recyclable materials collected.
F. The Borough shall endeavor to provide collection containers for
commingled recyclables in close proximity to each public waste
receptacle. Each container shall be clearly marked for commingled
recyclables.
G. Commercial, institutional, industrial and municipal establishments and
community activities shall handle all recyclable materials in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. Commercial, institutional, industrial
and municipal establishments with four or more occupants shall follow
the same procedure as described for multifamily housing in Subsection
D, above.
H. The authorized collector and collectors shall establish a regular
collection schedule for recyclable materials in the Borough and so
notify the Borough of the days and times. If a regular collection day falls
on a holiday, the collector shall notify all customers and the Borough as
to when collection shall be made.
A. The following materials shall be separated for collection and recycling
by all properties within the Borough:
(1) All recyclables, including all Act 101 recyclable materials such as
office paper, newsprint, aluminum cans, corrugated cardboard, bimetal
or steel containers, No. 1 and 2 plastic containers.
B. The aforementioned designations may be added to or deleted from, due
to market, fluctuations, as deemed necessary by the Borough. Notice of
such additions or deletions will be provided to residents.
A. All residential establishments shall be issued one recycling container
from the Borough for storage and collection of recyclable materials.
Owners of multifamily housing properties shall provide recycling
containers for each individual unit. If requested by the owner, landlord
or agent of the owner of any multifamily housing properties, one
container, as described below, shall be issued by the Borough for each
individual unit.
B. Containers shall be provided free of charge. All new residential units
established within the Borough after the start of the recycling program
shall be issued one container per unit, free of charge.
§ 246-9 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 246-11
1:146
§ 246-12. Collection of recyclable materials.
§ 246-13. Preparation of recyclable materials for collection.
§ 246-14. Public education program.
A continuing comprehensive public education program involving solid waste
management, waste reduction and reuse and recycling of resources within
the Borough will be organized as part of the recycling/solid waste
management program. Education materials and information may be
presented or made available through public meetings, handouts, mailings,
the local media, etc.
C. All containers shall be numbered and recorded by street address at the
time of initial distribution and shall remain the property of the Borough
of Slippery Rock. The recycling containers may not be altered.
D. The recycling containers used by the Borough are blue, ninety-fivegallon-
capacity containers and are clearly marked.
A. Residential properties. Occupants or owners of all residential
properties shall place the container with recyclable materials at the
curbside on the same day as their normal garbage pickup, on a
biweekly (every other week) basis.
B. Multifamily housing properties. Owners, landlords or agents of each
multifamily housing property within the Borough shall be responsible
for establishing a collection system for the designated recyclable
materials from each residential unit. Collection of such materials shall
occur once every two weeks.
C. Commercial, institutional and municipal establishments. The owner,
landlord or agent of each commercial, institutional and municipal
establishment within the Borough shall be responsible for establishing
a separation, storage and collection system for the designated
recyclable materials generated at such establishments. Collection of
such materials shall be provided as often as necessary. Residential units
located above commercial establishments shall be considered
commercial establishments for purposes of this chapter.
A. All food containers are to be rinsed free of food particles.
B. Aerosol cans are to be empty.
C. All bottle tops, lids and caps are to be removed and discarded.
D. Paper is to be placed in plastic bags if so specified by the authorized
collector.
§ 246-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-15
1:147
§ 246-15. Administration and enforcement.
The Borough Council is authorized by this chapter to enact reasonable fees,
rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of this chapter,
including, but not limited to:
§ 246-16. Rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials in the Borough
shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations as may
from time to time be promulgated by the Borough Council by resolution;
provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be contrary to
the provisions of this chapter or applicable law.
§ 246-17. Prohibited activities.
A. Designating recyclable materials to be separated by residential,
multifamily, commercial, industrial or municipal establishments.
B. Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
C. Establishing reporting procedures for volumes of materials recycled.
D. Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring, and collection
of recycling containers.
E. Establishing fees to cover the Borough's administrative costs of the
municipal waste and recyclable materials collection program.
F. Approving vacancy applications/submissions.
G. Establishing procedures for the monitoring, management and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate upon any public or
private property within the Borough any garbage, rubbish, bulky items,
municipal or solid waste except in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and any Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 of 1980 or
Act 101.60
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste or compostable
organic material except as provided by Chapter 121, Burning, Open, as
amended, or other applicable law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or operate an open
dump. The owners of property on which an open dump exists shall be
responsible for the cleanup of the area.
60.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 246-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 246-17
1:148
§ 246-18. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(1) The owner(s) of property on which an open dump is found to exist
shall be issued an official written notice of noncompliance by
certified mail from the Code Enforcement Officer. The owner(s)
shall have three calendar weeks, beginning with the day the notice
is received, to submit a plan for elimination of the dump.
(2) If not acceptable, the plan shall be addressed and amended by
Council at a regular public meeting. This amended plan shall be
carried out by the owner(s) without delay.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of yard waste by
depositing it on public property or on private property without the
written permission of the property owner.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of solid waste or
recyclable materials in any method except those specified in this
chapter.
F. Separation of recyclables and solid waste. It shall be a violation for any
person to place solid waste with recyclables to be collected and to place
recyclable materials with solid waste to be collected.
A. In the event of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of related
regulations or procedures, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue an
official written warning of noncompliance for the first offense.
Corrective measures must be commenced and completed within 15
calendar days, beginning with the day the warning is received, unless
otherwise specified in the ordinances, regulations, or procedures.
B. If corrective measures are not undertaken within the time period
specified, or if the violation constitutes a repeat offense, the second or
subsequent time that the same individual has been notified of a
violation of the same rule or regulation, a citation will be filed in the
Magisterial District Court.
C. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial
District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that
is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 246-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-19
1:149
§ 246-19. Purchase of recycled paper products.
In support of Act 101,61 in the long-term interest of the environment, the
Borough of Slippery Rock will purchase necessary paper products of all
kinds with recyclable fiber content, rather than paper made directly from
raw materials. This is with the understanding that the cost of the recycled
products does not exceed by more than 5% the cost of nonrecycled products
of similar quality which have been purchased previously.
§ 246-20. Amendments to regulations.
These regulations may be amended by ordinance at a regularly scheduled
public meeting. Notice of these regulations and any amendments to such
regulations shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Borough.
Chapter 260
TAXATION
61.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 4000.101 et seq.
§ 246-19 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 246-20
1:150
ARTICLE I
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 1-1969 by Ord. No. 262 (Ch. 24, Part 1, of the 1983 Code)]
§ 260-1. Imposition of tax. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328]
A per capita tax for general revenue purposes in the amount of $5 per
person is hereby imposed on each and every adult resident, 18 years or
older, of the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania, to be
paid annually and continuing for each taxable year hereafter.
§ 260-2. Exemptions. [Added 3-3-1981 by Res. No. 162]
§ 260-3. Tax Collector. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328;
12-3-1985 by Res. No. 185]
The tax imposed herein shall be collected by such Tax Collector heretofore
or hereafter appointed for such purpose, whether appointed solely for
collection of the Borough tax or appointed jointly by agreement with any
other taxing body. Such Tax Collector shall be annually audited as provided
by law. Such Tax Collector is hereby authorized to collect the tax hereunder,
report to the Borough, and receive such commission therefor as provided by
law.
§ 260-4. Statutory authority.63
The per capita tax is authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq.).
A. The Slippery Rock Borough does hereby exempt any person whose total
income from all sources is less than $12,000 per annum from its per
capita tax, or any portion thereof.62
B. Any person desiring exemption from paying the tax shall complete an
exoneration application to qualify for the exemption provided by Act
No. 309 of 1974.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
63.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:151

ARTICLE II
Real Estate Tax
[Adopted 11-2-1976 by Ord. No. 298 (Ch. 24, Part 3, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 260-5. Date of billing taxes.
Local real estate tax as enacted by the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler
County, Pennsylvania, for the year 1977 and thereafter as levied against
existing valuations in such Borough shall be billed to property owners on
March 1, 1977, and each subsequent year thereafter.
§ 260-6. Discounts and penalties.
From March 1, 1977, and each subsequent year thereafter, the taxpayer
will be allowed a two-percent discount if the tax is paid prior to April 30
of each year. From May 1 of each tax year until June 30 of each year, the
local real estate tax as assessed shall be due at the face amount. From and
after July 1 of each year, until paid or returned to be liened in accordance
with delinquent tax provisions, a ten-percent penalty shall be added. Such
penalty shall not preclude the assessment of additional costs and expenses
added in processing of delinquent taxes as provided by law.
§ 260-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-6
1:153

ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 8-4-1987 by Res. No. 205 (Ch. 24, Part 4, of the 1983
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 260-7. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Slippery Rock adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the
Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.) and imposes a realty
transfer tax as authorized under that article subject to the rate limitations
therein. The tax imposed under this section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 260-8. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 260-7 and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, known as the "Local Tax Enabling
Act," 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.), provided that, if the correct amount of the
tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough
of Slippery Rock, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of
1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the
tax, interest and penalties.
§ 260-9. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 260-7 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et
seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as the "Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:155

ARTICLE IV
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 1-5-1999 by Res. No. 281 (Ch. 24, Part 6, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 260-10. Statutory authority; applicability; general provisions.
A. As a local taxing authority, Council recognizes the Borough's
responsibility to comply with the requirements of the Tax Reform Act of
1998.64
B. "Eligible taxes" shall be defined as all non-real-estate taxes, including
per capita; occupations, occupation assessment and occupation
privilege; income and net profits; business gross receipts privilege;
amusements or admissions; and any other tax authorized by the Local
Tax Enabling Law.65
C. Council shall adopt a Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights that includes the
following components:
(1) Taxpayer rights and the Borough's obligation during an audit or
administrative review of the taxpayer's books or records.
(2) Administrative and judicial procedures for a taxpayer to appeal or
seek review of a tax decision.
(3) Procedures for filing and processing refund claims and taxpayer
complaints.
(4) Enforcement procedures.
D. Council shall ensure that taxpayers are notified about the Borough's
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights any time they are contacted regarding
assessment, audit, determination, review and collection of any tax other
than property taxes.
E. It shall be the responsibility of Council to develop procedures to
implement this policy, which shall include:
(1) Preparation and dissemination of the required notice of availability
of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights.
(2) Preparation of a Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights.
(3) Preparation of a procedure for the Borough to request information
from a taxpayer.
(4) Establishment of an administrative appeals process.
64.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 260-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:157
§ 260-11. Appeals process.
Upon receipt of a taxpayer petition relating to assessment, determination
or refund of an eligible tax, the Borough shall review said petition, and, if
the Borough disagrees with the position of the taxpayer or if the Borough
is unable to otherwise resolve the disagreement, the petition shall be
forwarded to the tax appeal hearing board for coordination with all
interested municipalities and for resolution within statutory requirements.
§ 260-12. Disclosure statement.
Every taxpayer is obligated to pay all taxes levied by the Borough,
hereinafter frequently referred to as "municipality," to which the taxpayer
is subject. When taxes are not paid or the Borough has a question about
whether a taxpayer has fulfilled all tax obligations, the Borough has legal
rights to enforce taxpayer obligations. In conjunction with taxpayer
obligations and Borough rights, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has
enacted a Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights which grants legal rights to
taxpayers and creates obligations for municipalities so that equity and
fairness control how municipalities collect taxes. This document is the
disclosure statement required by the bill of rights. This document is merely
a summary of your rights. For a complete statement of your rights and
obligations of the Borough, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 84, Subchapter C.66
§ 260-13. Applicability/eligible taxes.
This disclosure statement applies to eligible taxes levied by the Borough.
For this purpose, eligible taxes include any tax levied by the Borough other
than the real estate tax. This disclosure statement does not apply to real
estate taxes. The specific eligible taxes levied by the Borough are earned
income tax, per capita tax and occupational privilege tax. Unless expressly
provided in the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights, the failure of any Borough
representative to comply with any provision of this disclosure statement,
related regulations or the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights will not excuse the
taxpayer from paying the taxes owed. The earned income tax is collected
and administered by the Borough Earned Income Tax Collector. A separate
(5) Development of the form, content, process and deadlines for
taxpayers to file a tax appeal petition.
(6) Formulation of rules of practice and procedure for hearings.
F. Council shall respond to taxpayer requests for a Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights by making copies available at the Borough office or mailing at
the Borough's expense.
G. Information obtained by the Borough as a result of an audit, return,
report, investigation, hearing or verification shall be confidential.
66.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 260-10 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 260-13
1:158
disclosure statement relating to the earned income tax is available from that
office. This disclosure statement does not apply to the earned income tax.
§ 260-14. Borough requests for tax information.
§ 260-15. Tax overpayment refunds.
A. Minimum time period for taxpayer response.
(1) The taxpayer has 30 calendar days from the mailing date to
respond to the Borough requests for tax information.
(2) Upon written request, the Borough will grant reasonable time
extensions for good cause.
(3) The Borough will notify the taxpayer of the procedures to obtain an
extension in its initial request for tax information.
B. Requests for prior year returns.
(1) An initial Borough request may cover only taxes required to be paid
or tax returns required to be filed no more than three years prior to
the mailing date of the request.
(2) The Borough may make a subsequent request relating to other
taxes or returns if, after the initial request, the Borough determines
that the taxpayer failed to file a tax return, underreported income,
or failed to pay a tax for one or more of the tax periods covered by
the initial request.
C. Use of federal tax information. The Borough may require a taxpayer to
provide copies of federal tax returns if the Borough can show that the
information is reasonably necessary for enforcement or collection of a
tax and the information is not available from the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue or other sources.
A. A taxpayer may file a written request with the Borough for a refund or
credit. The filing of a written request will not preclude a taxpayer from
later filing a tax appeal petition as discussed below. The request must
be made within three years of the due date for filing the return or one
year after payment of the tax, whichever is later. If no return is
required, the request must be made within three years after the
payment due date or within one year after payment, whichever is later.
A tax return filed by the taxpayer showing a tax overpayment will be
considered a written request for a cash refund unless the return
indicates otherwise. If the taxpayer pays a tax as a result of receiving a
notice of underpayment, the taxpayer must file a written request for a
refund within one year of the payment date. Subject to certain
exceptions, the Borough will pay interest, at a rate determined
pursuant to the state law, from the date of overpayment until the date of
resolution.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-15
1:159
§ 260-16. Enforcement.
Depending on the type of tax involved and the specific circumstances, if
a taxpayer has not paid a tax liability determined to be due or which the
Borough has reason to believe might be due, possible Borough enforcement
options include:
B. Tax appeal petitions.
(1) To appeal a tax assessment or denial of a refund request, the
taxpayer must file a tax appeal petition with the Borough's office.
The petition must be mailed or delivered to the attention of the
Borough at the following address: 306 East Water Street, P.O. Box
83, Slippery Rock, Pennsylvania 16057.
(2) Tax appeal petitions requesting a refund must be filed within the
time set forth above under Subsection A of this section.
(3) Tax appeal petitions appealing a tax assessment or notice of
underpayment must be filed within 90 days after the date of the tax
assessment or underpayment notice.
(4) Regulations regarding the form and content of petitions, as well as
practice and procedure for tax appeals, may be obtained in person
or by mailing a request to the above address or by calling the
Borough at (724) 794-6391 during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
C. Decision.
(1) If not otherwise resolved, the hearing board will issue a decision on
tax appeal petitions within 60 days after receipt of a complete and
accurate petition.
(2) If the petition was complete and accurate when filed, the failure to
render a decision within 60 days will result in the petition being
deemed approved.
D. Appeals to court.
(1) Both the taxpayer and the Borough may appeal the decision of the
hearing board to the Court of Common Pleas.
(2) Appeals to the Court must be filed with the Court within 30 days
after the date of the decision.
A. Inquiry by the Borough to the taxpayer.
B. Borough audit of taxpayer records.
C. The Borough may contact the taxpayer and attempt to resolve the
liability through payment in full, an installment payment plan, or
compromise.
§ 260-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 260-16
1:160
§ 260-17. Confidentiality of tax information.
Information gained by the Borough as the result of any audit, report,
investigation, hearing or verification shall be confidential. However,
confidentiality will not preclude disclosure for official purposes, whether
in connection with legal proceedings or otherwise, and will not preclude
disclosure to the extent required by applicable law.
§ 260-18. Taxpayer complaints.
If a taxpayer has a complaint about a Borough action relating to taxes, the
Borough may be contacted in writing at the Slippery Rock Borough office,
306 East Water Street, P.O. Box 83, Slippery Rock, Pennsylvania 16057. The
Borough's counsel and the Borough's Solicitor will facilitate resolution of
the complaint.
§ 260-19. Borough tax appeal information and regulations.
The Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights requires every Borough to adopt
regulations concerning the form and content of petitions, as well as practice
and procedure for tax appeal petitions. This document contains the
regulations required by the Bill of Rights. In addition, the Borough
(hereinafter frequently referred to as "municipality") has published a
disclosure statement required by the Bill of Rights.67
§ 260-20. Tax appeal petitions.
D. The Borough may employ private collection agencies to collect the tax.
E. The Borough may file a lien against the taxpayer, and in some cases,
against an employer or other person responsible for payment of the tax.
F. The Borough may attach or require an employer to make reductions in
the wages or earnings of the taxpayer.
G. The Borough may file suit against the taxpayer before a Magisterial
District Judge or in the County Court of Common Pleas.
H. The Borough may execute and attach taxpayer bank accounts, sell
taxpayer vehicles, other personal property or real estate, based on a
judgment or lien obtained through legal proceedings.
I. The Borough may seek criminal prosecution of the taxpayer.
A. Filing.
(1) As explained more fully in the disclosure statement, petitions
should be filed with the Borough office.
67.Editor's Note: Original § 611, Applicability/eligible taxes, of the 1983 Code, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-20
1:161
§ 260-21. Hearing procedure.
(2) Petitions must be filed within the time limits explained in the
disclosure statement. Petitions received by the Borough are
considered timely filed if received by the Borough by the required
date or if mailed and postmarked by the United States Postal
Service on or before the required date. The burden is on the
taxpayer to present evidence sufficient to prove the petition was
timely filed.
B. Contents. Petitions must be in writing, signed by the taxpayer (if the
taxpayer is an entity, a partner or officer must sign), and must contain:
(1) Taxpayer's name, address and telephone number.
(2) If taxpayer is represented by an attorney, accountant or other
qualified individual as explained below, the name, address and
telephone number of the representative.
(3) Designation of the tax to which the petition relates, including the
year or other period and tax amount. A copy of any tax bill, refund
request denial or other essential document relating to the petition
shall be attached.
(4) Taxpayer's license number, account number, employer
identification number, social security number or other appropriate
identifying designation.
(5) A detailed statement in separate numbered paragraphs of the
reasons requiring a refund or the objections to the assessment or
notice of underpayment being appealed, and the facts supporting
such reasons or objections.
A. Notice of hearing. If the appeal is not otherwise resolved and the
hearing board schedules a hearing, reasonable notice will be given to
the taxpayer, in writing, specifying the date, time and place.
B. Continuances. The presiding officer of the hearing board may grant a
reasonable request for continuance of a scheduled hearing. The request
shall be made in writing, shall state the reasons for the requested
continuance and shall be received by the presiding officer of the
hearing board at least five days prior to the scheduled hearing. The
presiding officer shall take appropriate steps to ensure that no
statutory time limits are exceeded.
C. Transcripts or recordings. Transcripts or recordings of a hearing are
not required, but may be made at the discretion of the presiding officer.
D. Authority of presiding officers. Presiding officers have the authority to:
(1) Regulate the conduct of hearings, including the scheduling,
recessing, reconvening and adjournment hearings and all acts
proper for the efficient conduct of hearings.
§ 260-20 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 260-21
1:162
(2) Administer oaths and affirmations.
(3) Receive evidence.
(4) Require production of books, records, documents and other data
pertinent to the issues.
E. Evidence. Hearings need not adhere to the technical rules of evidence.
In cases involving issues of fact, oral testimony shall be under oath or
affirmation. At the discretion of the hearing officer, depositions or
affidavits may be received in lieu of oral testimony if the actual
presence of a witness is not feasible.
§ 260-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-21
1:163

ARTICLE V
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-5-2002 by Ord. No. 593 (Ch. 24, Part 2, of the 1983
Code); amended in its entirety 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 687]
§ 260-22. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Slippery
Rock Earned Income Tax Ordinance."
§ 260-23. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of Slippery
Rock.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth in
53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., and as amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAXING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Slippery Rock.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted or
reported under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 260-24. Imposition of tax. [Amended 12-6-2016 by Ord. No. 698]
A tax at the rate of 1% on each dollar is hereby imposed on all earned
income and net profits, as defined by Act 32,68 earned by residents of the
Borough of Slippery Rock and on all earned income and net profits earned
by nonresidents of the Borough of Slippery Rock employed in or receiving
work assignments within the Borough. All changes shall remain in effect on
a calendar year basis without annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is
subsequently changed.
68.Editor's Note: See the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 260-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-25
1:165
§ 260-25. Exemptions.
§ 260-26. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 260-27. Employer withholding, remittance and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit tax and file tax returns in
accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 260-28. Administration; powers and duties of officer. [Amended
12-6-2016 by Ord. No. 698]
The collection and administration of the tax provided for in this article
shall be performed by the Tax Officer appointed by the Butler County Tax
Collection Committee. Said Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for
his services and expenses as determined from time to time by the TCC. Such
Tax Officer shall administer and have the powers and duties as provided for
by Act 3269 and the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 260-29. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 260-30. Purpose; effect on other legislation, suits or prosecutions.
The primary purpose of this article is to conform the earned income and net
profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and
restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame required by
Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income or net profits
A. Any person whose total income from all sources is less than $12,000 per
annum is exempt from liability for the tax.
B. This governing body finds that minors of various age groups have
traditionally, and with judicial sanction, been considered as comprising
separate classes for many legislative purposes; and minors under the
age of 16 are generally unemancipated and subject to compulsory
school attendance and child labor laws, and therefore have limited
earned income and net profits and control of money such that
enforcement of reporting and collection of the tax hereunder against
them would yield inconsequential amounts and be unduly difficult,
expensive and not in the public interest. For these reasons, individuals
under the age of 16 years are exempt from liability for the tax.
69.Editor's Note: See the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 260-25 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 260-30
1:166
of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read as stated in this
article. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior enactment conflicting
with the provisions of this article is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists.
To the extent the same as any enactment in force immediately prior to
adoption of this article, the provisions of this article are intended as a
continuation of such prior enactment and not as a new enactment. If this
article is declared invalid, any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall
remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
article. If any part of this article is declared invalid, the similar part of any
prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in effect and shall not be
affected by adoption of this article. The provisions of this article shall not
affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any
suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty
or to punish offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to
adoption of this article. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section,
this article shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.
§ 260-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-30
1:167

ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-27-2007 by Ord. No. 637 (Ch. 24, Part 5, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 260-31. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Slippery Rock Borough
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 260-32. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended by Act No. 7 of 2007.70
§ 260-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes; and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 260-34. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — "Compensation," as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of
1971,"71 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart B, Article V (relating
to personal income tax); not including, however, wages or compensation
paid to individuals on active military service. Employee business expenses
are allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971. Any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
71.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-34
1:169
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity (except from corporations), determined under
Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971,"72 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart
B, Article V (relating to personal income tax). The term does not include
income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature
of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business,
profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of
Slippery Rock Borough.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard, or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 260-35 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 260-35. Levy of tax.
Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instruments of the farming business.
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery.
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes.
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
A. The Borough of Slippery Rock hereby levies and imposes on every
individual engaging in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of
Slippery Rock Borough a tax in the amount of $52 per annum,
beginning the first day of January 2008 and continuing on a calendar
basis annually thereafter until modified or repealed by subsequent
ordinance.
72.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 260-34 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 260-35
1:170
§ 260-36. Exemptions; refunds.
B. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes, as the same may
be allocated by Slippery Rock Borough from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion).73
C. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services.
D. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the political subdivision.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
73.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 260-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-36
1:171
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
§ 260-36 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 260-36
1:172
§ 260-37. Duty of employers to collect.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exception certificates, monitoring tax-exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. Slippery Rock Borough, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. Slippery Rock Borough or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate
of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
§ 260-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:173
§ 260-38. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return, showing a computation of the
tax, on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 260-39. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
Collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30, and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 31, respectively.
§ 260-40. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who has earned income or realized net
profits, as those terms are defined herein, within the political subdivision
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 260-36B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of the calendar year.
§ 260-37 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 260-40
1:174
shall be required to comply with this article and pay the tax due to the
Collector on or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 260-41. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 260-42. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 260-43. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed.
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works, if the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept
and keep a record of the information submitted by employers relating to
the number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
§ 260-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-43
1:175
§ 260-44. Suits for collection.
§ 260-45. Violations and penalties.74
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall, upon being found
liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil
action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense,
exempt from the tax, and employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County after exhausting any
administrative remedies, as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If, for any reason, the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of
6% on the amount of such tax shall be calculated, beginning with the
due date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-43 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 260-45
1:176
and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section,
the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas
of Butler County. The action to enforce the penalty herein prescribed may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who shall have failed or who refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 260-46. Interpretation.
§ 260-47. Repealer; effect on prior taxes.
Except as set forth hereafter, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall be
construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupation privilege
tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar year 2005 and all
prior calendar years or of an emergency and municipal services tax, plus
applicable penalties and interest, for calendar years 2006 and 2007, as the
same existed prior to this amendment.
§ 260-48. Estimated tax revenue.
It is estimated that the annual revenue generated from the local services
tax will be approximately $80,000, based upon 2008 projections.
§ 260-49. When effective.
This article shall become effective in accordance with applicable law, with
the repeal of the previous occupational privilege and emergency and
municipal services tax ordinances effective January 1, 2008.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 260-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-49
1:177
Chapter 267
TRAILERS
§ 267-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 267-2. Parking and standing restrictions.
No person shall park or locate any trailer, or allow it to stand, upon any
street, alley or other public place, or upon any tract of land, occupied or
unoccupied, within the Borough of Slippery Rock, except as provided in this
chapter.
§ 267-3. Occupancy restrictions.
No person shall occupy any trailer in the Borough of Slippery Rock for
sleeping or living purposes except in a trailer park licensed under this
A. The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
TRAILER — Any structure which is mounted, or designed for mounting,
on wheels and which includes accommodations designed for sleeping
or living purposes for one or more persons.
TRAILER PARK — Any lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained
or intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations
for any trailer, or upon which any trailer is parked or located, whether
or not a charge is made for the use of the trailer park and its facilities,
and shall include all buildings and structures used or intended for use
as a part of the equipment thereof. The term "trailer park" shall not
include any automobile or trailer sales lot on which any unoccupied
trailer is parked for the purpose of inspection and sale.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. No person shall allow any trailer to stand upon any of the streets or
alleys in the Borough of Slippery Rock without being attached to a
motor vehicle.
B. No person shall park any trailer, attached to a motor vehicle, on any
street or alley in the Borough for a period of time longer than that
allowed for the parking of vehicles upon such street or alley by the
applicable state laws and the ordinances of the Borough applicable to
traffic and parking. Any person who shall violate this subsection shall
be subject to the penalties specifically provided in such laws and
ordinances, as the case may be.
§ 260-49 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 267-3
1:178
chapter, unless such trailer conforms to and complies with all plumbing,
electrical, sanitary and building ordinances of the Borough applicable to
stationary dwellings; provided, however, that the parking or storing of no
more than one unoccupied trailer in a private garage, or in a rear yard,
shall be permitted on condition that no person uses such trailer for living or
sleeping purposes while such trailer is so parked or stored.
§ 267-4. Enforcement.75
It shall be the duty of the Borough Council to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and, to that end, it shall, from time to time, make or cause to be
made, by the police or any other Borough officer or employee, an inspection
to ascertain whether any trailer park continues to operate strictly under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 267-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
32876]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Butler County.
Chapter 275
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 343.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 267-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-5
1:179

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 275-1. Definitions and interpretation. [Amended 6-4-1996 by Ord.
No. 555]
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed in the Vehicle Law of Pennsylvania, also known and cited by its
short title as the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. (1977), as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania, unless the context or the
supplemental definitions within this chapter clearly indicate a different
meaning.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
C. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE —
A vehicle (other than a pedalcycle) shall be presumed to be
abandoned under any of the following circumstances, but the
presumption is rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence:
The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on a
highway or other public property for more than 48 hours.
(a)
The vehicle has remained illegally on a highway or other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours.
(b)
The vehicle is left unattended on or along a highway or other
public property for more than 48 hours and does not bear all of
the following:
[1] A valid registration (license) plate.
[2] A valid certificate (sticker) of inspection.
[3] An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
(c)
The vehicle has remained on private property without the
consent of the owner or person in control of the property for
more than 48 hours.
(d)
(1)
Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction or in
the operation or maintenance of highways or public utility facilities,
which are parked in a manner which does not interfere with the
normal movement of traffic, shall not be considered to be
abandoned.
(NOTE: This definition is modified slightly from the Vehicle Code
of Pennsylvania.)
(2)
§ 275-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-1
1:181
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The elected members and appointed
replacement members, if any, of the governing body of the Borough
of Slippery Rock. (This definition is not in the Vehicles Law of
Pennsylvania.)
CROSSWALK —
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A Fire Department vehicle, police vehicle,
Sheriff vehicle, ambulance or emergency medical technician vehicle,
blood-delivery vehicle, armed forces emergency vehicle, one vehicle
operated by a coroner or chief county medical examiner and one vehicle
operated by a chief deputy coroner or deputy chief county medical
examiner used for answering emergency calls, or any other vehicle
designated by the state or Borough police under § 6106 of the Vehicle
Law of Pennsylvania (relating to designation of emergency vehicles
by Pennsylvania State Police), or a private-owned vehicle used in
answering an emergency call when used by any of the following:
HANDICAPPED PERSONAL MOBILITY DEVICES — Any personally or
mechanically powered device intended by design for personalized use
That part of the roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway, measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs,
from the edges of the traversable roadway; and, in the absence of
a sidewalk on one side of the roadway, that part of the roadway
included within the extension of the lateral lines of the existing
sidewalk.
(1)
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
(2)
(1) A police chief, assistant chief and other officers.
(2) A fire chief, assistant chiefs and working firefighters.
(3) A fire police captain and fire police lieutenant.
(4) An ambulance corps commander and assistant commander.
(5) A river rescue commander and assistant commander.
(6) A county and a Borough emergency management coordinator.
(7) A fire marshal.
A rescue service chief and assistant chief.
(This definition is modified slightly from the Vehicles Law of
Pennsylvania.)
(8)
§ 275-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-1
1:182
to increase the mobility of handicapped persons or severely disabled
veterans. (This definition is not in the Vehicles Law of Pennsylvania.)
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term includes a roadway
open to the use of the public for vehicular travel on grounds of a college
or university or public or private school or public or historical park.
INTERSECTION —
LEGAL HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
PARKING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A natural person authorized
by law to issue tickets for violations of laws which prohibit stopping,
standing or parking a vehicle in specified places. (This definition is not
in the Vehicles Law of Pennsylvania.)
PARK or PARKING —
PEDALCYCLE — A vehicle propelled solely by human-powered pedals.
The term does not mean a three-wheeled human-powered pedal-driven
vehicle with a main driving wheel 20 inches in diameter or under and
primarily designed for children six years of age or younger such as, but
not limited to, tricycles and "big wheels."
POLICE OFFICER — A natural person authorized by law to make
arrests for violations of law.
PRIVATE PARKING LOT — A privately owned parking lot open to the
public or used for parking without charge; or a privately owned parking
lot used for parking with charge.
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curblines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of
the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles
traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may
come in conflict.
(1)
Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
In the event the intersecting highway also includes two roadways
30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of the
highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
(2)
When permitted, means the temporary storing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, off the roadway.
(1)
When prohibited, means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, except momentarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers.
(2)
§ 275-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-1
1:183
§ 275-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter.
§ 275-3. Continuation of prior regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the adoption of this chapter, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as
new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done
or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending
or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense
under any such ordinances or regulations as aforesaid.
§ 275-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk, berm
or shoulder even though such sidewalk, berm or shoulder is used by
pedalcycles. In the event a highway includes two or more separate
roadways, the term "roadway" refers to each roadway separately, but
not to all such roadways collectively.
STAND or STANDING — When prohibited, means the halting of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
STATE-DESIGNATED HIGHWAY — A highway or bridge on the system
of highways and bridges over which the Department has assumed or
has been legislatively given jurisdiction.
STOP or STOPPING —
TRAFFICWAY — The entire width between property lines or other
boundary lines of every way or place of which any part is open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel as a matter of right or custom.
TRAILER — A vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used
exclusively upon rails or tracks.
(1) When required, means complete cessation from movement.
When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
(2)
§ 275-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-4
1:184
§ 275-5. Experimental regulations.
Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the
highways in the Borough of Slippery Rock where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate such locations by
proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective just as they had been specified in this chapter. No person
shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation,
prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or
deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this
section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25, together with costs of
prosecution, provided the purpose of this section is to allow for the test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 275-6. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough of Slippery Rock are hereby given
authority to direct traffic on the highways of the Borough of Slippery Rock
and at intersections thereof.
§ 275-7. Speed-timing devices.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations;
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 275-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-7
1:185
A. The Borough of Slippery Rock Police Department is hereby authorized
to use all mechanical, electrical or electrical-mechanical speed-timing
devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are
approved or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including but not limited to ESP
and Vascar systems.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Borough, be they Borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to local authorities under
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§§ 101 to 9701 (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified
or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 275-7 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-7
1:186
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 275-8. Driving on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall drive any vehicle, except a human-powered vehicle, upon
a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly authorized
temporary driveway. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25,
together with costs of prosecution.
§ 275-9. Speed limits established. [Amended 11-5-1985 by Ord. No.
338; 4-1-1986 by Ord. No. 339; 9-7-1997 by Ord. No. 557]
§ 275-10. Traffic signals. [Amended 1-20-1998 by Ord. No. 558]
A. The following speed limits are hereby established:
Street Between
Speed Limit
(mph)
East Water Street Grove City Road and North
Main Street
25
Kelly Boulevard Grove City Road and Oak
Street intersection
30
Kelly Boulevard SR 173 and SR 258 25
Mulberry Lane West Water Street and New
Castle Street
25
Normal Avenue Franklin Street and Maltby
Avenue
25
West Cooper Street South Main Street and Borough
line
25
_____ 115 + 22 and 143 + 20 35
_____ 0 + 00 and 115 + 22 45
_____ 0 + 00 and 13 + 92 25
_____ 0 + 00 and 11 + 86 25
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of that
established therefor upon any highway or portion thereof as specified in
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
$35 and, for exceeding a maximum speed limit by more than five miles
per hour, shall pay an additional fine of $2 for each mile per hour in
excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or
are hereby ratified if heretofore erected), and traffic at such
intersections shall be directed by such signals:
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-10
1:187
§ 275-11. Right turn on red signal prohibited.
§ 275-12. Stop intersections. [Amended 9-3-1985 by Ord. No. 336;
4-2-1996 by Ord. No. 554; 4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 559; 4-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 567; 1-8-2002 by Ord. No. 589; 10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 601;
10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 603; 10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 604; 7-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 630]
Grove City Road and Franklin Street
Grove City Road (SR 0173) and Kelly Boulevard
Main Street and Cooper Street
Main Street and Kiester Road
Main Street and Pa. Route 108
B. Any driver of a vehicle who shall disobey the directions of any traffic
signal shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25,
together with costs of prosecution.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicles traveling on the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions hereby indicated in each case, to make a right turn when his
or her vehicle is facing a steady red traffic signal:
Cooper Street and Main Street
Kiester Road and Main Street
Main Street and Cooper Street
New Castle Street and Main Street
South Main Street and Main Street
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with
costs of prosecution.
A. The following intersections are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby
ratified if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions hereby indicated. It shall be unlawful for all
vehicles approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street,
in the direction or directions hereby indicated, to not come to a full
stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
intersection:
§ 275-10 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-12
1:188
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Allen Alley Midway Street East and west
Arbor Trail [Added
10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Poplar Forest Drive West
Aspen Court [Added
10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Sassafras Drive South
Butternut Court
[Added 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Willow Drive East
Cedar Drive [Added
10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Sassafras Drive South
Center Street Highland Avenue East and west
Center Street Maple Street West
Center Street Normal Avenue East and west
Center Street Vincent Street East
Cornish Drive Elm Street East and west
Cornish Drive Midway Street East and west
Cornish Drive South Main Street East
Cross Street Kiester Road North
East Cooper Street Normal Avenue East and west
East Cooper Street
(4-way)
Normal Avenue North and south
East Water Street Grove City Road East
East Water Street North Main Street West
Elm Street New Castle Street North
Elm Street West Cooper Street North and south
Evergreen Court
[Added 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Kelly Boulevard North
Fairview Drive Elm Street West
Giant Eagle Parking
Lot, lower (east) exit
Kelly Boulevard North
Giant Eagle Parking
Lot, upper (west) exit
Kelly Boulevard North
Grange Alley Midway Street West
Highland Avenue Center Street North and south
§ 275-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12
1:189
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Highland Avenue East Cooper Street South
Highland Avenue Franklin Street North
High Street South Main Street West
Hockenberry Drive Main Street East
Kelly Boulevard Grove City Road East
Kelly Boulevard
[Added 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
North Main Street West
Legion Alley West
Legion Alley School Alley South
Legion Street Main Street East and west
Library Drive, each
end
— —
Maltby Avenue Campus Drive East
Maltby Avenue Elm Street East
Maltby Avenue Midway Street West
Maltby Avenue Normal Avenue West
Maltby Avenue South Main Street West
Maple Street East Cooper Street South
Maple Street Franklin Street North
Midway Street Cornish Drive North
Midway Street Fairview Drive North
Midway Street Maltby Avenue Ext. North
Midway Street New Castle Street North and south
Midway Street West Cooper Street North
Mulberry Lane New Castle Street South
Mulberry Lane West Water Street North
Normal Avenue Center Street North and south
Normal Avenue Franklin Street North
Normal Avenue Maltby Avenue South
Oak Street Kelly Boulevard North
Oak Street North Main Street West
Park Lane Drive North Main Street West
§ 275-12 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-12
1:190
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Poplar Forest Drive
[Amended
10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Kelly Boulevard South
Sassafras Drive
[Amended
10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Kelly Boulevard South
Sassafras Drive
[Added 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Willow Street East
School Street Church Alley East and west
School Street East Cooper Street North and south
School Street East Water Street North
School Street Franklin Street South
School Street Legion Street North
Seldom Seen Lane
[Added 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Poplar Forest Drive West
Spruce Drive [Added
10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Kelly Boulevard South
Spruce Wood
Commons
Kelly Boulevard —
Vincent Street Franklin Street North
West Cooper Street Elm Street East and west
White Oak Drive
[Added 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. 705]
Poplar Forest Drive East
Willow Drive [Added
10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
Kelly Boulevard South
Willow Drive [Added
10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 705]
White Oak Drive North
B. Any driver of a vehicle who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25,
together with costs of prosecution.
§ 275-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-13
1:191
§ 275-13. Left turns prohibited. [Added 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 653]
The following intersections are hereby established as intersections at which
no vehicles on the first-named street approaching the second-named street
may turn left, and providing for appropriate signage on the first-named
street identifying the restricted movement. It shall be unlawful for vehicles
on the first-named street approaching the second-named street to make a
left turn.
First-Named Street Second-Named Street
Normal Avenue Franklin Street, also known as "SR 108"
§ 275-14. Yield intersections.
§ 275-15. Through streets. [Amended 4-2-1996 by Ord. No. 553]
A. The following intersections are hereby established as yield-right-of-way
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are hereby
ratified if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street. All
vehicles approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time that the driver of such vehicle is
moving across or within such intersection:
Yield Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25,
together with costs of prosecution.
A. The following streets are hereby established as through streets, and the
driver of every vehicle, upon approaching any such street at any
intersection thereof (except for intersections where there are now or
shall hereafter be located official traffic control signals), shall come to a
full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering such through
street:
Street Between
Cooper Street Whole distance
East Water Street Whole distance
Elm Street Whole distance
Kelly Boulevard Whole distance
Legion Street Whole distance
Midway Street Whole distance
§ 275-13 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-15
1:192
§ 275-16. One-way streets.
§ 275-17. Traffic to keep right of certain structures and barriers.
§ 275-18. U-turns.
B. Any driver of a vehicle who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25,
together with costs of prosecution.
A. The following are hereby established as one-way streets, with operation
of vehicles thereupon to be in the direction hereby indicated:
Streets From To
Direction of
Travel
Allen Alley South Main
Street
Midway Street West
Fairview Drive South Main
Street
Elm Street West
Hockenberry
Drive
Midway Street South Main
Street
East
Lab Drive East Cooper Normal Avenue South
Maltby Avenue
Ext.
South Main
Street
Midway Street West
Midway Street Fairview Drive New Castle
Street
North
Midway Street West Water
Street
Legion Street South
School Street Franklin East Cooper
Street
South
School Street Maltby Avenue East Cooper
Street
North
B. Any person who shall violate a provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs of
prosecution.
A. All vehicular traffic shall keep to the right of the following structures or
barriers located in the center of the specified intersections:
Circle at east end of Park Lane Drive
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with
costs of prosecution.
§ 275-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-18
1:193
§ 275-19. Vehicle weight limits. [Amended 7-1-1986 by Ord. No.
342]
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to make a U-turn on
any of the following streets or portions of streets:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with
costs of prosecution.
A. The following weight limits are hereby established, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle or other vehicle,
trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight in excess of
that herein prescribed upon any of the following streets or portions
thereof where such streets or portions thereof have been posted with
notice of such maximum weight:
Street
Maximum Gross Weight
(tons)
East Water Street 10
Elm Street 10
Kelly Boulevard 10
Mulberry Lane 10
Normal Avenue 10
Oak Street 10
West Cooper Street 10
B. Provided: the aforesaid weight limit shall not apply to any motor vehicle
or other vehicle, trailer or tractor-trailer combination making deliveries
or picking up goods, wares, material or merchandise at or on premises
located in any such street or portion thereof, listed above, or any motor
vehicle or other vehicle, or trailer or tractor-trailer combination for
which a special permit to operate on any such street or portion thereof
shall have been issued by the Chief of Police. Provided, further: the
provisions of this section shall not apply to the driving of vehicles
hauling food or household goods, public utility vehicles, firefighting
equipment, garbage and rubbish vehicles, or school and public
transportation buses.
C. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $75, plus $75 for each
500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight limit, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 275-18 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-20
1:194
§ 275-20. Trucks prohibited on certain streets; exceptions.
§ 275-21. Trucks to travel in low gear.
§ 275-22. Local traffic only on certain streets.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, which shall
mean a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property, freight, or merchandise, upon any of the
following streets, or portions thereof, as herein designated:
Street
Center Street
Cross Street
East Cooper Street
East Water Street
Elm Street
Highland Avenue
High Street
Maple Street
Mulberry Lane
Normal Avenue
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with
costs of prosecution; provided nothing in this section shall make it
unlawful to operate a truck upon any street or portion thereof listed
above for delivery and pickup of goods, wares, merchandise, or
material at or on premises located upon such street or portion thereof.
A. All trucks are to use low gear when traveling on the following streets or
portions thereof:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with
costs of prosecution.
A. The following streets or portions of streets are hereby designated as
being for local traffic only:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 275-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-22
1:195
§ 275-23. Unlawful to operate motor vehicles on streets closed for
construction or repair.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any street
that is under construction, resurfacing or repair, in disregard of any official
sign, barricade or notice that the same is closed to vehicular traffic. Any
person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with costs of
prosecution.
§ 275-24. Play streets.
B. Any person who shall use as a through street the streets or portions
thereof hereby designated as being for local traffic only shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with
costs of prosecution; provided "local traffic," as used herein, shall mean
access to and egress from properties and businesses or parking
facilities located along said streets.
A. The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate as play streets, whenever
and for whatever period of time he shall deem advisable, any portion of
any street whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such
street shall be set apart for this purpose under the direction of the
Mayor.
B. No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any play street at any
time when such street shall be so designated, except in case of
emergency, with special permission of the police officer in charge, who
shall first clear such play street of all persons using such street for the
purpose for which it was set aside.
C. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with
costs of prosecution.
§ 275-22 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-24
1:196
ARTICLE III
Stopping, Standing and Parking Regulations
[Added 6-4-1996 by Ord. No. 555]
§ 275-25. General prohibitions.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to protect the
safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall:
A. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(1) On the roadway or on the roadway side of any vehicle that is
stopped, standing or parked at the edge or curb of a highway,
except that:
(a) A pedalcycle may be parked as provided in § 275-29.
(b) Standing or parking for the purpose of loading or unloading
persons or property is authorized, but is restricted to the
minimum length of time that is absolutely necessary for such
loading or unloading. Loading or unloading is prohibited
everywhere parking is prohibited, is limited to the posted times
everywhere overtime parking is prohibited, and is prohibited
whenever one lane for vehicular traffic shall not be kept open
at all times. Loading or unloading on state-designated
highways is prohibited between the peak traffic flow hours of
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., as provided
by Departmental regulations.
(2) On a sidewalk, except that a pedalcycle may be parked as provided
in § 275-29.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) On a crosswalk.
(5) Alongside or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(6) Within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in answer to a fire
alarm.
(7) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
B. Stand or park a vehicle:
(1) Within three feet of or in any portion of a public driveway or within
three feet of or in front of any portion of a private driveway or in,
without permission of the owner or responsible person, any portion
of a private driveway. The owner or other person in charge of the
private property must request enforcement on that private
property.
§ 275-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-25
1:197
§ 275-26. Vehicles on private property.
(2) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection or other location.
(3) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign,
yield sign or traffic control signal located at the site of a roadway.
(4) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(5) When properly sign posted, within 100 feet of the driveway
entrance to any fire station or, on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station, within 100 feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the entrance or within 100 feet on both sides
and in all directions from the street intersection commonly used for
the ingress and egress of emergency vehicles to and from said fire
station.
(6) At any place where official signs prohibit parking or standing in a
parking location, highway, trafficway or designated corridor
provided for emergency vehicles or other vehicles designated by
the state or Borough police.
(7) At any part of any yellow curb or painted lines on the highway or
parking lot, or anywhere that parking is prohibited for that vehicle.
(8) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
C. Park a vehicle:
(1) Overtime at any place where official signs:
(a) Limit the duration of time a vehicle may park.
(b) Prohibit continuous long-term parking of more than 48 hours
on all public streets and public parking lots of the Borough, as
well as properly posted private parking lots as described in
§ 275-26B.
(2) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
A. Unattended vehicle on private property. No person shall park or leave
unattended a vehicle on private property without the consent of the
owner or other person in control or possession of the property, except in
the case of emergency or disablement of the vehicle, in which case the
operator shall arrange for the removal of the vehicle as soon as
possible, not to exceed the later of either 48 hours of time immediately
following such emergency or disablement or the next business day
following the emergency or disablement.
B. Private parking lots. The stopping, standing and parking regulations
and their enforcement shall not apply to private parking lots unless
such lots are properly posted to notify the public of any parking
restrictions and a specific request on an incident-by-incident basis or a
§ 275-25 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-26
1:198
§ 275-27. Vehicle position while parked.
§ 275-28. Handicapped persons and disabled veterans.
written request for continued enforcement from the owner or other
person in charge of such private parking lot is received and continued
enforcement is approved by the President of Borough Council. The
written request must contain a list of all posted signs and their
locations, as well as indication that the posted signs meet the
Department regulation that specifies what constitutes adequate posting
for public notice. Further, the request must indicate a commitment to
pay all costs for all installation and maintenance of signs to meet the
regulations and needs of the situation. For the purposes of this section,
"private parking lot" means a privately owned parking lot open to the
public or used for parking without charge or a privately owned parking
lot used for parking with charge.
C. Property owners remove vehicle. The owner or other person in charge
or possession of any property on which a vehicle is parked or left
unattended in violation of the provisions of this section may remove the
vehicle or have the vehicle removed. Such person who removes a
vehicle left parked or unattended in violation of the provisions of this
section shall have a lien against the owner of the vehicle, in the amount
of the reasonable value of the costs of removing the vehicle. The vehicle
owner may reclaim the vehicle upon payment of the towing and storage
costs and must also pay the penalty for illegally parking the vehicle, as
well as any other assessed charges.
A. Parallel parking side and direction. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, every vehicle standing or parked upon a two-way highway shall
be positioned parallel to and with the right-hand wheels next to the
right-hand curb, or upon a one-way highway shall be positioned parallel
to the curb in the direction of authorized traffic movement with the
right-hand wheels next to the right-hand curb or the left-hand wheels
next to the left-hand curb.
B. Within 12 inches of curb. Vehicles parallel parked shall have all
curbside wheels within 12 inches of the appropriate curb or, in the
absence of a curb, as close as practicable to the edge of the appropriate
shoulder.
C. Inside painted lines. Vehicles shall be parked such that no part of the
vehicle is directly above or outside of the parking guidance lines on the
highway or the curb. This requirement is suspended when the painted
lines are completely obscured by snow or ice.
A. Handicapped 60 minutes extra. When a motor vehicle bearing a
handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking placard as
prescribed in this section is being operated by or for the transportation
of the handicapped person or severely disabled veteran, the driver shall
be relieved of any liability for parking for a period of 60 minutes in
§ 275-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-28
1:199
excess of the legal parking period permitted by Borough Council in
either officially designated handicapped parking locations or in any
other legal parking location, except where local ordinances or police
regulations provide for the accommodation of heavy traffic during
morning, afternoon or evening hours. After the extra 60 minutes, an
overtime parking violation has occurred.
B. Handicapped reserve parking.
(1) Upon the annual written request, including substantive
justifications of any handicapped person or severely disabled
veteran, the payment of an annual fee, and the favorable evaluation
of need on a case-by-case basis, Borough Council may erect on the
highway as close as possible to their place of residence a sign or
signs indicating that that place is reserved for the handicapped
person or severely disabled veteran, that no parking is allowed
there by others and that any unauthorized person parking there
shall be subject to a specific penalty and towing of the vehicle.
Borough Council may restrict such handicapped parking with
conditions that circumstances and judgment may warrant. Any
vehicle which is unlawfully parked in a designated handicapped
parking area may be towed and stored upon authorization of a
police officer or a parking enforcement officer.
(2) Except for persons parking vehicles lawfully bearing a handicapped
or severely disabled veteran registration plate or displaying a
handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking placard when
such vehicles are being operated by or for the transportation of a
handicapped person or a severely disabled veteran, no person shall
park a vehicle on public property posted in accordance with
Departmental regulations which shall require a sign stating the
penalty for violation and a sign indicating that vehicles in violation
may be towed. Signs must be replaced when they become either
obsolete or missing, with all costs to replace the necessary signs to
be borne by the persons responsible for signing the particular
location. Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked in a designated
handicapped parking area may be towed and stored upon
authorization of a police officer or a parking enforcement officer.
C. Unauthorized operator using handicapped. An operator of a vehicle
bearing a handicapped or severely disabled veteran plate or displaying
a handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking placard shall not
make use of the parking privileges accorded to handicapped persons
and severely disabled veterans under Subsection B above, unless the
operator is handicapped or a severely disabled veteran or unless the
vehicle is being operated for the transportation of a handicapped
person or severely disabled veteran.
D. Handicapped personal mobility devices. Personal conveyance devices,
such as wheelchairs and powered chairs, for the handicapped person or
severely disabled veteran, whether personally or mechanically
§ 275-28 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-28
1:200
§ 275-29. Pedalcycle parking.
§ 275-30. Parking of certain vehicles restricted; parking for repairs;
abandoned vehicles.
powered, are subject to the same stopping, standing and parking
regulations as pedalcycles. Operators of such vehicles are discouraged
for safety reasons from parking on any highway, trafficway or any legal
parking space, but may park upon sidewalks in such a manner that
pedestrian and vehicle traffic is not impaired.
A. Pedalcycle parking on sidewalks.
(1) A person may park a pedalcycle on a sidewalk unless prohibited or
restricted by an official traffic control device.
(2) A pedalcycle parked on a sidewalk shall not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
B. Pedalcycle parking on roadways.
(1) A pedalcycle may be parked on the roadway at any angle to the
curb or edge of the roadway at any location where parking is
allowed.
(2) A pedalcycle may be parked on the roadway abreast of another
pedalcycle or pedalcycles near the side of the roadway at any
location where parking is allowed.
(3) A person shall not park a pedalcycle on a roadway in such a manner
as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.
(4) In all other respects, pedalcycles stopped, standing or parked
anywhere on a highway shall conform with the provisions of this
article.
A. Larger trucks restricted to deliveries. Trucks of Class Eight or heavier
weight, as determined by the weight classification system of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any tractor or trailer, or tractortrailer
combination, shall not stand or park on any highway, public
parking lot or properly signed private parking lot of the Borough of
Slippery Rock for a period longer than necessary to make deliveries.
B. Trailer parking restricted. Trailers are prohibited from parking on any
highway, public parking lot or properly signed private parking lot
without having attached to such trailer a fully operational motor vehicle
designed or adapted for the purpose of towing such trailer.
C. Parking for repairs. Disabled motor vehicles and/or trailers parked
upon the traveled or untraveled portion of any highway or parking lot in
the Borough of Slippery Rock shall be only temporarily parked for the
minimum time to effect repairs, not to exceed the later of either 48
hours of time immediately following such disablement or the next
§ 275-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-30
1:201
§ 275-31. Enforcement.
business day following the disablement. Parking for repairs is not
permitted where parking is otherwise prohibited. Drivers of disabled
vehicles should either notify Borough police about the vehicle, leave a
note on the dash of the vehicle or tie a white cloth on the driver's side
door or other serviceable location.
D. Prohibited vehicles prohibited. Any vehicle, device or animal that is
prohibited from transportation use on the highways, trafficways or
public parking lots of the Borough is prohibited from stopping, standing
or parking in any legal or illegal location on any highway, public parking
lot or properly signed private parking lot in the Borough, including, but
not limited to, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts, children's toy
vehicles and vehicles that would damage the highway. Vehicles and
equipment used or to be used in construction or in the operation or
maintenance of highways or public utility facilities, which are parked in
a manner which does not interfere with the normal movement of traffic
or damage the surface of the highway, trafficway, public parking lot or
properly signed private parking lot, may be parked in legal parking
locations and shall not be considered to be abandoned. Prohibited
vehicles which are legally or illegally parked may be towed and stored
upon authorization of a police officer or a parking enforcement officer.
E. Abandoned vehicle. No person shall abandon a vehicle upon any
highway or trafficway or upon any public or private property without
the express or implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful
possession or control of the property. Abandoned vehicles may be towed
and stored upon authorization of a police officer, a parking enforcement
officer or the owner or person in charge of the private property where
the vehicle was abandoned.
A. Restrictions by state and Borough Council. The Department on statedesignated
highways and Borough Council on any highway within the
Borough boundaries may, by erection of official traffic control devices,
prohibit, limit or restrict stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on
any highway where engineering and traffic studies indicate the
stopping, standing or parking would constitute a safety hazard or where
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere
with the free movement of traffic.
B. Penalties for violations. The penalty for violating any part of this article
may be partially or wholly established, modified or abolished upon
resolution or ordinance of the Borough Council of Slippery Rock.
C. Enforcement by Borough. The Borough of Slippery Rock will enforce all
prohibitions of stopping, standing or parking within its boundaries by
either part-time or full-time:
(1) Police officers.
§ 275-30 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-31
1:202
§ 275-32. Payment of penalties and costs.
§ 275-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-8-2002 by Ord. No.
588; 1-6-2004 by Ord. No. 611; 4-2-2013 by Ord. No. 673; 10-6-2015
by Ord. No. 687]
It is a reasonable exercise of the Borough police powers to regulate the
stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on the streets or highways within
the physical boundaries of the Borough. The Borough is authorized by the
Borough Code77 and the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code78 to impose penalties for
violations of its stopping, standing or parking regulations and may impose
late payments for the failure to timely pay such penalties. Penalties for
violations of the stopping, standing and parking regulations of the Borough
shall be set by ordinance between $10 and $50 for each violation.
(2) Parking enforcement officers.
(3) Video cameras.
D. Enforcement on private property. The owner or other person in charge
of the private property must request enforcement on that private
property. See § 275-26B for the requirement of a particular written
request for continued enforcement on private parking lots.
A. Penalty payment period. Violators of stopping, standing or parking
prohibitions, limitations or restrictions may settle and compromise the
claim against the violator by paying the stipulated penalty amount
within the later of either 48 hours of time immediately following such
violation or the next business day following the violation.
B. Penalty for late payment. If the stipulated penalty for violation remains
unpaid after the regular payment period specified in Subsection A, then
an additional penalty for late payment will be levied, and the violation
shall be prosecuted as a summary violation before the Magisterial
District Judge having jurisdiction.
C. Penalty payment required. The penalty for any violation of stopping,
standing or parking must be paid in full. Payment of any other penalties
or charges shall not operate to relieve the obligation of the owner or
operator for payment of penalties imposed under this article.
D. Towed and stored vehicle costs. The vehicle owner may reclaim the
towed and stored vehicle upon paying the towing and storage costs and
must also pay the penalty for illegally parking the vehicle, as well as any
other assessed charges.
77.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
78.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 275-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-34
1:203
§ 275-34. Parking, stopping and standing restricted at certain
locations. [Amended 1-8-2002 by Ord. No. 588; 6-3-2003 by Ord. No.
602; 1-6-2004 by Ord. No. 611; 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 651]
A. Parking is prohibited at these locations:
Highway/Parking Lot Side Between
Arlington Drive cul-desac
[Added 10-10-2017
by Ord. No. 702]
Both No parking shall be permitted
along the Arlington Drive culde-
sac between November 1
through the following April 1
Center Street Both Normal Avenue and Vincent
Street
Center Street South Maple Street and Normal
Avenue
Center Street South Vincent Street and Borough
line
Church Drive Both South Main Street and Maple
Street
Cornish Drive Both South Main Street and end of
street
Cross Street Both Keister Road and High Street
Cross Street and High
Street intersection
Both Tow-away zone
East Cooper Street Both Normal Avenue and Lab Drive
East Cooper Street Both South Main Street and School
Drive
East Cooper Street North 90 feet west of Normal
Avenue and Borough line
East Cooper Street South School Drive and Borough line
East Maltby Avenue Both South Main Street and
Campus Drive
East Water Street
[Amended 4-2-2013 by
Ord. No. 673]
Both North Main Street and Grove
City Road
Elm Street Fire Station
entrance
Both New Castle Street and 260
feet south of New Castle
Street Fire Station entrance
area — tow-away zone
Elm Street [Added
6-5-2012 by Ord. No.
670]
East All
§ 275-34 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-34
1:204
Highway/Parking Lot Side Between
Elm Street [Repealed
6-5-2012 by Ord. No.
670; 4-2-2013 by Ord.
No. 673]
Elm Street [Amended
6-5-2012 by Ord. No.
670; 4-2-2013 by Ord.
No. 673]
West Fire station entrances at Elm
Street and New Castle Street
Elm Street, 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m. [Added
6-5-2012 by Ord. No.
670; amended
4-2-2013 by Ord. No.
673]
West New Castle Street and
Fairview Drive
Fairview Drive Both South Main Street and Elm
Street
Franklin Street Both South/North Main Street and
Borough line
Grange Street Both South Main Street and Elm
Street
Grove City Road East Franklin Street and Borough
line
Grove City Road West Franklin Street and Rebecca
Lane
Highland Avenue Both Franklin Street and Legion
Drive
Highland Avenue East Franklin Street and East
Cooper Street
High Street Both South Main Street and Cross
Street
Hockenberry Drive Both South Main Street and Elm
Street
Kelly Boulevard Both North Main Street and Grove
City Road
Kiester Road Both South Main Street and
Borough line
Legion Drive Both North Main Street and 160
feet east of Highland Avenue
Library Drive [Amended
4-2-2013 by Ord. No.
673]
Both East Cooper Street and
Maltby Avenue
§ 275-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-34
1:205
Highway/Parking Lot Side Between
Maple Street Both East Cooper Street and
Slippery Rock University
property
Maple Street East Franklin Street and East
Cooper Street
Midway Drive
[Amended 4-2-2013 by
Ord. No. 673]
Both Gateway Park and Fairview
Drive
New Castle Street Both North/South Main Street and
Borough line
New Castle Street, Fire
Station entrance
Both 100 feet east of Elm Street
and 180 feet west of Elm
Street, Fire Station entrance
— tow-away zone
Normal Avenue Both Franklin Street and Center
Street
Normal Avenue East Center Street and East
Maltby Avenue
Normal Avenue West 140 feet north of Cooper
Street and East Cooper Street
Normal Avenue West East Cooper Street and 74
feet south of East Cooper
Street
Normal Avenue West 130 feet north of East Maltby
Drive and East Maltby Avenue
Normal Avenue, 2:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
West Center Street and 140 feet
north of East Cooper Street
Normal Avenue, 2:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
West 74 feet south of East Cooper
Street and 130 feet north of
East Maltby Avenue
North Main Street Both East/West Water Street and
Borough line
North Main Street, 2:00
a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Both Franklin Street/New Castle
Street and East/West Water
Street
North Main Street, 11:30
p.m. to 5:30 a.m. [Added
4-2-2013 by Ord. No.
673]
West (as
posted)
New Castle Street and West
Water Street
Oak Street Both North Main Street and Kelly
Boulevard
§ 275-34 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-34
1:206
Highway/Parking Lot Side Between
School Drive Both Franklin Street and East
Cooper Street
School Drive East East Cooper Street and East
Maltby Avenue
School Drive West East Cooper Street and 126
feet south of East Cooper
Street
South Main Street East East Cooper Street and
Kiester Road
South Main Street West Cornish Drive and Borough
line
South Main Street West West Cooper Street and 432
feet south of West Cooper
Street
South Main Street, 2:00
a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
East 54 feet south of Franklin
Street and East Cooper Street
South Main Street, 2:00
a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
West 52 feet south of New Castle
Street and West Cooper
Street
South Main Street, 2:00
a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
West 432 feet south of West Cooper
Street and Cornish Drive
South Main Street,
handicapped crossing
Both At Church Drive
Vincent Street Both Franklin Street and Center
Street
West Cooper Street Both South Main Street and
Borough line
West Liberty Road
[Amended 4-2-2013 by
Ord. No. 673]
Both South Main Street and
Borough line
West Maltby Avenue Both South Main Street and Elm
Street
West Water Street
[Amended 4-2-2013 by
Ord. No. 673]
Both North Main Street and
Midway "Pigtail" Drive
B. Standing is prohibited at these locations:
Highway/Parking Lot Side Between
Church Drive Both South Main Street and School
Drive
C. Overtime parking is prohibited at these locations:
§ 275-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-34
1:207
Highway/Parking
Lot Side Between Time Limit
Elm Street, 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
[Amended 6-5-2012
by Ord. No. 670]
West 304 feet south of
New Castle Street
and Fairview Drive
2-hour
parking
Normal Avenue, 6:00
a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
West Center Street and
140 feet north of East
Cooper Street
2-hour
parking
Normal Avenue, 6:00
a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
West 74 feet south of East
Cooper Street and
130 feet north of East
Maltby Drive
2-hour
parking
North Main Street,
5:30 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
Both Franklin Street and
East/West Water
Street
2-hour
parking
South Main Street — In front of post office
at 500 South Main
Street
15-min.
parking
South Main Street,
5:30 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
Both 76 feet south of
Franklin Street and
East Cooper Street
2-hour
parking
South Main Street,
5:30 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
West 52 feet south of New
Castle Street and
East Cooper Street
2-hour
parking
South Main Street,
5:30 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
West 432 feet south of
West Cooper Street
and 60 feet north of
Cornish Drive
2-hour
parking
D. Handicapped and other special purpose parking zones are provided at
these locations:
Highway/Parking Lot Side Between
Borough Building parking
lot, handicapped
North Adjacent to rear entrance
door
Borough Building parking
lot, handicapped
West Adjacent to basement ramp
(2)
Borough Building parking
lot, patrons only
All East Water Street and Legion
Drive
Borough Building parking
lot, police car
North Adjacent to rear entrance
door
Borough Building road,
police cars
Both East Water Street and Legion
Drive
§ 275-34 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-34
1:208
Highway/Parking Lot Side Between
Maple Street,
handicapped
West First space 32 feet north of
Church Drive
School Drive, loading
zone
West First space 32 feet south of
Franklin Avenue
South Main Street,
handicapped [Amended
4-2-2013 by Ord. No.
673]
East Fifth space south of Church
Drive
South Main Street,
handicapped
West First space 14 feet north of
Grange Drive
South Main Street,
handicapped [Repealed
4-2-2013 by Ord. No.
673]
South Main Street,
loading zone
East First space 54 feet south of
Franklin Street
S.R. Comm. parking lot,
handicapped
South Adjacent to buildings
E. Parking is prohibited during certain months at these locations:
Highway/
Parking Lot Side Between Months
East Cooper
Street
North South Main Street
and Highland Avenue
From November 1
to the following
April 1
Normal Avenue
[Added
11-4-2014 by
Ord. No. 682]
West East Cooper Street
and Maltby Avenue
From November 1
to the following
April 1
South Main Street East Keister Road and first
alley (unnamed)
directly south of
Keister Road
From November 1
to the following
April 1
§ 275-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-34
1:209

ARTICLE IV
Unlicensed, Uninspected and Dismantled Vehicles
§ 275-35. Parking and storage of unlicensed or uninspected
vehicles restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any type of motor vehicle requiring
a registration plate and a state inspection sticker under the applicable
provisions of the Vehicle Code79 to park or store or permit the same to be
parked or stored on any public street or public alley within the limits of
the Borough of Slippery Rock for a period in excess of 48 hours, if said
motor vehicle does not have attached to it a current valid registration plate
and a current valid state inspection sticker required under the applicable
provisions of the Vehicle Code.
§ 275-36. Parking and storage of dismantled vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any motor vehicle requiring a
registration plate and a state inspection sticker under the applicable
provisions of the aforesaid Vehicle Code to park or store or to permit to be
parked or stored any such motor vehicle on any street or alley within the
Borough of Slippery Rock when such motor vehicle is to any extent partially
dismantled and inoperable.
§ 275-37. Removal of vehicles in violation.
§ 275-38. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a fee of $25, of which $10 shall be transferred to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to which the
vehicle was taken.
A. Any police officer may remove or cause to be removed to a nearby
garage or other place of safety, a vehicle in violation of any provision of
this article. Prior to removal of such vehicle bearing a registration plate
by which the last registered owner of the vehicle can be determined,
notice shall be sent by certified mail to the last registered owner of the
vehicle informing him that unless the vehicle is moved to a suitable
location within five days of the date the notice is mailed, the vehicle will
be removed and held at a suitable facility where it may be reclaimed. If
the vehicle does not bear an identifiable registration plate, the notice
may be secured to the vehicle.
B. Within the five-day period, the owner shall be given, if requested, an
opportunity to explain to police officers or the Department why the
owner believes the vehicle should not be removed. If the police officers
or Department decides that the vehicle shall be moved, the owner shall
be given an additional 48 hours to move the vehicle or have it moved.
79.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 275-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-39
1:211
§ 275-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50, together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§§ 7301 to 7312 (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 275-39 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-39
1:212
ARTICLE V
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 275-40. Authority to remove and impound.
The Police Department of the Borough of Slippery Rock is hereby authorized
to remove and impound or to order the removal and impoundment of any
vehicle parked upon any street, alley, highway or public property in the
Borough in violation of any provision of the law or of any ordinance of the
Borough, provided no vehicle shall be removed for overtime parking.
§ 275-41. Approved storage garages.
The Borough Council shall have authority to designate, from time to time,
one or more garages as approved storage garages, to serve as a pound for
the storage of such impounded vehicles.
§ 275-42. Towing and storage charges.
Every such approved storage garage shall have authority to charge the
owner of record of every such impounded vehicle the towing and storage
charges that shall be fixed and approved by resolution of the Borough
Council.
§ 275-43. Garage to post bond.
Every such approved storage garage shall furnish a bond, in an adequate
amount as shall be fixed by the Borough Council, for the indemnifying of the
owner of any such impounded vehicle against the loss thereof, or injury or
damage thereto, while in the custody of the keeper of the pound.
§ 275-44. Notification to owner.
Within 24 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
to the owner of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall include the make,
model, title number, vehicle identification number and registration plate
number, the location the vehicle is held, notification of the right to reclaim
said vehicle within 30 days after the date of the notice upon payment of
a fee of $25, towing and storage charges, and notification that failure to
reclaim said vehicle is deemed consent to the disposition of the vehicle.
§ 275-45. Payment of towing and impoundment charges without
protest.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall, unless such payment shall have been made under protest, be
final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the
money so paid.
§ 275-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-46
1:213
§ 275-46. Payment of towing and impoundment charges under
protest.
In the event that any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall be paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing
before a Magisterial District Judge or court of record having jurisdiction, in
which case the defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such
notice as is provided for by the Vehicle Code,80 in other cases of summary
offenses, and shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 275-47. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded, and it
shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or agents of the
owners thereof information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 275-48. Owner or operator remains liable for fine or penalty.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve the
owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for
the violation of any law or ordinance on account of which such vehicle was
removed and impounded.
§ 275-49. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
80.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 275-46 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-49
1:214
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 275-50. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHAINS — Full chains, strap chains or other types of chains mounted on
both rear wheels of a motorized vehicle.
SNOW — Any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets,
including snow, sleet, hail, ice and freezing rain.
SNOW REMOVAL CONDITION — State of street conditions that are
hazardous and dangerous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, as so declared
by the Chief of Police or such person designated by the Chief of Police.
SNOW TIRES — Tires having treads designed for use in snow, which tires
must be in such condition as to serve the purpose for which they are
designed.
VEHICLE — Any self-propelled motorized vehicle licensed to travel upon the
streets, roads and highways of the Borough of Slippery Rock.
§ 275-51. Declaration of snow removal condition.
A snow removal condition is hereby declared to exist in the Borough of
Slippery Rock whenever snow falls so that, in the opinion of the Chief
of Police, or such person designated by the Chief of Police, the street
conditions are hazardous and dangerous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic
because of snow accumulation. The Chief of Police, or such person
designated by the Chief of Police, shall have authority to declare a snow
removal condition, notice of which shall immediately be issued to local radio
and news services. In either instance, a snow removal condition is presumed
to continue for a period of 24 hours following the accumulation of snow, or
until such period of time as designated by the Chief of Police.
§ 275-52. Unattended vehicles prohibited during emergency.
During such time as a snow removal condition is in effect, it shall be
a violation of this article for any person, firm, organization or entity to
park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any streets, roads and
highways and their adjacent rights-of-way within the boundaries of the
Borough of Slippery Rock that have been publicly designated for snow
removal or plowing.
§ 275-53. Certain streets designated for snow removal.
The following streets within the Borough of Slippery Rock are hereby
designated for snow removal or plowing, and parking thereon shall be
prohibited while a snow removal condition is in effect:
§ 275-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-53
1:215
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 275-54. Snow tires or chains required.
During such time as a snow removal condition is in effect, any person, firm,
organization or entity operating or causing to be operated a vehicle which
is not equipped with snow tires or chains upon any street, road or highway
within the boundaries of the Borough resulting in such vehicle becoming
stalled or incapable of moving under its own power, or who leaves such
vehicle abandoned or unattended on any street, road or highway within the
boundaries of the Borough as a result of its inability to move under its own
power because of its failure to be equipped with snow tires or chains, shall
be in violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties and fines
set forth in § 275-55.
§ 275-55. Violations and penalties.
A. During such time as a snow removal condition is in effect, any person
who shall park a vehicle anywhere upon or along any of the streets of
the Borough that have been publicly designated for snow removal or
plowing shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $15, together with costs of
prosecution.
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle upon any street of the Borough
of Slippery Rock, if such vehicle shall become stalled during such time
as a snow removal condition is in effect, and if such stalling shall have
been by reason of the failure to have such vehicle equipped as
prescribed in § 275-54 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation of
this article, and, upon conviction thereof, such person shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 275-53 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-55
1:216
ARTICLE VII
Parking of Motor Vehicles on Private Property
[Added 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 608]
§ 275-56. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED PARKING LOCATION — Any parking space on private property
that has been approved by the Borough permit officer for parking use and
has been improved to meet or exceed minimum Borough requirements for
off-street parking as set forth hereafter.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular path improved to Borough standards connecting
the public street and the approved parking locations on private property
which the driveway serves. A driveway shall be considered an approved
parking location if constructed to Borough requirements for such approved
parking locations.
PARKING — The placement of a motor vehicle in a stationary position when
the operator is not in or on the vehicle. Parking shall not be construed
to include placement of motor vehicles for such temporary purposes as
cleaning, loading and unloading so long as such activity is diligently
undertaken.
PERMITTED SURFACES — A natural ground surface, whether maintained
as a lawn or not, which is not prepared for motor vehicle parking, shall
be prohibited for parking usage. A gravel, blacktop or concrete surface
contained along its edges by railroad ties or similar edging shall be
considered a permitted parking surface for one- and two-family dwelling
lots. Unprepared surfaces leading to erosion and/or tracking of mud onto
public streets shall not be considered approved parking locations.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, corporation or any other
entity.
§ 275-57. Unlawful parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on private
property unless within an approved parking location on a surface other
than a grass or dirt surface. Grass or dirt areas shall not be considered an
approved parking location. A parking location must be as set forth under
the definition of "permitted surfaces" in § 275-56.
§ 275-58. Issuance of building permit.
Before a building permit can be issued for the development of a property,
or the expansion of existing development, or for the change of use of a
property, or when the property owner wishes to increase the number of
parking spaces on his property, the property owner shall provide the permit
officer a scaled drawing of his property showing:
§ 275-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-58
1:217
§ 275-59. Unpaved parking spaces.
Unpaved parking spaces are permitted on lots containing single-family or
two-family dwellings. Such unpaved spaces shall be surfaced with shale,
crushed limestone or similar material approved by the permit officer. The
edges of the surface area shall be contained by railroad ties, concrete
blocks, the side of a building, or such other method that will prevent the
scattering of the surface material beyond the parking spaces.
§ 275-60. Violations and penalties.81
Any person who shall park their vehicle in violation of this article shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and
the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Borough
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 10 days or to the county
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to
or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this
article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Butler County.
A. The location of each proposed parking space and the access to it.
B. Proposed surfacing of the lot, including a description of materials to be
used and their depth, and method of preparing the site to receive them.
C. Any earthmoving necessary to level the parking site.
D. Method to contain loose materials if the site is not paved.
E. Method of disposal of excess stormwater runoff on a paved site, except
for one- and two-family dwellings.
F. Location and intensity of any lighting to be used to illuminate the
parking site.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-58 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 275-60
1:218
PART III: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND LAND USE
LEGISLATION
Chapter 296
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 217.
§ 296-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Slippery Rock hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 296-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to
405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the Municipal Building Code of the Borough of
Slippery Rock.
§ 296-3. Manner of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of Slippery
Rock shall be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the
Borough Council of Slippery Rock from time to time by resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee of Slippery Rock to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Slippery Rock Borough;
B. By retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party
agencies to act on behalf of Slippery Rock Borough;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code
through an intermunicipal agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code on
behalf of Slippery Rock Borough;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous-use structures.
§ 275-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-4
1:219
§ 296-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock in conformity with the
requirements of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time
to time, and for the purpose set forth therein. If at any time enforcement
and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more municipalities,
said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the
participating municipalities.
§ 296-5. Effect on other provisions.
§ 296-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by Slippery Rock Borough for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by Borough Council by resolution from time to time.82
§ 296-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-1-2005 by Ord. No.
612-AB]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and/or
to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the
discretion of the court. Each day a violation of this chapter continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Slippery Rock Borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
and effect until such provisions fail to exceed the minimum
requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the municipality not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
82.Editor's Note: The current Fee Resolution is on file in the office of the Borough
Administrator/Secretary.
§ 296-4 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 296-7
1:220
Chapter 309
GRADING AND EXCAVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 338.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
350.
Water — See Ch. 368.
Zoning — See Ch. 375.
§ 296-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-7
1:221

ARTICLE I
Grading, Erosion and Stormwater Management
[Adopted 10-2-1984 by Ord. No. 329 (Ch. 9, Part 1, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 309-1. Legislative authority; purpose.
This article is enacted pursuant to standards of Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part I, Department of Environmental Protection, Subpart C,
Protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102,
Erosion and Sediment Control, and the Pennsylvania "Storm Water
Management Act" (1978, Oct. 4, P.L. 864, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.) and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto and is designed to comply with
affirmative requirements imposed on municipalities by said authority, and
the purpose hereof is to regulate the modification of natural terrain, the
alteration of drainage, and to provide for certain erosion, sedimentation
and surface water runoff control and containment within the Borough of
Slippery Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
§ 309-2. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this article, any building permit issued
pursuant to Chapter 350, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code
of the Borough of Slippery Rock or separate grading permit issued pursuant
to provisions hereof shall require conformance with this article as part of
the terms and conditions. In the event of a conflict between this article and
floodplain regulations, the floodplain regulation shall prevail.
§ 309-3. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALLUVIAL SOILS — An azonal great group of soils, developed from
transported and relatively recently deposited material (alluvium),
characterized by a weak modification (or none) of the original material by
soil-forming processes.
CUT and/or FILL — Process of earthmoving by excavating part of an area
and/or using excavated material for embankments of fill areas.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
EROSION —
The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice,
chemical or other geological agents;
A.
Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice
or gravity.
B.
§ 309-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-3
1:223
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land area from the overflow of streams, rivers or
other waters of this commonwealth.
GENERAL FLOODPLAIN AREA — The one-hundred-year floodway and that
maximum area of land that is likely to be flooded by a one-hundred-year
flood, as shown on the floodplain maps.
GRADE —
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure or assembly of materials, including fill,
above or below the surface of land or water and an activity which might
impede, retard, or change flood flows. The planting, cultivation, the
harvesting of field and orchard crops or the grazing of livestock, including
the maintenance of necessary appurtenant agricultural fencing, shall not be
considered an obstruction under this definition and shall not be subject to
regulation under this article.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The highest level of flooding that on the
average is likely to occur every 100 years, that is, that has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN or FLOODPLAIN — The one-hundredyear
floodway and that maximum area of land that is likely to be flooded
by a one-hundred-year flood as shown on the floodplain maps provided by
FEMA to the municipality.
RUNOFF (HYDRAULICS) — That portion of the precipitation on a drainage
area or watershed that is discharged from the area in stream channels;
types include surface runoff, groundwater runoff, or seepage.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface
either above or below sea level.
SLOPE — Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percent or degrees.
SOIL DRAINAGE — A condition of the soil, referring to the frequency and
duration of periods when the soil is free of saturation.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair
is started, or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, substantial
A. The slope of a road, channel, or natural ground;
The finished surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment,
or bottom of excavation; any surface prepared for the support of
construction like paving or laying a conduit;
B.
To finish the surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment, or
bottom or excavation.
C.
§ 309-3 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 309-3
1:224
improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of
a structure to comply with the existing state or local health, sanitary or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions or any alteration to a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places.
WATERCOURSE — A natural drainage route or channel for the flow of
water.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other body
of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERSHED STORMWATER PLAN - COUNTY — A plan for stormwater
management adopted by a county in accord with the requirements of the
Storm Water Management Act.83
§ 309-4. General requirements.
Whenever the landscape is to be permanently disturbed as to either
contours, soil or slope characteristics, or vegetation or any ground cover
is to be permanently removed, a plan is required showing how resulting
erosion and sediment shall be controlled. This plan shall include the
following:
§ 309-5. Activities requiring grading permit.
The following activities require a grading permit:
A. The amount of site alteration proposed;
B. Development schedule;
C. Erosion and sediment control practices (both temporary and
permanent) and the operation and maintenance arrangements.
A. Modifying, disturbing, blocking, diverting or otherwise adversely
affecting the natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater;
B. Construction, erection, or installation of any drainage dam, ditch,
culvert, drainpipe, bridge or any other structure or obstruction
affecting the drainage of any premises;
C. Paving, filling, stripping, excavating, grading and regrading of any land;
D. Disturbing the landscape, vegetation or any ground cover by any
proposal involving an area in excess of 25,000 square feet.
83.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 309-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-6
1:225
§ 309-6. Activities not requiring grading permit.
The following activities require no grading permit:
§ 309-7. Application for permit.
§ 309-8. Data required on plan.
The plan for a grading permit shall include:
A. Improvements, such as erection of retaining walls, driveway paving,
minor regrading or activities on a property which do not adversely
affect the natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater, drainage
of any premises, or adversely disturb the landscape, in a gross area of
up to 25,000 square feet on any one property.
B. Farming, gardening, or lawn restoration, but not including sod farming.
A. Any person, firm or corporation proposing to engage in an activity
requiring a grading permit hereunder shall apply by the submission of a
plan.
B. The applicant should, before submitting a preliminary plan for review,
consult Chapter 375, Zoning, the floodplain regulations, and Chapter
350, Subdivision and Land Development, which regulate the
development of land in the Borough of Slippery Rock.
C. A separate plan shall be required for each grading permit.
D. Five copies of the proposed plan, including specifications and
development schedules, shall be submitted to the Borough
Administrator/Secretary for a grading permit. The Borough
Administrator/Secretary shall forward one copy of the plan to the
Planning Commission, one copy to the Borough Engineer and one copy
to the Zoning Officer.
E. The plan for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a fee established
in the governing body's schedule of fees and collection procedure for all
applications and other matters pertaining to Chapter 350, Subdivision
and Land Development, and this article.
A. A valid boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be
performed;
B. A description of the features, existing and proposed, surrounding the
site which are of importance to the proposed development;
C. A plan of the general topography (including drainage) and soil
conditions on the site (latter available through the County Conservation
District);
§ 309-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 309-8
1:226
§ 309-9. Stormwater management plan.
In addition to the requirements aforesaid, and where deemed necessary by
the Borough Engineer and the Planning Commission, the applicant shall
submit, with the plan, a detailed stormwater management plan prepared
by a registered professional engineer qualified in hydrology in the
commonwealth. This plan shall include:
D. The location and a description of existing and future man-made features
of importance to the proposed development (i.e., cuts and/or fills,
buildings, roads, and driveways);
E. Plans and specifications of soil erosion and sediment control measures
in accordance with standards and specifications of the Borough of
Slippery Rock and the County Conversation District;
F. A development schedule indicating the anticipated starting and
completion dates of the development sequence and the time of
exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and
sediment control measures.
A. A plan of the property showing the location of all present and proposed
ditches, streams, pipes and other drainage structures, and proposed
cuts and/or fills. In addition to showing present elevations and
dimensions, and location and extent of all proposed grading and/or
drainage, the plan shall clearly indicate all woodlands, buildings,
parking areas and driveways. Further, the plan shall indicate the
present and proposed sources, storage and disposition of water being
channeled through or across the premises, together with elevations,
gradients, and maximum flow rates. The plan shall describe the work to
be performed and disposition of cut and/or fill, the materials to be used
and the manner or method of performance, including provisions for
protecting and maintaining existing drainage facilities, whether on
public or private property. The applicant shall also supply the
supporting data for the plan as developed by the Engineer.
B. Calculations to determine runoff, which shall be based on the Soil-
Cover Complex Method, a description of which is available from the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service and outlined in the
"Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, Butler, Pennsylvania."
(1) The design criteria for storm sewer piping on inlet systems within a
subdivision being developed shall be designed for a twenty-fiveyear
frequency storm; culverts across roadways shall be designed
for a fifty-year frequency storm; open watercourses or swales shall
be designed for a one-hundred-year frequency storm as prescribed
in accordance with the following:
(a) The coefficient of runoff used for all areas upstream of any
drainage structure shall be computed on the basis of existing
land use and the projected land use described and shown on
§ 309-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-9
1:227
§ 309-10. Disclaimer.
the Slippery Rock Borough Comprehensive Plan and adjacent
municipalities' Comprehensive Plans, where applicable.
(2) The following provisions apply to the carrying and disposal of
stormwater runoff:
(a) All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry surface water
in such a manner as to prevent erosion or overflow.
(b) The applicant shall agree to the granting and recording of
easements covering the installation and maintenance of
drainage facilities.
(c) The rate of runoff shall be no greater during and after a onehundred-
year frequency storm when the development is
completed than which existed before the development began,
and appropriate measurements of calculations shall be
provided to verify such provisions.
C. A soils investigation report, if load-bearing fill is proposed, which shall
consist of test borings, laboratory testings and engineering analysis to
correlate surface and subsurface conditions with the proposed grading
plan. The results of the investigation shall be presented in a report by a
registered professional soils engineer and shall include data regarding
the nature, distribution and supporting ability of existing soils and
rocks on the site, conclusions and recommendations to insure stable
soil conditions and groundwater control as applicable. Slippery Rock
Borough may require such supplemental reports and data as is deemed
necessary by the Borough Engineer. Recommendations included in such
reports and approved by the Borough Engineer shall be incorporated in
the plan or specifications. In addition:
(1) Fills toeing out on natural slopes steeper than four horizontal to
one vertical shall not be made unless a report is received which is
deemed acceptable by the Borough Engineer and approved by the
Borough Council. The report shall be made by a registered
professional soils engineer certifying that he has investigated the
property, made solid tests and that in his opinion such steeper
slopes will safely support the proposed fill.
(2) Natural and/or existing slopes exceeding five horizontal to one
vertical shall be benched or continuously stepped into competent
materials prior to placing all classes of fill.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. The issuance
of a permit under this article does not imply that areas outside of the
floodplain areas will be free from flooding, nor does it imply that the
§ 309-9 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 309-10
1:228
§ 309-11. Stormwater management considerations.
§ 309-12. Indemnity.
The application shall contain a statement of indemnity by the applicant
wherein the owner or developer/owner legally agrees to hold the Borough
harmless from any and all liability relating to flood damage or loss, or
from loss relating to storm drainage systems and their discharge during
construction of the system and thereafter.
§ 309-13. Stormwater management requirements.
regulations regarding stormwater management will insure any
property will be free from water damage.
B. Neither this article nor the issuance of a permit hereunder shall create
liability on the part of Slippery Rock Borough or any officer or employee
for any flood or water damage, and the issuance of a building permit, or
any considerations thereunder, may not be relied upon to assess
liability against the Borough, nor may it be asserted as a defense in an
action by a third party for damages caused by the applicant.
A. When a building permit is requested by an applicant and the Zoning
Officer or Borough Engineer clearly determines that the proposed
construction will not affect stormwater runoff characteristics and is
consistent with the applicable provisions of the watershed stormwater
plan adopted by the county and that the proposed construction is not in
a floodplain area, the Zoning Officer may process the application
without further reference to the provisions and requirements of this
article.
B. In the event it is determined that there are surface water
characteristics which must be considered, the surface water
management provisions of this article must be complied with. In
addition, if it is determined that the proposed construction or
development is in a floodplain area, that ordinance must be considered.
A. Initial determination.
(1) If, at the time of completing an application for a building permit, it
is determined that the development or construction will affect the
surface water or stormwater characteristics as in § 309-11,
Stormwater management considerations, above, it shall then be
determined if an individual stormwater management plan shall be
required as part of the building permit application.
(2) Where no individual stormwater management plan is required by
reason of the exclusions set forth in this article, the Zoning Officer
shall make a proper notation on the building permit application and
shall process the application without further reference to
stormwater management considerations.
§ 309-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-13
1:229
(3) Where an individual stormwater management plan is required as
part of the building permit application, it shall be submitted in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Stormwater management plan dispute. Where there is a
dispute as to whether or not an individual stormwater
management plan is required, the issue shall be presented to
the Borough Council at the next regular meeting, which shall
determine pursuant to its sole and exclusive authority as
reserved in this article whether a plan must be submitted as a
part of the application for a building permit.
(b) Preparation of an individual stormwater management plan.
Where an individual stormwater management plan is required,
it shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications and
standards set forth in this article, or in any technical bulletin or
release adopted by reference by this article. Such adoption
shall be by resolution.
(c) Submission of an individual stormwater management plan. The
complete individual stormwater management plan shall first be
submitted to the Butler County Conservation District for
review. The Conservation District, or the developer, shall
return a certified copy of the plan containing any changes,
recommendations or modifications of the Borough with the
review, findings and/or approval or disapproval to be filed with
the application for a permit. Concurrently, a copy of the plan
shall be submitted to the Butler County Planning Commission
for review and recommendations. All such reviews shall be
completed and returned to the Borough within 30 days.
(d) Presentation of complete application.
[1] Upon filing of the certified plan and approval letter, the
building permit shall be deemed complete and shall be
presented to the Borough Council at the next regular
meeting for action. Provided all other matters are in order
and in compliance with the provisions of this article or any
other ordinance and the proper fee has been paid, the
Borough Council shall authorize the issuance of a building
permit by the Township.
[2] The certified plan, together with any conditions or changes
noted thereon, and the approval letter or report from the
Butler County Conservation District and the
recommendations of the Butler County Planning
Commission must be filed with the application and shall
become part of the permit.
B. Designation of review agency.
§ 309-13 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 309-13
1:230
(1) The Borough hereby designates the Butler County Conservation
District and the Butler County Planning Commission as the official
reviewing agencies of the Borough for the individual stormwater
management plans.
(2) The designated reviewing agency shall have the authority to review
all stormwater management plans, note required changes, suggest
conditions to be imposed and do all other things that the Borough
may by law require. The reviewing agency may also recommend
approval or disapproval of a plan.
(3) The designated reviewing agency shall be required to apply the
standards and procedures as adopted by this article.
C. Standards.
(1) Adoption by reference. Slippery Rock Borough adopts by reference
the provisions of "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
Technical Release No. 55," prepared by the Engineering Division of
the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture, and any amendments thereto in the
future, as if said document was more fully and completely set forth
herein.
D. Local standards.
(1) The stormwater management plan required under this article shall
be designed to secure the release of runoff at a rate equal to the
runoff from a ten-year, twenty-four-hour predevelopment storm and
must provide sufficient capacity to store the runoff from a twentyfive-
year, twenty-four-hour storm.
(2) When an impoundment for retention purposes is designed, the
emergency spillway capacity shall be sized to accommodate a fiftyyear
flood.
E. Exclusions.
(1) Specific exclusions. An individual stormwater management plan
shall not be required when:
(a) The building is an individual lot owner constructing a singlefamily
dwelling unit for his own use and the lot to be developed
fronts on an existing public road of record and the owner
executes an indemnity agreement holding the Borough
harmless.
(b) The total land to be developed by individual owners/buildings
does not exceed five contiguous lots, all of which front on an
existing public road of record and the subdivision meets all
other requirements as set forth in the ordinances. Additional
contiguous lots in excess of five may be subdivided without
formal stormwater management control facilities with special
§ 309-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-13
1:231
§ 309-14. Approval of plan; issuance of permit.
Upon the approval of the plan by the Borough Engineer, the Zoning Officer
shall issue the necessary grading permit.
§ 309-15. Standards for issuance of grading permit.
permit when, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, runoff
generated from the proposed development will not be in excess
of a maximum allowable protection for downstream developed
and undeveloped lands and waterways. The maximum number
of lots so subdivided shall be 15.
(2) General conditions. The land area coverage of any individual lot as
contemplated aforesaid, when duly developed according to the plan
submitted, shall not exceed the following maximum values:
(a) Principal structure: 15%.
(b) Driveways, porches, garages and appurtenances: 10% of lot
area.
(c) The remaining undeveloped portion of any individual lot shall
have a land surface condition comparable to or less than
ground runoff curve numbers of 75 (meadowland) according to
Tables 2-1 and 2-2 of Technical Release No. 55, United States
Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation
Service, January 1975, as amended.
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this article or any condition of the
grading permit, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of
damage to other property or personal injury which may be affected by
the activity requiring a grading permit.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall modify, fill, excavate, pave, grade,
or regrade land in any manner so close to a property line as to endanger
or damage any adjoining street, alley, or any other public or private
property without supporting and protecting such property from
settling, cracking, erosion, sediment, flooding, or any other physical
damage or personal injury which might result.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or place any debris or any
other material whatsoever, or cause such to be thrown or placed, in any
drainage ditch or drainage structure in such a manner as to obstruct
free flow.
D. No person, firm or corporation shall fail to adequately maintain in good
operating order any drainage facility on his premises. All drainage
ditches, culverts, drainpipes, and drainage structures shall be kept
open and freeflowing at all times.
§ 309-13 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 309-15
1:232
E. The owner of any property on which any work has been done pursuant
to a grading permit granted under this article shall continuously
maintain and repair all graded surfaces and anti-erosion devices,
retaining walls, drainage structures or means and other protective
devices, plantings and ground cover, installed or completed. The
Borough is responsible for maintenance and repair within the right-ofway
of municipal roads.
F. All graded surfaces shall be permanently seeded, sodded and/or
planted or otherwise protected from erosion within 30 days, weather
permitting, and shall be tended and/or maintained until growth is well
established. The disturbed area and duration of exposure shall be kept
to a minimum using temporary erosion and sediment control measures
immediately, as outlined in the "Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook, Butler, Pennsylvania."
G. All trees in an area of extreme grade change shall be protected with
suitable tree wells, unless the necessity for removal is established.
Precautions shall be taken to prevent the unnecessary removal of trees.
H. When required, adequate provisions shall be made for dust-control
measures as are deemed acceptable by the Borough Engineer.
I. All plans and specifications submitted for a grading permit shall include
provisions for both interim (temporary) and ultimate (permanent)
erosion and sediment control. The design, installation and maintenance
of erosion and sediment control measures shall be accomplished in
accordance with standards and specifications established by the County
Soil Conservation District, as adopted from standards and
specifications of the United States Natural Resources Conservation
Service, and as outlined in the "Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook, Butler, Pennsylvania."
(1) Technical standards for the design and installation of erosion and
sediment control measures are on file with the Borough, the office
of the County Conservation District and other governmental agency
offices.
(2) Standards and specifications adopted for the purpose of this article
and by the County Conservation District include, but are not
limited by, the following basic conservation measures:
(a) Temporary cover on critical areas;
(b) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on
prepared seedbed;
(c) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on
unprepared seedbed;
(d) Sodding;
(e) Mulching;
§ 309-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-15
1:233
§ 309-16. Inspection procedures.
(f) Temporary diversion;
(g) Permanent diversion;
(h) Grassed waterway or outlet;
(i) Grade stabilization structure;
(j) Debris basin;
(k) Drain; and
(l) Drainage, mains or laterals.
J. A quality control program is critical for fills; therefore, wherever fill
material is to be used, the person, firm or corporation shall be
responsible for testing to determine its dry density as per ASTM D1556.
The density of each layer shall not be less than 95% of maximum
density as determined by ASTM D1557.
(1) Inspection procedure shall follow the general procedure as stated
in § 309-16.
(2) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times.
(3) Degree of compaction required shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer following the guidelines in this section.
A. All inspections shall be the responsibility of the Borough Engineer, or, in
his absence, a qualified person acceptable to the Borough Engineer and
the Borough.
B. Inspections will be carried out on a random basis, except as stated
below. However, a set of as-built plans shall be on file at the site and
authenticated by a registered professional engineer. When it is deemed
acceptable to the Borough Engineer, a designated qualified person may
authenticate the as-built plans and will assume full responsibility for
the quality of work.
C. Any and all as-built plans shall be available on the site at all times and
be subject to inspection and inquiry.
D. Engineering check notes shall accompany all as-built plans which
involve structural or mechanical measures and shall serve as
supporting evidence that structures meet design standards and
specifications specified herein.
E. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Borough Engineer to certify
compliance with this article. Satisfactory compliance with this article
shall be necessary before issuance of an occupancy or use permit.
§ 309-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 309-17
1:234
§ 309-17. Costs of inspection.
Permittees shall bear all costs of inspections required or permitted
hereunder and shall deposit with the Borough such sum as the Borough
shall determine to guarantee payment of the costs of such inspections. The
costs of inspections shall be in accordance with the established schedule of
fees and collection procedure for matters pertaining to this article.
§ 309-18. Permit fee.
The fee for a grading permit shall be fixed by resolution of the Borough from
time to time.
§ 309-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300 and/or to undergo imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 309-20. Restoration requirements.
In addition to the penalties as set forth in § 309-19, any movement of the
landscape, vegetation, or any ground cover performed in violation of this
article shall be restored to its previous condition, including replacement of
excavating earth, removal of illegally placed fill, and restoration of grades
and planting.
§ 309-21. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on November 2, 1984.
§ 309-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-21
1:235
Chapter 334
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 338. Water — See Ch. 368.
§ 309-21 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 309-21
1:236
ARTICLE I
Sewer System
[Adopted 10-23-1922 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 18, Part 1, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 334-1. Sewer system to be constructed.
A system of sanitary sewers shall be constructed in, upon and along the
public streets of the Borough.
§ 334-2. Sewerage plant to be built.
A sewerage plant shall be built and equipped.
§ 334-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-2
1:237

ARTICLE II
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 8-11-1955 by Ord. No. 182 (Ch. 18, Part 2, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 334-3. Connection required.
All owners of property abutting on or adjoining any street or alley in
which there is a sanitary sewer owned or constructed by the Slippery Rock
Municipal Authority, County of Butler, Pennsylvania, are hereby required
to connect at their own cost, and in accordance with the regulations and
charges of the Authority, the buildings erected on said property to such
sewer for the purpose of discharging all household waste liquids and other
matter customarily directed into a sanitary sewer system and shall be
required to pay the usual and customary tapping fee and the service charge
for such sewage service to the said Authority. Oils, grease, tar, gasoline
or any other liquids that are not of the usual household nature, including
stormwater or drainage due to rain or snow, shall not be emptied into or
permitted to enter the sanitary sewer system.
§ 334-4. Separate connections required.
Every such property shall be connected separately and independently with
the sewer through the house connection branch directly opposite the
building or nearest in a downstream direction. Grouping of buildings upon
one house sewer shall not be permitted, except under special
circumstances, and for good sanitary reasons, with special permission
granted by the Authority upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer.
§ 334-5. Notice to connect; failure to comply.
The owners of property abutting on or adjoining any street or alley in
which there is a sanitary sewer shall be given 45 days' notice in writing
by the Secretary of the Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock of the
requirement that all buildings erected upon abutting property shall have
sewer connections, and, upon his, her, its or their failure to make such
connections within said period, the Borough may make the same and collect
the costs thereof from the owner by a municipal claim or in an action of
assumpsit as is provided by law.
§ 334-6. Tapping permit.
Any person required to connect with said sanitary sewer system shall make
application for a tapping permit to the Secretary of the Board of Directors of
the Slippery Rock Municipal Authority on forms provided by the Authority
and shall not open any street or alley or make any connection with the
sanitary sewer system until a written permit has been issued and the fee
for the issuing of said permit has been paid in full to the Slippery Rock
Municipal Authority.
§ 334-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-7
1:239
§ 334-7. Privy vaults, cesspools and similar receptacles prohibited.
No privy vault, cesspool or similar receptacle for human excrement shall at
any time, now or hereafter, be connected with the sanitary sewer system.
§ 334-8. Use of certain facilities declared nuisances.
No privy vault, cesspool or similar receptacle for human excrement shall
hereafter be maintained upon any premises from which connection with
the sanitary sewer system shall have been made. Every such privy vault,
cesspool or other receptacle shall, within 30 days after final enactment of
this article in the case of premises now connected with a sewer, and within
30 days after connection with a sewer, in the case of premises hereafter
so connected, be abandoned, cleaned and filled under the direction and
supervision of the Health Officer of the County of Butler or State of
Pennsylvania. Any such privy vault, cesspool or other receptacle not
abandoned, cleaned and filled as required by this section shall constitute a
nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated on order of the Board of Health
as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such property.
§ 334-9. House trailers. [Added 11-28-1958 by Ord. No. 197]
No house trailer or other living quarters constructed on movable chassis
shall be installed for living purposes in the Borough of Slippery Rock unless
the same is connected with the Borough sewerage system.
§ 334-10. On-lot septic systems prohibited. [Added 3-3-1981 by Res.
No. 162; amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No. 328]
From and after the date of this section, there shall be no on-lot septic
systems installed within the Borough of Slippery Rock, and any owner,
developer of land, or builder shall provide for the extension of line for any
new construction to be run to and tapped into the sanitary sewer lines of
the Borough of Slippery Rock.
§ 334-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
328]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 334-7 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 334-11
1:240
ARTICLE III
Sewer Line and Waterline Extension Procedures
[Adopted 5-5-1970 by Ord. No. 270 (Ch. 18, Part 3, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 334-12. Approval of sewerage and water facilities.
§ 334-13. Permits and approvals.
A. No sewers shall be extended from the Borough sewer system, and no
waterline shall be extended from the Borough water system, and no
sewerage extension installed or constructed without approval first
having been obtained from the Borough, permits obtained from the
Sanitary Water Board, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and permits,
licenses and/or approvals obtained as required from all federal, state,
county and Borough agencies.
B. All such construction shall be done in accordance with these
regulations and the regulations of the Slippery Rock Municipal
Authority, and other applicable requirements. Any facilities extended
from the Borough into adjoining municipal subdivisions shall be
approved by the Slippery Rock Municipal Authority in addition to other
approval required herein and shall be done in accordance with the
standards set forth herein.
C. The applicant for any such construction and extension shall enter into a
written agreement with the Borough providing for all conditions upon
which approval will be granted, and water and sewerage service be
extended, in accordance with the requirements of this article. All
sewerage lines and waterlines and facilities constructed shall be
conveyed to the Slippery Rock Municipal Authority by deed of
conveyance or bill of sale.
D. The applicant shall prepare at his cost all contract plans and
specifications, rights-of-way plans, contract documents and prepare at
his cost all other material as is required to obtain all permits, licenses
and/or other approvals, and prepare the applications relative thereto
and pay all fees.
E. No person, corporation or partnership shall be permitted to drill or
operate an individual water well within the Borough or to obtain water
or sewer service from any other source than the Borough facilities.
A. The construction of all sewerage facilities and water facilities shall be
subject to the applicant obtaining at his cost all permits and approvals
required by federal, state, county and Borough agencies.
B. No application for such permits shall be submitted until preliminary
approval of the project is obtained from the Borough.
§ 334-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-13
1:241
C. The requirements of the State of Pennsylvania under the Clean Stream
Law,84 administered by the State Department of Health for the State
Sanitary Water Board in accordance with Act Number 394 of the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania approved June 22, 1937, shall be
complied with. Said section provides as follows:
"Approval of Plans, Designs and Relevant Data by the Sanitary Water
Board. All plans, designs and relevant data for the construction of
any new sewer system, or for the extension of any existing sewer
system, by a person or municipality, or for the erection, construction
and location of any treatment works or intercepting sewers by a person
or municipality, shall be submitted to the Sanitary Water Board for
its approval before the same are constructed, erected or acquired.
Any such construction or erection which has not been approved by
the Board by written permit, or any treatment works not operated
or maintained in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Board, is hereby also declared to be a nuisance and abatable as herein
provided."
D. All permits for the construction of new sewerage facilities by private
developers or other private interests shall be obtained in the name of
the Borough of Slippery Rock or the Slippery Rock Municipal Authority,
as follows:
(1) The installation of any facility "in, along, across or projecting into
all streams and bodies of water" of the commonwealth, as provided
in an Act approved June 25, 1913, and as amended May 6, 1937,
must be approved by a permit to be obtained from the Water and
Power Resources Board of the Department of Forests and Waters
prior to actual construction.
(2) For the installation of facilities or work within the right-of-way of
any public roadway, the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation requires that a highway occupancy permit be
obtained from that Department.
(3) The state requires that all sewer construction conform to the
regulations for excavation and construction of the Department of
Labor and Industry. Notice by the contractor must be given to the
Department of Labor and Industry on prescribed forms before any
excavation is started. An exception to this requirement of notice is
allowed for any person the majority of whose revenue is not
obtained from contracting or construction, and who digs or orders
dug by its own employees more than 200 excavations in any one
year, where the following requirements are met:
(a) An exemption application is filed with the Department.
84.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 334-13 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 334-13
1:242
§ 334-14. Application requirements.
§ 334-15. Procedure for submitting reports and plans.
(b) All work be supervised by either a registered engineer or a
member of the American Society of Safety Engineers.
(c) A daily file of work information be maintained.
(d) All disabling injuries be reported to the Department.
A. A written application on the forms furnished by the Borough, unless
otherwise indicated, shall be submitted for the purpose of requesting
approval of a sewer line extension, waterline extension and/or any other
work related thereto, and the obtaining or furnishing of water and
sewerage service therefrom.
B. Such application is to be signed by the owner or owners and shall be
subject to the terms and conditions set forth and included herein, and
Borough and Slippery Rock Municipal Authority regulations, and to the
execution of a written agreement, and this application, together with
the regulations of the Borough, shall regulate and control all such
installation and extension.
C. Applications for sewage and water service must be accompanied by all
plans, documents, reports and other required materials as set forth
herein.
D. The submission of the application shall be in strict accordance with the
regulations of the Borough.
A. An applicant for sewer and/or water service shall submit preliminary
plans and reports to the Borough for general review and
recommendations and then prepare and submit applications, final
plans, necessary permits and reports for approval.
B. The applicant shall submit preliminary plans and reports, in triplicate,
in accordance with the following:
(1) A formal request for review and recommendations.
(2) An engineers report setting forth a full description of the proposed
system and setting forth the basis for the design. The report must
include a statement and description of the extent of the area which
it is proposed to include within the system at the present time, and
in the future; the estimated present and future population to be
served; the estimated per capita rates or volume of sewage to be
provided for; the general character of the sewage and the
proportion and nature of any industrial wastes; and such other data
and information as is necessary to evaluate the application.
(3) Where industrial wastes are involved, all applications for service,
regardless of location of the premises, must be accompanied by a
§ 334-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-15
1:243
§ 334-16. Plan preparation.
detailed report setting forth the quantities and character of the
wastes, the proposed rates of discharge and such other facts as
required.
(4) Such report must include a detailed summary, relative to the
drainage areas and areas to be served, of the sewerage or water
system, showing sizes of all sewers, distances between manholes,
grades, capacities and future ultimate flows in main and
intercepting sewers.
(5) Preliminary plan showing the layout of all sewers and manholes,
showing sizes and distance between manholes, grades, types of
sewers, and approximate invert elevations of all manholes. Design
features should be submitted at least in sketch for special
conditions, inverted siphons and such other features.
(6) Copies of such report shall be supplied to the Borough Planning
Commission for review.
C. Final plans. The applicant shall submit five copies of final plans and
reports, and other required items, in accordance with the following:
(1) A formal letter of request for final approval, preparation of an
agreement, and such other related actions are required.
(2) An engineers report setting forth the information and data required
in the preliminary report, and if no revisions or additional data are
required after preliminary review, the preliminary report may be
used as the final report.
(3) All application forms, modules, reports and such other data as
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Health, and all
applications, plans, exhibits and supporting data required for
submittance to all agencies having jurisdiction in order to obtain
licenses, permits and approvals.
(4) Such report must include a detailed summary, relative to the
drainage areas and areas to be served, of the sewerage or water
system, showing sizes of all sewers, distances between manholes,
grades, capacities and future ultimate flows in main and
intercepting sewers.
(5) Preliminary plan showing the layout of all sewers and manholes,
showing sizes and distance between manholes, grades, types of
sewers, and approximate invert elevations of all manholes. Design
features should be submitted at least in sketch form for special
conditions, inverted siphons and such other features.
(6) Copies of such report shall be supplied to the Borough Planning
Commission for review.
§ 334-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 334-16
1:244
§ 334-17. Costs.
A. All final plans must be in uniform size and in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the Sewerage Manual of the State
Department of Health and regulations of the Borough.
B. The plans shall be prepared on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches in size,
with a one-inch border on the left side and a one-half-inch border on all
other sides. A three-inch by five-inch title block shall be located in the
lower right-hand corner.
C. The general plan shall be on the scale not smaller than 300 feet to one
inch, preferably, and not more than 100 feet to one inch. All other plans
shall be drawn to a scale to permit all necessary information to be
shown plainly. Sewer profiles shall be on a horizontal scale of not more
than 50 feet to the inch and a vertical scale of not more than 10 feet to
the inch, and plan view of sewers shall be drawn to the same scale as
the profile view.
D. Subsequent to completion of construction, the applicant shall submit
as-built plans to the Borough. No sewer or water service shall be
furnished until these plans are submitted.
A. The cost of all engineering, permit fees and construction shall be paid
by the applicant.
B. The costs shall include the following:
(1) The cost of all sewer lines and waterlines, of the size required for
the project, none to be less than six inches for waterlines and eight
inches for sewer lines, and of all manholes and other sewer line and
waterline appurtenances.
(2) The cost for connection to existing sewer lines and waterlines.
(3) The cost of all land and rights-of-way; such land and rights-of-way
to be deeded to the Slippery Rock Municipal Authority.
(4) The cost of obtaining all permits, licenses and such other approvals
as required.
(5) The payment of a minimum of 10% of the total construction costs to
defray legal, engineering and overhead cost, if the project is to be
constructed and designed by the Borough. All such costs in excess
of 10% shall be paid by the applicant. Where the project is designed
and constructed by the applicant, the applicant must pay the
Borough costs involved in the evaluation and review of the contract
plans and specifications, field work, legal work, administrative and
such other costs in connection with the project.
(6) All costs due to the Borough as specified, whether the applicant
elects to construct the project himself, or requests the Borough to
undertake the construction, shall be paid prior to the extension of
§ 334-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-17
1:245
§ 334-18. Written agreement.
Applicants shall enter into a written agreement with the Borough prior to
final approval and the execution of any work, said agreement to contain
such conditions as the following:
service; and the written agreement required herein shall contain
provisions for furnishing security for such payment by surety bond,
right to file municipal lien or such other security as the Borough, in
its sole discretion, may require. Such security may include, but is
not limited to, a maintenance bond for a period of one year.
(7) The cost of a resident engineer or inspectors furnished by the
Borough to supervise and/or inspect the construction of the project,
such costs of supervision to be the per diem rate currently in effect
in the area, plus mileage and expenses. Deposits shall be made in
advance for two months' estimated costs and continue each two
months until completion of inspection work, such costs to be
adjusted as required at the end of each period.
(8) The paying of all tapping, sewage treatment and other fees.
(9) Any other related costs.
A. The cost of all construction and application expense to be borne by the
applicant.
B. The materials and workmanship to be in accordance with the
specifications and requirements of the Borough.
C. The highways, streets, alleys and lanes in which sewer and water
extensions are to be located must be dedicated to public use, the lines
and grades thereof established and the rough grading completed.
D. The ownership title to all land and easements, sewer systems, water
systems, related facilities and all rights-of-way to be conveyed to the
Slippery Rock Municipal Authority.
E. The Borough to have the right to make further extensions beyond and
laterally from such sewers and waterlines, such extensions not being
considered as connections subject to refund.
F. The payment of refunds with respect to the sewer lines or waterlines to
the owner for additional new customers abutting on and connected
directly to the lines installed, to be subject to such conditions as set
forth herein or as agreed upon and limited to a number of years.
G. Provision by applicant for permanent easements on all plans of lots for
all sanitary sewers and waterlines, and for future extensions as
required by the Borough. All easements shall be obtained and provided
at the cost of the applicant and conveyed to the Borough prior to
requesting final approval of the construction.
§ 334-17 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 334-18
1:246
H. Provision for all insurance, bonds and other such items as required by
the Borough with respect to municipal improvements, including
sewerage, and also including maintenance bonds where required.
I. Such other related conditions and improvements.
§ 334-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-18
1:247
Chapter 338
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 309.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 334.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
350.
Water — See Ch. 368.
Zoning — See Ch. 375.
§ 338-1. Title.
This chapter shall be generally known and referred to as the "Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 338-2. Applicability.
A. In the Borough of Slippery Rock, all regulated activities and all
activities that may affect stormwater runoff, including land
development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by
this chapter.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive than state law.
C. "Regulated activities" are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. Regulated activities include, but are
not limited to, the following listed items:
(1) Earth disturbance activities.
(2) Land development.
(3) Subdivision.
(4) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces.
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(7) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
(8) Installation of stormwater BMPs.
§ 334-18 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-2
1:248
§ 338-3. Effect of other provisions.
Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes,
laws, rules, statutes, or ordinances. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management, the
specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
§ 338-4. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 338-5. Municipal liability.
§ 338-6. Word usage; definitions.
D. See § 338-8 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
A. Neither the granting of any approval under this chapter, nor the
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or with any condition
imposed by a municipal official hereunder, shall relieve any person from
any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting
therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability
upon the Borough for damages to persons or property.
B. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of
any kind by the Borough, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public
body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural; and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
§ 338-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-6
1:249
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or
maintained."
B. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activity and natural processes at
a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, tillage,
land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops,
or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed
an application for approval to engage in any regulated activities at a
project site within the Borough.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "nonstructural" or "structural."
"Nonstructural" BMPs are measures referred to as operational and/
or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas "structural" BMPs are
measures that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed
to capture and treat stormwater runoff. "Structural" BMPs include,
but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from
large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-
§ 338-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-6
1:250
impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. "Structural" stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank used for storing
rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Butler County Conservation District.
The Butler County Conservation District has the authority under a
delegation agreement executed with the Department of Environmental
Protection to administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations
promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream
and/or stormwater runoff under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DESIGNEE — The agent of this Borough and/or agent of the governing
body involved with the administration, review or enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of
understanding.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a twenty-five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in
the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see
"return period."
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or
other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed. Also see "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
§ 338-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-6
1:251
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed, located such that all
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to convey stormwater runoff and shall include streams,
channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage,
or conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch,
pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which surface water
flows.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land
development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting
activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the
moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth
materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL-VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality,
which satisfies Pa. Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter
93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to anti-degradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is
undeveloped land and not forested, the land use shall be considered as
meadow, unless the natural land cover is documented to generate lower
curve numbers or rational "C" coefficient.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A general, temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOOD-FRINGE — The remaining portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain outside of the floodway boundary.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration,
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as being a special flood hazard area.
Included are lands adjoining a river or stream that have been or may
be inundated by a one-hundred-year flood. Also included are areas that
comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
§ 338-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-6
1:252
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to
time by PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year
frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that
the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet landward from the top
of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a tank, pond or basin.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground,
specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED — (Hydrologic Engineering Center
Hydrologic Modeling System) A computer-based hydrologic modeling
technique adapted to the watershed(s) in Butler County for the Act
167 plan. The model has been calibrated by adjusting key model input
parameters.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pa. Code Title
25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards,
§ 93.4b(a).
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into one of four HSG (A, B, C, and
D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for
bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture defines
the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United
States and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest
TO) GRADE — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of
embankment or bottom of excavation.
(1)
§ 338-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-6
1:253
may be identified from a soil survey report from the local NRCS office
or the County Conservation District.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. "Impervious surface"
(or areas) includes, but is not limited to, roofs, additional indoor living
spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, parking
or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface
areas proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed
to be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) —
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — An approach to land
development that uses various land planning and design practices and
technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource
systems and reduce infrastructure costs. LID still allows land to be
developed, but in a cost-effective manner that helps mitigate potential
environmental impacts.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Butler County Act 167
watershed hydrologic model(s).
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
buildings or the division or allocation of land or space between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features;
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.85
(3)
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 338-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-6
1:254
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County,
Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — The federal government's system for issuance of permits
under the Clean Water Act,86 which is delegated to PADEP in
Pennsylvania.
NOAA ATLAS 14 — Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, United States Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
(2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at internet address
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes not under pressure.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking
areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as "impervious."
(1) Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
"Point Source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where the
municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of
the commonwealth.
(2)
86.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 338-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-6
1:255
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough
of Slippery Rock.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92a.2.87
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be
expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a,
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.88, 89
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of
runoff from a site or subwatershed area to which the post-development
peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which postdevelopment
flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of
predevelopment flows as required to meet the plan requirements and
the goals of Act 167.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored
and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released
from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
88.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 338-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-6
1:256
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected
to recur on the average once every 25 years; or, stated in another way,
the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one given
year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands that serves as a protective filter to
help protect streams/wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land uses.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches, and other similar activities. Road maintenance
activities that do not disturb the subbase of a paved road (such as
milling and overlays) are not considered earth disturbance activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured
(retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth
during or after a storm event.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material
transported by stormwater runoff.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
§ 338-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-6
1:257
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number" (CN).
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a
pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.90
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage), with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See
also "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Runoff from the surface of the land resulting from
precipitation, snow, or ice melt.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants than
are found in typical stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure, natural
or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to,
detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and
infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Butler County
Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff in
Butler County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."91
90.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
91.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 338-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-6
1:258
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) — The
plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance
with this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses regulated
waters of the commonwealth.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or
building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision
by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than
10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwellings, shall be exempt (Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 24792).
SUBWATERSHED AREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria has been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface
water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
92.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 338-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-6
1:259
§ 338-7. General requirements.
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes
but is not limited to wetland areas listed in the state water plan, the
United States Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania and
a wetland area designated by a river basin commission. This definition
is used by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the
United States Army Corps of Engineers.)
A. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in § 338-8:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Borough issues
written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will
be provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements, as
described under §§ 338-10 and 338-11 of this chapter.
(4) The SWM site plan approved by the Borough shall be on site
throughout the duration of the regulated activities.
B. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code (including but not limited to Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control) and the Clean Streams Law.93 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
C. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, conform
to the state water quality requirements, meet all requirements under
the Storm Water Management Act94 and any more stringent
requirements as determined by the Borough.
D. The Borough may, after consultation with PADEP and the Conservation
District, approve measures for meeting the state water quality
requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet
the minimum requirements of and do not conflict with state law,
including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
93.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 338-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-7
1:260
E. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands.
(b) Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect
existing forested buffers.
(c) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(d) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(e) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(f) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(g) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(h) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(i) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(j) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible, and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
F. Impervious areas.
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For developments taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
G. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
§ 338-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-7
1:261
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge.
(1) The applicant must provide an easement for proposed concentrated
flow across adjacent properties to a drainageway or public right-ofway.
(2) Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
H. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
I. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
(with a minimum width of 20 feet and include the one-hundred-year
water surface) shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also,
maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the easement, may
be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing
authority.
J. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.
K. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands),
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility
of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be
obtained from PADEP.
L. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety.
M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on or discharged onto state highway rights-of-way shall
§ 338-7 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-7
1:262
§ 338-8. Exemptions; modifications.
be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
N. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
O. Infiltration BMPs must be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
P. The design of facilities over karst shall include an evaluation and
implementation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
Q. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
the Borough shall permit it on a case-by-case basis.
R. Applicants are encouraged to use low-impact development practices to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and
the state water quality requirements.
S. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the developer shall notify the
downstream municipality and provide a copy of the SWM plan, if
requested, for review and comment.
A. Under no circumstances shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
(1) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(2) Protect health, safety, and property.
(3) Meet special requirements for high-quality (HQ) and exceptionalvalue
(EV) watersheds.
B. The applicant must demonstrate that the following BMPs are being
utilized to the maximum extent practicable to receive consideration for
the exemptions:
(1) Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation, and other
sensitive and special value features.
(2) Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
§ 338-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-8
1:263
(3) Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
(4) Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
(5) Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
(6) Direct runoff to pervious areas.
C. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development/
additional impervious area will not adversely impact the following:
(1) Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
(2) Velocities and erosion.
(3) Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
(4) Existing known problem areas.
(5) Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
(6) Downstream property owners.
D. An applicant proposing regulated activities may be eligible for
exemption from rate control, volume control, or stormwater
management site plan requirements in this chapter according to the
following table:
Table 807.1
Exemptions and Submission Requirements
New Impervious Area1, 2
(square footage) Applicant Must Provide
0 < 2,500 No submission is required
2,500 < 5,000 Documentation of new impervious
surfaces3
5,000 and greater Rate controls, volume controls and
SWM site plan
NOTES:
1 New impervious area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
2 Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious, and gravel
in proposed condition shall be considered impervious.
3 The small project stormwater management application adopted by
resolution of Borough Council shall be used to document new
impervious surfaces.
E. Single-family residential activities.
§ 338-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-8
1:264
(1) Single-family residential activities are exempt from these
requirements, provided the construction:
(a) Complies with §§ 338-7G and 338-8A, B and C;
(b) Has buildings set back 75 feet from downstream property
lines; and
(c) Driveways:
[1] Runoff must discharge onto pervious surface with a gravel
strip or other spreading device.
[2] No more than 1,000 square feet of paved surface may
discharge to any one point.
[3] The length of flow on the pervious surface must exceed the
length of the paved surface flow.
(2) The Borough can require more information or require mitigation of
certain impacts through installation of stormwater management
BMPs if there is a threat to property, health, or safety.
F. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 338-8A, B and C, may be exempted from various
requirements of this chapter if documentation can be provided that a
downstream man-made water body (i.e., reservoir, lake, or man-made
wetlands) has been designed or modified to address the potential
stormwater flooding impacts of the proposed development.
G. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting
(when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear
set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is
subject. The Borough may accept alternative stormwater management
controls under this section, provided that:
(1) The Borough, in consultation with the PADEP (or delegated
authority), determines that meeting the volume control
requirements (See § 338-10.) is not possible or places an undue
hardship on the applicant.
(2) The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to PADEP
(or delegated authority) for NPDES requirements pertaining to
post-construction stormwater management requirements.
(3) The alternative controls are in compliance with all other sections of
this chapter, including but not limited to §§ 338-7D and 338-8A
through C.
H. Agricultural activities are exempt from the rate control and SWM site
plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided the activities
§ 338-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-8
1:265
§ 338-9. Waivers.
are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
I. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
and volume control requirement and SWM site plan preparation
requirement of this chapter, provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102. It should be
noted that temporary roadways are not exempt.
J. The Borough may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Borough believes may pose a
threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
A. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public welfare.
B. All waiver requests must meet the provisions of Subsections G and H of
this section. Waivers shall not be issued from implementing such
measures as necessary to meet state water quality standards and
requirements; protect health, safety, and property; meet special
requirements for high-quality (HQ) and exceptional-value (EV)
watersheds. Municipalities will then consider waivers in accordance
with § 338-7D.
C. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the governing body of
the Borough that any mandatory provision of this chapter is
unreasonable or causes unique or undue unreasonableness or hardship
as it applies to the proposed project, or that an alternate design may
result in a superior result within the context of the findings and
purposes of this chapter, the governing body of the Borough, upon
obtaining the comments and recommendations of the Borough
Engineer, may grant a waiver or relief so that substantial justice may be
done and the public interest is secured, provided that such waiver will
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
D. The applicant shall submit all requests for waivers in writing and shall
include such requests as a part of the plan review and approval process.
The applicant shall state in full the facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of
this chapter that are involved, and the minimum waiver or relief that is
necessary. The applicant shall state how the requested waiver and how
the applicant's proposal shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent or purpose and general principles of this
chapter.
E. The Borough shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver
requests.
F. The Borough may charge a fee for each waiver request, which shall be
used to offset the administrative costs of reviewing the waiver request.
§ 338-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-9
1:266
The applicant shall also agree to reimburse the Borough for reasonable
and necessary fees that may be incurred by the Borough Engineer in
any review of a waiver request.
G. In granting waivers, the Borough may impose reasonable conditions
that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements that are to be modified.
H. The Borough may grant applications for waivers when the following
findings are made, as relevant:
(1) That the waiver shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent of this chapter.
(2) That the waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief.
(3) That the applicant is not requesting a waiver based on cost
considerations.
(4) That existing downgradient stormwater problems will not be
exacerbated.
(5) That runoff is not being diverted to a different drainage area.
(6) That increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or
roadways will not occur.
(7) That potential icing conditions will not occur.
(8) That increase of peak flow or volume from the site will not occur.
(9) That erosive conditions due to increased peak flows or volume will
not occur.
(10) That adverse impact to water quality will not result.
(11) That increased one-hundred-year floodplain levels will not result.
(12) That increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses will
not result from the waiver.
(13) That the amount of stormwater generated has been minimized to
the greatest extent allowed.
(14) That infiltration of runoff throughout the proposed site has been
provided where practicable, and predevelopment groundwater
recharge protected.
(15) That peak flow attenuation of runoff has been provided.
(16) That long-term operation and maintenance activities are
established.
§ 338-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-9
1:267
§ 338-10. Volume controls.
(17) That the receiving streams and/or water bodies will not be
adversely impacted in flood-carrying capacity, aquatic habitat,
channel stability and erosion and sedimentation.
A. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
and in Appendix C of this chapter95 shall be utilized for all regulated
activities to the maximum extent practicable.
B. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method as defined below. For
regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not require
hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter
establishes no preference for either method; therefore, the applicant
may select either method on the basis of economic considerations, the
intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures
associated with each methodology, and other factors.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions.
(a) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume
when compared to the predevelopment total runoff volume for
the two-year/twenty-four-hour storm event.
(b) For hydrologic modeling purposes:
[1] Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations.
[2] Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present
within the proposed project site, shall be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
greater than one acre or for projects that require detailed design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into surface waters of the
95.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 338-9 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-10
1:268
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases, at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(d) Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed
elevation of the stormwater BMPs are required. Infiltration
tests shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP Manual.
Notification of the Borough shall be provided to allow
witnessing of the testing.
(3) In cases where it is not possible or desirable to use infiltrationbased
best management practices to partially fulfill the
requirements in either Subsection B(1) or (2) of this section, the
following procedure shall be used:
(a) At a minimum, the following documentation shall be provided
to justify the decision to not use infiltration BMPs:
[1] Description of and justification for field infiltration/
permeability testing with respect to the type of test and
test locations.
[2] An interpretive narrative describing existing site soils and
their structure as these relate to the interaction between
soils and water occurring on the site. In addition to
providing soil and soil profile descriptions, this narrative
shall identify depth to seasonal high-water tables and
depth to bedrock, and provide a description of all
subsurface elements (fragipans and other restrictive
layers, geology, etc.) that influence the direction and rate
of subsurface water movement.
[3] A qualitative assessment of the site's contribution to
annual aquifer recharge shall be made, along with
identification of any restrictions or limitations associated
with the use of engineered infiltration facilities.
[4] The provided documentation must be signed and sealed by
a professional engineer or geologist.
(b) The following water quality pollutant load reductions will be
required for all disturbed areas within the proposed
development:
§ 338-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-10
1:269
§ 338-11. Rate controls.
§ 338-12. Sensitive areas and stormwater hotspots.
Pollutant Load Units
Required
Reduction
Total suspended solids
(TSS)
Pounds 85%
Total phosphorous (TP) Pounds 85%
Total nitrate (NO3) Pounds 50%
(c) The performance criteria for water quality best management
practices shall be determined from the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, most current
version.
C. The applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual must be used in
calculations to establish volume control.
A. Lands contained within Butler County that have not had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 stormwater management plan:
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year storms.
B. Lands contained within Butler County that have had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 stormwater management plan:
(1) The post-development peak discharge rates shall be in accordance
with the approved release rate map for the following watersheds
(see appendixes for release rate map96):
(a) Connoquenessing Creek Watershed.
A. Sensitive areas and water quality sensitive developments as defined
below which require special consideration with regard to stormwater
management.
(1) "Sensitive areas" are defined as those areas that, if developed, have
the potential to endanger a water supply. These areas consist of the
delineated one-year zone of contribution and direct upslope areas
tributary to the water supply wells. Municipalities may update the
sensitive area boundaries based on new research or studies as
required.
(2) "Stormwater hotspots" are defined as a land development project
that has a high potential to endanger local water quality and could
potentially threaten groundwater reservoirs. The Municipal
96.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 338-10 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-12
1:270
§ 338-13. Erosion and sedimentation control.
Engineer will determine what constitutes these classifications on
a case-by-case basis. The PADEP wellhead protection contaminant
source list shall be used as a guide in these determinations.
Industrial manufacturing site and hazardous material storage
areas must provide NPDES SIC codes.
B. Performance standards.
(1) The location of the boundaries of sensitive areas is set by drainage
areas tributary to any public water supply. The exact location of
these boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined using mapping at a scale which accurately defines the
limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is within the sensitive
area (in whole or in part), two-foot contour interval mapping shall
be provided to define the limits of the sensitive area. If the project
site is adjacent to but within 500 linear feet of a defined sensitive
area, a five-foot contour interval map defining the limits of the
sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater management
plan to document the site's location relative to the sensitive area.
(2) Stormwater hotspots may be required to prepare and implement a
stormwater pollution prevention plan and file notice of intent as
required under the provisions of the EPA Industrial Stormwater
NPDES Permit Requirements.
(3) Stormwater hotspots must use an acceptable pretreatment BMP
prior to volume control and/or rate control BMPs. Acceptable
pretreatment BMPs for these developments include those based on
filtering, settling, or chemical reaction processes such as
coagulation.
A. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 92a and 102, as required and applicable, as follows:97
(1) The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
(2) Development of written plans.
(3) Submission of plans for approval.
(4) Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits.
(5) Maintaining plans and permits on site.
B. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the Butler County Conservation
District must be provided to the Borough of Slippery Rock as part of any
final plan submission.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 338-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-13
1:271
§ 338-14. Protected watershed requirements.
C. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the Butler County Conservation
District, shall be available at the project site at all times if required
under Chapter 102.
A. For any regulated activity within a protected watershed (high-quality or
exceptional-value), the applicant shall meet requirements as contained
in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 as required and applicable.
B. An existing resources and site analysis plan shall be prepared to
provide the developer and the Borough with a comprehensive analysis
of existing conditions, both on the proposed development site and
within 500 feet of the site. Conditions beyond the parcel boundaries
may be described on the basis of existing published data available from
governmental agencies and from aerial photographs. The Borough shall
review the plan to assess its accuracy, conformance with Borough
ordinances, and likely impact upon the natural and cultural resources
on the property. The following information shall be required:
(1) Complete current perimeter boundary survey of the property to be
subdivided or developed prepared by a registered surveyor,
showing all courses, distances, and area and tie-ins to all adjacent
intersections.
(2) A vertical aerial photograph enlarged to a scale not less detailed
than one inch equals 400 feet, with the site boundaries clearly
marked.
(3) Natural features, including:
(a) Contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet. (Ten-foot
intervals are permissible beyond the parcel boundaries,
interpolated from USGS published maps.) Contour lines shall
be based on information derived from a topographic survey for
the property, evidence of which shall be submitted, including
the date and source of the contours. Datum to which contour
elevations refer and references to known, established bench
marks and elevations shall be included on the plan.
(b) Steep slopes in the following ranges: 15% to 25%, 25% and
greater. The location of these slopes shall be graphically
depicted by category on the plan. Slope shall be measured over
three or more two-foot contour intervals.
(c) Areas within the floodway, flood-fringe, and approximated
floodplain.
(d) Watercourses, either continuous or intermittent and named or
unnamed, and lakes, ponds or other water features as depicted
on the USGS Quadrangle Map, most current edition.
§ 338-13 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-14
1:272
(e) Wetlands and wetland margins.
(f) Riparian buffers.
(g) Soil types and their boundaries, as mapped by the USDA
Natural Resource Conservation Service, including a table
listing the soil characteristics pertaining to suitability for
construction and, in unsewered areas, for septic suitability.
Alluvial and hydric soils shall specifically be depicted on the
plan.
(h) Existing vegetation, denoted by type, including woodlands,
hedgerows, tree masses, tree lines, individual freestanding
trees over six inches DBH, wetland vegetation, pasture or
croplands, orchards, permanent grassland, old fields, and any
other notable vegetative features on the site. Vegetative types
shall be described by plant community, relative age, and
condition.
(i) Any identified Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI)
site conflicts.
(j) Geologic formations on the tract, including rock outcroppings,
cliffs, sinkholes, and fault lines, based on available published
information or more detailed data obtained by the applicant.
(4) Existing man-made features, including:
(a) Location, dimensions, and use of existing buildings and
driveways.
(b) Location, names, widths, center-line courses, paving widths,
identification numbers, and rights-of-way of existing streets
and alleys.
(c) Location of trails that have been in public use (pedestrian,
equestrian, bicycle, etc.).
(d) Location and size of existing sanitary sewage facilities.
(e) Location and size of drainage facilities.
(f) Location of water supply facilities, including wellhead
protection areas.
(g) Any easements, deed restrictions, rights-of-way, or any other
encumbrances upon the land, including location, size, and
ownership.
(h) Site features or conditions such as hazardous waste, dumps,
underground tanks, active and abandoned wells, quarries,
landfills, sand mounds, and artificial land conditions.
§ 338-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-14
1:273
(5) Total acreage of the tract, the adjusted tract area, where
applicable, and the constrained land area with detailed supporting
calculations.
C. Stormwater management system concept plan. A written and graphic
concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater
management system shall be prepared and include:
(1) Preliminary selection and location of proposed structural
stormwater controls;
(2) Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as
grass channels, swales, and storm drains;
(3) Location of floodplain/floodway limits;
(4) Relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and
drainages;
(5) Preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications,
such as bridge or culvert crossings.
D. Consultation meeting. Prior to any stormwater management permit
application submission, the landowner or developer shall meet with the
Borough for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the postdevelopment
stormwater management system to be utilized in the
proposed project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time
of the preliminary plan or other early step in the development process.
The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development
stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project,
as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential
ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design
engineering is commenced.
E. All proposed regulated activities within a protected watershed shall
utilize, to the maximum extent possible, low-impact development
practices as contained in Appendix C.98
F. SWM plan and report shall address the following:
(1) Design using nonstructural BMPs:
(a) Lot configuration and clustering:
[1] Reduced individual lot impacts by concentrated/clustered
uses and lots.
[2] Lots/development configured to avoid critical natural
areas.
[3] Lots/development configured to take advantage of
effective mitigative stormwater practices.
98.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 338-14 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-14
1:274
[4] Lots/development configured to fit natural topography.
(b) Minimum disturbance:
[1] Define disturbance zones (excavation/grading) for the site
and individual lots to protect maximum total site area from
disturbance.
[2] Barriers/flagging proposed to protect designated
nondisturbance areas.
[3] Considered mitigative practices for minimal disturbance
areas (e.g., soil restoration).
[4] Considered reforestation and revegetation opportunities.
(c) Reduce impervious coverage:
[1] Reduced road width.
[2] Reduced driveway lengths and widths.
[3] Reduced parking ratios and sizes.
[4] Utilized porous surfaces for applicable features.
(d) Stormwater disconnected from impervious area:
[1] Disconnected drives/walkways/small impervious areas to
natural areas.
[2] Use rain barrels and/or cisterns for lot irrigation.
(2) Apply structural BMP selection process that meets runoff quantity
and quality needs:
(a) Manage close to source with collection with conveyance
minimized.
(b) Consistent with site factors (e.g., soils, slope, available space,
amount of sensitive areas, pollutant removal needs).
(c) Minimize footprint and integrate into already disturbed areas/
other building program components (e.g., recharge beneath
parking areas, vegetated roofs).
(d) Consider other benefits such as aesthetic, habitat, recreational
and educational benefits.
(e) BMPs selected based on maintenance needs that fit owner/
users.
(f) BMPs sustainable using a long-term maintenance plan.
§ 338-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-15
1:275
§ 338-15. Design criteria for stormwater management and drainage
facilities.
A. General design guidelines.
(1) Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless:
(a) The watersheds are subwatersheds of a common watershed
which join together within the perimeter of the property;
(b) The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate discharge
onto adjacent lands; or
(c) Easements from the affected landowner(s) are provided.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
predevelopment flow type condition.
(3) Innovative stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are
encouraged (e.g., rooftop storage, dry wells, cisterns, recreation
area ponding, diversion structures, porous pavements, holding
tanks, infiltration systems, in-line storage in storm sewers, and
grading patterns). They shall be located, designed, and constructed
in accordance with the latest technical guidance published by
PADEP, provided they are accompanied by detailed engineering
plans and performance capabilities and supporting site-specific
soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and infiltration rate data to
verify proposed designs. Additional guidance from other sources
may be accepted at the discretion of the Municipal Engineer (a
preapplication meeting is suggested).
(4) All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
(5) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
Borough shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the continuation or exacerbation of a documented
adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed, as
identified in the plan.
(6) The design and construction of multiple-use stormwater detention
facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses, including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
etc. Consultation with the Borough and prior approval are required
§ 338-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-15
1:276
before design. Provision for permanent wet ponds with stormwater
management capabilities may also be appropriate.
(a) Multiple-use basins should be constructed so that potentially
dangerous conditions are not created.
(b) Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed for a
slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are
not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas
are clearly separated and secure.
(7) Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter
105 concerning dam safety.
B. Stormwater management facility design considerations. All stormwater
management facilities shall meet the following design requirements:
(1) No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a municipal or state roadway
without approval from the Borough or PennDOT.
(2) The top, or toe, of any slope shall be located a minimum of 10 feet
from any property line.
(3) The minimum horizontal distance between any stormwater holding
facility shall be 25 feet. The lowest floor elevation of any structure
constructed immediately adjacent to a detention basin or other
stormwater facility shall be a minimum of two feet above the onehundred-
year water surface elevation.
(4) Stormwater management facility bottom (or surface of permanent
pool) elevations must be greater than adjacent floodplain
elevations (FEMA or HEC-RAS analysis). If no floodplain is defined,
bottom elevations must be greater than existing ground elevations
50 feet from top of stream bank in the facility's vicinity.
(5) Basin outflow culverts discharging into floodplains must account
for tailwater. Tailwater corresponding to the one-hundred-yearfloodplain
elevation must be used for all design storms, or the
applicant may elect to determine flood elevations of the adjacent
watercourse for each design storm. The floodplain is assumed to be
50 feet from top of stream bank in areas where a floodway is not
designated, or no other evidence is provided.
(6) The invert of all stormwater management facilities and
underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table.
The invert of stormwater facilities may be lowered if adequate
subsurface drainage is provided. Flows from underdrains need not
be accounted for in volume or rate control calculations.
§ 338-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-15
1:277
(7) Whenever possible, the side slopes and basin shape shall be
amenable to the natural topography. Vertical side slopes and
rectangular basins shall be avoided whenever possible.
(8) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed 3:1 and may be
further reduced if the soil has unstable characteristics.
(9) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed 3:1.
(10) Unless specifically designed as a volume control facility, all
stormwater management facilities shall have a minimum slope of
2% extending radially out from the principal outlet structure.
Facilities designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs may have a
bottom slope of zero.
(11) Impervious low-flow channels are not permitted within stormwater
management facilities.
(12) Unless specifically designed as a volume control or water quality
facility, all stormwater management facilities must empty over a
period of time not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours
from the end of the facility's inflow hydrograph. Infiltration tests
performed at the facility locations and proposed basin bottom
depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual, must support time-toempty
calculations if infiltration is a factor.
(13) Energy dissipaters and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
Discharges to drainage swales shall be dissipated, or piped, to an
acceptable point.
(14) Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(a) Minimal-maintenance, saturation-tolerant vegetation must be
provided in basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs.
(15) A safety fence may be required, at the discretion of the Borough,
for any stormwater management facility. The fence shall be a
minimum of four feet high and of a material acceptable to the
Borough. A gate with a minimum opening of 10 feet shall be
provided for maintenance access.
(16) Principal outlet structures. The primary outlet structure shall be
designed to pass all design storms (up to and including the onehundred-
year event) without discharging through the emergency
spillway. All principal outlet structures shall:
(a) Be constructed of reinforced concrete or an alternative
material approved by the Municipal Engineer. When approved
for use, all metal risers shall:
§ 338-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-15
1:278
[1] Be suitably coated to prevent corrosion.
[2] Have a concrete base attached with a watertight
connection. The base shall be sufficient weight to prevent
flotation of the riser.
[3] Provide a trash rack or similar appurtenance to prevent
debris from entering the riser.
[4] Provide an anti-vortex device, consisting of a thin vertical
plate normal to the basin berm.
(b) Provide trash racks to prevent clogging of primary outflow
structure stages for all orifices.
(c) Provide outlet aprons and shall extend to the toe of the basin
slope at a minimum.
(17) Emergency spillways. Any stormwater management facility
designed to store runoff shall provide an emergency spillway
designed to convey the one-hundred-year post-development peak
rate flow with a blocked primary outlet structure. The emergency
spillway shall be designed per the following requirements:
(a) The top of embankment elevation shall provide a minimum one
foot of freeboard above the maximum water surface elevation.
This is to be calculated when the spillway functions for the onehundred-
year post-development inflow, with a blocked outlet
structure.
(b) Avoid locating on fill areas, whenever possible.
(c) The spillway shall be armored to prevent erosion during the
one-hundred-year post-development flow, with a blocked
primary outlet structure.
[1] Synthetic liners or riprap may be used, and calculations
sufficient to support proposed armor must be provided. An
earthen plug must be used to accurately control the
spillway invert if riprap is the proposed armoring material.
Emergency spillway armor must extend up the sides of the
spillway and continue at full width to a minimum of 10 feet
past the toe of slope.
(d) Municipal Engineer may require the use of additional
protection when slopes exceed 4:1 and spillway velocities
might exceed NRCS standards for the particular soils involved.
(e) Any underground stormwater management facility (pipe
storage systems) must have a method to bypass flows higher
than the required design (up to a one-hundred-year postdevelopment
inflow) without structural failure or causing
downstream harm or safety risks.
§ 338-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-15
1:279
(18) Stormwater management basins. Design of stormwater
management facilities having three feet or more of water depth
(measured vertically from the lowest elevation in the facility to the
crest of the emergency spillway) shall meet the following additional
requirements:
(a) The maximum water depth within any stormwater
management facility shall be no greater than eight feet when
functioning through the primary outlet structure.
(b) The top of embankment width shall be:
[1] For embankments up to four feet, width shall be at least six
feet;
[2] For embankments between four and six feet, width shall be
at least eight feet;
[3] For embankments over six feet, width shall be at least 10
feet.
(c) A ten-foot-wide access to the basin bottom must be provided
with a maximum longitudinal slope of 10%.
(d) Berms shall be constructed using soils that conform to the
unified soil classification of CH, MH, CL or ML. Soils used shall
be tested to determine its density analysis per ASTM 698. The
embankments will be constructed in a maximum of six-inch
lifts. The lifts will each be compacted to a density at least 98%
of its maximum dry density. Each layer of compacted fill shall
be tested to determine its density per ASTM 2922 or ASTM
3017. One test per 50 cubic yards of material placed (at least
one per layer) shall be performed by an independent testing
agency.
(e) A cutoff and key trench of impervious material shall be
provided under all embankments four feet or greater in height.
The cutoff trench shall run the entire length of the
embankment and tie into undisturbed natural ground.
(f) Antiseep collars, or a PADEP-approved alternative, must be
provided on all outflow culverts in accordance with the
methodology contained in the latest edition of the PADEP E&S
Manual. An increase in seepage length of 15% must be used in
accordance with the requirements for permanent antiseep
collars.
(19) Construction of stormwater management facilities:
(a) Basins used for rate control only shall be installed prior to or
concurrent with any earthmoving or land disturbances which
they will serve. The phasing of their construction shall be noted
in the narrative and on the plan.
§ 338-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-15
1:280
(b) Basins that include water quality or recharge components shall
have those components installed in such a manner as to not
disturb or diminish their effectiveness.
(c) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times, with copies being forwarded to
the Municipal Engineer upon request.
(d) Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures
shall be established on the sides and base of all earthen basins
within 15 days of construction.
(20) Exceptions to these requirements may be made at the discretion of
the Borough for BMPs that retain or detain water but are of a much
smaller scale than traditional stormwater management facilities.
C. Stormwater-carrying facilities.
(1) All storm sewer pipes, grass waterways, open channels, swales and
other stormwater-carrying facilities that service drainage areas
within the site must be able to convey post-development runoff
from the ten-year design storm.
(2) Stormwater management facilities that convey off-site water
through the site shall be designed to convey the twenty-five-year
storm event (or larger events, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer).
(3) All developments shall include provisions that allow for the
overland conveyance and flow of the post-development onehundred-
year storm event without damage to public or private
property.
(4) Storm sewers.
(a) Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff
without surcharging inlets for the ten-year storm event.
(b) When connecting to an existing storm sewer system, the
applicant must demonstrate that the proposed system will not
exacerbate any existing stormwater problems and that
adequate downstream capacity exists.
(c) Inlets, manholes, pipes, and culverts shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications set forth in PennDOT's
Publication 408, and as detailed in PennDOT's Publication
72M, Standards for Roadway Construction (RC), or other detail
approved by the Municipal Engineer. All material and
construction details (inlets, manholes, pipe trenches, etc.)
must be shown on the SWM site plan and a note added that all
construction must be in accordance with PennDOT's
Publication 408 and PennDOT's Publication 72M, latest
edition. A note shall be added to the plan stating that all
§ 338-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-15
1:281
frames, concrete top units, and grade adjustment rings shall be
set in a bed of full mortar according to Publication 408.
(d) A minimum pipe size of 15 inches in diameter shall be used in
all roadway systems (public or private) proposed for
construction in the Borough. Pipes shall be designed to provide
a minimum velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second when flowing full,
but in all cases, the slope shall be no less then 0.5%. Arch pipe
of equivalent cross-sectional area may be substituted in lieu of
circular pipe where cover or utility conflict conditions exist.
(e) All storm sewer pipes shall be laid to a minimum depth of one
foot from subgrade to the crown of pipe.
(f) In curbed roadway sections, the maximum encroachment of
water on the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a
through travel lane or one inch less than the depth of curb
during the ten-year design storm of five-minute duration.
Gutter depth shall be verified by inlet capture/capacity
calculations that account for road slope and opening area.
[1] Inlets shall be placed at a maximum of 400 feet apart.
[2] Inlets shall be placed so drainage cannot cross
intersections or street center lines.
(g) Standard Type "C" inlets with eight-inch hoods shall be used
along curbed roadway networks. Type "C" inlets with ten-inch
hoods that provide a two-inch sump condition may be used
with approval of the Municipal Engineer when roadway
longitudinal slopes are 1.0% or less.
(h) For inlets containing a change in pipe size, the elevation for the
crown of the pipes shall be the same, or the smaller pipe's
crown shall be at a higher elevation.
(i) All inlets shall provide a minimum two-inch drop between the
lowest inlet pipe invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert
elevation.
(j) On curbed sections, a double inlet shall be placed at the low
point of sag vertical curves, or an inlet shall be placed on each
side of the low point at a distance not to exceed 100 feet, or at
an elevation not to exceed 0.2 foot above the low point.
(k) At all roadway low points, swales and easements shall be
provided behind the curb or swale and through adjacent
properties to channelize and direct any overflow of stormwater
runoff away from dwellings and structures.
(l) All inlets in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicycle-safe
grating. A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site
plan or inlet details therein.
§ 338-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-15
1:282
(m) Inlets must be sized to accept the specified pipe sizes without
knocking out any of the inlet corners. All pipes entering or
exiting inlets shall be cut flush with the inside wall of the inlet.
A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site plan or inlet
details therein.
(n) Inlets shall have weep holes covered with geotextile fabric
placed at appropriate elevations to completely drain the
subgrade prior to placing the base and surface course on
roadways.
(o) Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater then five feet in
depth shall be equipped with ladder rungs and shall be
detailed on the SWM site plan.
(p) Inlets shall not have a sump condition in the bottom (unless
designed as a water quality BMP or specifically approved by
the Borough). Pipe shall be flush with the bottom of the box, or
concrete channels shall be poured.
(q) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on continuous
storm sewer systems at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5°, and at all
points of convergence of two or more storm sewer pipes.
(r) All storm drainage piping shall be provided with either
reinforced concrete headwalls or end sections of compatible
material as the pipe involved at its entrance and discharge.
(s) Outlet protection and energy dissipaters shall be provided at
all surface discharge points in order to minimize erosion
consistent with the E&S Manual.
[1] Flow velocities and volumes from any storm sewer shall
not result in a degradation of the receiving channel.
(t) Stormwater roof drains and pipes shall not be connected to
storm sewers or discharge onto impervious areas without
approval by the Municipal Engineer.
(5) Swale conveyance facilities.
(a) Swales must be able to convey post-development runoff from a
ten-year design storm with six inches of freeboard to top of the
swale.
(b) Swales shall have side slopes no steeper than 3:1.
(c) All swales shall be designed, labeled on the SWM site plan, and
details provided to adequately construct and maintain the
design dimension of the swales.
§ 338-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-15
1:283
§ 338-16. Calculation methodology.
(d) Swales shall be designed for stability using velocity or shear
criteria. Velocity criteria may be used for channels with less
than 10% slope. Shear criteria may be used for all swales.
Documentation must be provided to support velocity and/or
shear limitations used in calculations.
(e) Where swale bends occur, the computed velocities or shear
stresses shall be multiplied by the following factor for the
purpose of designing swale erosion protection:
[1] When swale bend is 30° to 60°: 1.75.
[2] When swale bend is 60° to 90°: 2.00.
[3] When swale bend is 90° or greater: 2.50.
(f) Manning's "n" values used for swale capacity design must
reflect the permanent condition.
A. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual, as amended herein.
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or the NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Methodology.
Other methods shall be selected by the design professional based on
the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
C. Rainfall values.
(1) Rational Method. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves,
Publication 584, Chapter 7A, latest edition, shall be used in
conjunction with the appropriate time of concentration and return
period.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. The Soil Conservation Service Type
II, twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in
conjunction with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14 or be
consistent with the following table:
Return Interval
(years)
24-hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
1 2.02
2 2.41
10 3.38
25 4.00
50 4.50
§ 338-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-16
1:284
Return Interval
(years)
24-hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
100 5.03
D. Runoff volume.
(1) Rational Method: not to be used to calculate runoff volume.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. This method shall be used to
estimate the change in volume due to regulated activities.
Combining curve numbers for land areas proposed for development
with curve numbers for areas unaffected by the proposed
development into a single weighted curve number is not
acceptable.
E. Peak flow rates.
(1) Rational Method. This method may be used for design of
conveyance facilities only. Extreme caution should be used by the
design professional if the watershed has more than one main
drainage channel, if the watershed is divided so that hydrologic
properties are significantly different in one versus the other, if the
time of concentration exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff
volume is an important factor. The combination of Rational Method
hydrographs based on timing shall be prohibited.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method.
(a) This method is recommended for design of stormwater
management facilities and where stormwater runoff volume
must be taken into consideration. The following provides
guidance on the model applicability:
[1] NRCS TR-55: limited to 100 acres in size.
[2] NRCS TR-20, WinTR-20, WinTR-55, HEC-HMS: no
watershed size limitations
[3] Other models as preapproved by the Municipal Engineer.
(b) The NRCS Antecedent Runoff Condition II (ARC II, previously
AMC II) must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous
simulation models that vary the ARC are not permitted for
stormwater management purposes.
(3) For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth
of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
F. Runoff coefficients.
(1) Rational Method. Use Table D-1 (Appendix D).99
§ 338-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-16
1:285
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. Use Table D-2 (Appendix D). Curve
numbers (CN) should be rounded to tenths for use in hydrologic
models as they are a design tool with statistical variability. For
large sites, CNs should realistically be rounded to the nearest
whole number.
(3) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious area conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition).
(4) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow (good condition).
G. Design storm.
(1) All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-year, two-year, ten-year, twenty-five-year, fiftyyear,
and one-hundred-year hydrographs through the facility using
the Storage Indication Method or Modified Puls Method. The
design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph.
(2) The stormwater management and drainage system shall be
designed to safely convey the post-development one-hundred-year
storm event to stormwater detention facilities, for the purpose of
meeting peak rate control.
(3) All structures (culvert or bridges) proposed to convey runoff under
a municipal road shall be designed to pass the fifty-year design
storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the
lowest point along the top of the roadway.
H. Time of concentration.
(1) The time of concentration is to represent the average condition that
best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. The following
time of concentration (Tc) computational methodologies shall be
used unless another method is preapproved by the Municipal
Engineer:
(a) Predevelopment: NRCS Lag Equation:
Time of concentration = Tc = [(Tlog/0.6) * 60] (minutes)
99.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 338-16 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-16
1:286
Where:
Tlag = Lag time (hours)
L = Hydraulic length of watershed (feet)
Y = Average overland slope of watershed (percent)
S = Maximum retention in watershed as defined by
S = [(1,000/CN) -10]
CN = NRCS curve number for watershed
(b) Post-development: commercial, industrial, or other areas with
large impervious areas (>20% impervious area): NRCS
Segmental Method. The length of sheet flow shall be limited to
100 feet. Tc for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using
Manning's Equation.
(c) Post-development: residential, cluster, or other low-impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area: NRCS Log
Equation or NRCS Segmental Method.
(2) Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
(a) The post-development Tc shall never be greater that the
predevelopment Tc for any watershed or subwatershed. This
includes when the designer has specifically used swales to
reduce flow velocities. In the event that the designer believes
that the post-development Tc is greater, it will still be set by
default equal to the predevelopment Tc for modeling purposes.
(b) The minimum Tc for any watershed shall be five minutes.
(c) The designer may choose to assume a five-minute Tc for any
post-development watershed or subwatershed without
providing any computations.
(d) The designer must provide computations for all
predevelopment Tc paths. A five-minute Tc cannot be assumed
for predevelopment.
(e) Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been
made to convey runoff from all new impervious coverage to
best management practices) may be assumed to represent the
predevelopment conditions for purpose of Tc calculation.
I. Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed depressions in areas
underlain by limestone or carbonate geologic features shall be excluded
from the modeled point of analysis defining predevelopment flows. If
left undisturbed during construction activities, areas draining to closed
depressions may also be used to reduce peak runoff rates in the post-
§ 338-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-16
1:287
§ 338-17. Approval of SWM site plan required.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for the
exemptions provided in § 338-8, the final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or
the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until
the applicant has received written approval of a SWM site plan from the
Borough.
§ 338-18. Contents of SWM site plan and report.
The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the Borough in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat and
well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be rejected. Appropriate
sections from Chapter 350, Subdivision and Land Development, and other
applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM site
plan.
development analysis. New, additional contributing runoff should not be
directed to existing sinkholes or closed depressions.
J. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning's Equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. The Manning's Equation should not
be used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Manning's "n" values shall be obtained from PennDOT's
Drainage Manual, Publication 584. Inlet control shall be checked at all
inlet boxes to ensure the headwater depth during the ten-year design
event is contained below the top of grate for each inlet box.
K. The Borough has the authority to require that computed existing runoff
rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions and site history.
If the designer can substantiate, through actual physical calibration,
that more appropriate runoff and time of concentration values should
be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate variations may be made
upon review and recommendation of the Borough.
A. SWM site plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Plans shall be of one size and in a form that meets the requirements
for recording in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Butler
County.
(a) Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch equals no more than 50 feet;
(b) Plans for tracts of 20 acres or more shall be drawn at a scale of
one inch equals no more than 100 feet;
(c) Lettering shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans are
reduced to 1/2 size.
§ 338-16 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-18
1:288
(2) The name of the development; name and location address of the
property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site plan.
(3) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(4) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(5) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
(6) A location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet
which illustrates the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(7) Metes and bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
(8) Existing and final contours at the following intervals:
(a) Slopes less than 5%: no greater than one foot;
(b) Slopes between 5% and 15%: no greater than two feet;
(c) Steep slopes (greater than 15%): five-foot contour intervals
may be used.
(9) Perimeters of existing water bodies within the project area,
including stream banks, lakes, ponds, springs, field-delineated
wetlands or other bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard
boundaries (FEMA-delineated floodplains and floodways), areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved, the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site, and overland drainage paths. In
addition, any areas necessary to determine downstream impacts,
where required for proposed stormwater management facilities,
must be shown.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
waterlines on and within 50 feet of property lines, including inlets,
manholes, valves, meters, poles, chambers, junction boxes, and
other utility system components.
(11) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(12) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the hydraulic soil
group classification, including rock outcroppings.
(13) Proposed impervious surfaces (structures, roads, paved areas, and
buildings), including plans and profiles of roads and paved areas
and floor elevations of buildings.
(14) Existing and proposed land use(s).
§ 338-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-18
1:289
(15) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs.
(16) The location and clear identification of the nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(17) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities,
shown on a plan separate from the SWM site plan (typically an E&S
plan).
(18) A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress to
and egress from a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an
easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the
plan granting the Borough or its designees access to all easements
via the nearest public right-of-way.
(19) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
(20) Construction sequence.
(21) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operations,
and maintenance responsibilities.
(22) Notes and statements.
(a) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed without prior approval by the Borough.
(b) A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is part
of the SWM site plan.
(c) A note indicating that record drawings will be provided for all
stormwater facilities prior to occupancy or the release of the
surety bond.
(d) The following signature block for the registered professional
preparing the stormwater management plan:
"I, __________________, hereby certify that the stormwater
management plan meets all design standards and criteria
of the Borough of Slippery Rock's Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
(e) The following signature block for the Municipal Engineer
reviewing the stormwater management plan:
"I, __________________, have reviewed this stormwater
management plan in accordance with the design standards
and criteria of the Borough of Slippery Rock's Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 338-18 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-18
1:290
B. SWM site report shall include (but not be limited to):
(1) General data, including:
(a) Project name.
(b) Project location; address of the property site.
(c) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant/owner
of the property.
(d) Name, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
engineering seal of the individual preparing the SWM site
report.
(e) Date of submission and revisions.
(2) Project description narrative that clearly discusses the project and
provides the following information, where applicable:
(a) Narrative:
[1] Statement of the regulated activity describing what is
being proposed; overall stormwater management concept
with description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications and
materials to be used for stormwater management
facilities.
[2] Expected project schedule.
[3] Location map showing the project site and its location
relative to release rate districts.
[4] Detailed description of the existing site conditions,
including a site evaluation completed for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas
such as brownfields.
[5] Total site area, pre and post, which must be equal or have
an explanation as to why it is not.
[6] Total site impervious area.
[7] Total off-site areas.
[8] Number and description of stormwater management
facilities.
[9] Type of development.
[10] Predevelopment land use.
§ 338-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-18
1:291
[11] Whether site is a water quality sensitive (WQS)
development.
[12] Whether site is in a defined sensitive area.
[13] Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
[14] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural
computations for all stormwater management facilities.
[15] A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features,
including detention facilities and other stormwater
management elements.
[16] Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility
for all permanent stormwater management facilities.
[17] Other pertinent information, as required.
(b) Summary tables:
[1] Predevelopment hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions,
curve numbers (CN), computation of average slope,
hydraulic length, computed time of concentration.
[2] Existing condition's runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
[3] Post-development runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
[4] Undetained areas, areas to ponds.
[5] Land use for each subarea.
[6] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve numbers
(CN).
[7] Time of concentration computed for each subarea.
[8] Post-development peak rate of runoff routed to ponds and
out.
[9] Pond maximum return period design data, including
maximum water surface elevation, berm elevation, and
emergency spillway elevation.
[10]Water quality depth and volume requirements.
(c) Calculations:
[1] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations, calculations, assumptions, and criteria for
the design of all stormwater BMPs.
[2] Details of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation, embankment
§ 338-18 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-18
1:292
side slopes, top width of embankment, emergency spillway
elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel
dimensions and dimensions and spacing of antiseep
collars.
[3] Design computations for the control structures (pipe
barrel and riser, etc.).
[4] A plot or table of the stage-storage (volume vs. elevation)
and all supporting computations.
[5] Routing computations.
(d) Drawings:
[1] Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting
the time of concentration path for both existing conditions
and post-developed condition.
[2] All stormwater management facilities must be located on a
plan and described in detail, including easements and
buffer boundaries.
(3) Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information may be
rejected for review by the Borough and will be returned to the
applicant.
(4) Description of, justification, and actual field results for infiltration
testing with respect to the type of test and test location for the
design of infiltration BMPs.
(5) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing municipal stormwater collection system that
may receive runoff from the project site.
(6) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious area
to be added.
(7) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operation,
and maintenance responsibilities, as well as schedules and costs
for inspection and maintenance activities for each permanent
stormwater or drainage BMP, including provisions for permanent
access or maintenance easements.
C. Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the SWM
site plan, as applicable:
(1) Signed and executed operations and maintenance agreement.
(2) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and offsite
work.
§ 338-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-18
1:293
§ 338-19. Submission of SWM site plan and report.
§ 338-20. Review of SWM site plan and report.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and approval letter from
the Butler County Conservation District.
(4) A NPDES permit.
(5) Permits from PADEP and ACOE.
(6) Geologic assessment.
(7) Soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction
requirements, and recommendations for construction of detention
basins.
(8) A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT when utilization of a
PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when proposed
facilities would encroach onto a PennDOT right-of-way.
A. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the
regulated activity.
B. Five copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted and be
distributed as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Borough accompanied by the requisite executed
review fee reimbursement agreement, as specified in this chapter.
(2) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(3) One copy to the Butler County Planning Department.
(4) One copy to the Butler County Conservation District.
C. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Borough or
PADEP.
A. The Borough shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan and
report as specified in this chapter. The Borough shall review the SWM
site plan and report for consistency with the purposes, requirements,
and intent of this chapter.
B. The Borough shall not approve any SWM site plan and report that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this chapter, when a SWM site plan
and report is found to be deficient, the Borough may disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or, in the case of minor
deficiencies, the Borough may accept submission of modifications.
C. The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar
days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or disapproved
if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision or land
§ 338-18 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-20
1:294
§ 338-21. Modifications of SWM site plan and report.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Borough, shall
require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with
this chapter.
§ 338-22. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plan and report.
A disapproved SWM site plan and report may be resubmitted, with the
revisions addressing the Borough's concerns documented in writing, to the
Borough in accordance with this chapter. The applicable municipal review
fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan and
report.
§ 338-23. Approval of SWM site plan and report; term of validity.
The Borough's approval of a SWM site plan and report authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. The Borough may
specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any
specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the
Borough signs the approval for a SWM site plan. If stormwater management
facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not been
constructed, or if a record drawing of these facilities has not been approved
within this time, then the Borough may consider the SWM site plan
disapproved and may revoke any and all permits or approvals.
§ 338-24. Record drawings; completion certificate; final inspection.
development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a
subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall follow the
subdivision and land development process according to the
Municipalities Planning Code.100
D. The Municipal Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
Borough. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawing and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved
SWM site plan shall be submitted to the Borough as a prerequisite for
the release of the guarantee or issuance of an occupancy permit.
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-24
1:295
§ 338-25. Easements.
B. The record drawing shall include a certification of completion signed by
a qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater BMPs
have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan and
report.
(1) Drawings shall show all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes, and stormwater control
facilities.
(2) Submission shall include a comparison of the constructed stagestorage
(volume vs. elevation) of all aboveground and belowground
stormwater storage facilities to the approved design.
C. After receipt of the record drawing and certification of completion by
the Borough, the Borough Engineer may conduct a final inspection.
A. Easements shall be established to accommodate the existence of
drainageways.
B. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream, there shall be provided an easement paralleling the line of such
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream with a width adequate to
preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the one-hundredyear
floodplain.
C. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management
or drainage facilities, including but not limited to detention facilitates
(above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs,
drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
D. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
E. All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall encompass
the one-hundred-year surface elevation of the proposed stormwater
facility.
F. Easements shall provide ingress to, and egress from, a public right-ofway.
In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note
may be added to the plan granting the Borough or its designee access to
all easements via the nearest public right-of-way able for vehicle
ingress and egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out
inspection or maintenance activities.
G. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
H. Nothing shall be planted or placed within the easement which would
adversely affect the function of the easement or conflict with any
conditions associated with such easement.
§ 338-24 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-25
1:296
§ 338-26. Financial guarantees.
§ 338-27. Maintenance responsibilities.
I. All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the site plan. The format and content
of the easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the
Municipal Engineer and Solicitor.
A. The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Borough for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter, equal to 110% of the full construction cost of the required
controls in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.101
B. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person, verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the SWM site plan
and report and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of record drawings.
(3) Request a final inspection from the Borough to certify compliance
with this chapter, after receipt of the certification of completion
and record drawings by the Borough.
A. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The operation and
maintenance description shall outline required routine maintenance
actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the
stormwater control facilities.
B. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Borough, stormwater
control facilities/BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by
the Borough.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
101. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 338-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-27
1:297
§ 338-28. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
(3) Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded
as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.
(4) The SWM site plan and report shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
(5) The Borough may take enforcement actions against an applicant
for failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
C. The Borough, upon recommendation of the Municipal Engineer, shall
make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report.
The Borough may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the
requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is
not an indication that the Borough will accept the facilities. The
Borough reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and
operating responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management
controls.
D. If the Borough accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, the Borough
may, at its discretion, require a fee from the applicant to the Borough to
offset the future cost of inspections, operations, and maintenance.
E. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM site plan or to allow the property to
remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved SWM site
plan, unless the Borough grants an exception in writing.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant
shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement in form
and substance approved by the Borough Solicitor covering all
stormwater control facilities that are to be privately owned. The
operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be recorded with
the SWM site plan and made a part hereto.
B. Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities.
C. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement, the Borough may perform the services
required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees
may result in a lien against the property.
§ 338-27 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-29
1:298
§ 338-29. Schedule of inspections.
§ 338-30. Right-of-entry for inspection.
§ 338-31. Notice of violation; failure to comply.
A. PADEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any permits
issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to
PADEP compliance programs, the Borough or its designee may inspect
all phases of the installation of temporary or permanent stormwater
management facilities.
B. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the Borough
determines that the stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the Borough
shall revoke any existing permits or approvals until a revised SWM site
plan is submitted and approved as specified in this chapter.
C. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the
landowner's designee, according to the inspection schedule described
on the SWM site plan for each BMP.
(1) The Borough may require copies of the inspection reports, in a form
as stipulated by the Borough.
(2) If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, the Borough, or its designee, may conduct
such inspections and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
(a) Prior to conducting such inspections, the Borough shall inform
the owner of its intent to conduct such inspections. The owner
shall be given 30 days to conduct required inspections and
submit the required inspection reports to the Borough.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the Borough to inspect the implementation, condition,
or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in regard to
any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the Borough ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Borough shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the Borough such devices
as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater BMP.
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Borough access to a stormwater
BMP is a violation of this chapter.
§ 338-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-31
1:299
§ 338-32. Enforcement; unlawful acts.
§ 338-33. Violations deemed public nuisances.
§ 338-34. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the Borough
shall provide written notification of the violation. Such notification shall
set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for
correction of these violation(s).
B. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalties provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Borough from pursuing
any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur,
is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and conditions
of this chapter.
A. The Borough Council or its designee shall enforce all of the provisions
of this chapter. The approved SWM site plan shall be on file at the
project site throughout the duration of the construction activity. The
Borough or its designee may make periodic inspections during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved SWM site plan.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as
provided for by an approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Borough may be suspended or
revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement.
§ 338-31 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-34
1:300
§ 338-35. Violations and penalties.
Penalties are as set forth in Article X, Enforcement Remedies, of Chapter
350, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 338-36. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or the Code
Enforcement Officer regarding provisions of this chapter may appeal in
accordance with the provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§§ 10909.1 and 11002-A, within 30 days of the action.
§ 338-37. Prohibited discharges and connections.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the Borough
when:
(1) The Borough or its designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the violation(s) that caused the suspension.
(2) The Borough is satisfied that the violation(s) has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Borough cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Any drain (including indoor drains and sinks) or conveyance, whether
on the surface or underground, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the Borough's separate storm sewer system or waters of the
commonwealth is prohibited.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the Borough's separate storm sewer system which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved
by the Borough is prohibited.
C. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the Borough's
separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of the
commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except
as provided in Subsection D below and discharges allowed under a
state or federal permit.
§ 338-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-37
1:301
§ 338-38. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative
BMPs, or pervious areas to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 338-39. Alteration of BMPs.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
E. In the event that the Borough or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection D significantly contribute to
pollution of waters of the commonwealth, or is so notified by PADEP, the
Borough will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
F. Upon notice provided by the Borough or PADEP under Subsection E,
the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
Borough or PADEP, to cease the discharge, consistent with the degree
of pollution caused by the discharge.
G. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
commonwealth law.
§ 338-37 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 338-39
1:302
§ 338-40. Fees and expenses.
§ 338-41. Recording of plans and related agreements.
Chapter 343
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 275. Grading and excavation — See Ch. 309.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or structures, unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the
Borough.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures, or within a drainage
easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of the Borough.102
A. Review and inspection fees for stormwater management site plans and
reports, waiver requests, and compliance, construction or maintenance
inspections shall be established by resolution of Borough Council to
cover costs incurred by the Borough Solicitor and the Borough
Engineer or other professional hired for review or inspection as deemed
necessary by the Borough in order to comply with this chapter.
B. Application fees for stormwater management site plans and reports or
waiver requests shall include administrative and clerical costs and a
completeness review by the Borough Engineer.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall
record the following documents in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Butler County within 60 days of approval of the SWM site plan by the
Borough:
(1) The SWM site plan and report.
(2) Operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement.
(3) Easements under § 338-25.
(4) Riparian buffers.
B. The Borough may suspend or revoke any approvals granted upon
discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with § 338-40 and this
section.
102. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 338-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-41
1:303

ARTICLE I
Removal of Snow from Sidewalks
[Adopted 3-1-1977 by Ord. No. 304 (Ch. 21, Part 2, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 343-1. Removal required.
Each resident, occupant, or property owner or business owner or operator
shall remove from the sidewalks abutting their respective properties all
accumulations of snow and ice within a period of 24 hours after a snowfall
which permits an accumulation of snow upon the sidewalk and/or permits
and enables formation of icy conditions and shall maintain such sidewalk in
a clear and passable condition free from icing or obstruction from snow.
§ 343-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1983 by Ord. No.
328]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 343-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 343-2
1:305

ARTICLE II
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 695103]
§ 343-3. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Excavation
Permit Ordinance."
§ 343-4. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
APPLICANT — Any person or entity who makes application for a permit.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence
of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or properties.
BOROUGH ADMINISTRATOR — The administrator for the Borough.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The engineer of the municipality as defined by
ordinance and is inclusive of his or her authorized deputy, representative or
inspector.
PERMITTEE — Any person or entity who has been issued a permit and has
agreed to fulfill all the terms of this article.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Any entity subject to the jurisdiction of and
control by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
STREET — A public street, public easement, right-of-way, public highway,
public alley, public sidewalk, public way or public road accepted or
maintained by the municipality or open for travel and use by the public,
whether or not so accepted or maintained, including the entire area within
the right-ofway thereof.
IMPROVED STREET — Any street in the Borough which has had
maintenance performed on it within the past five years. Maintenance shall
be considered any surface treatment. It shall be the prerogative of the
Director of Public Works to define the category of "newly improved street"
and advise the proper utility companies of this designation.
§ 343-5. Activities requiring issuance of permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to make any tunnel, opening
or excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street without
first securing a permit from the Borough Administrator or his or her
designee for each separate undertaking; provided, however, that any
person or entity maintaining pipes, lines or other underground facilities
103. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Article II, Openings and
Excavations, adopted 2-1-2005 by Ord. No. 620 (Ch. 21, Part 3, of the 1983 Code).
§ 343-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 343-5
1:307
§ 343-6. Work to be done pursuant to permit.
No person or entity to whom a permit has been granted shall perform
any of the work authorized by such permit in any amount greater than
that specified in the permit, except that where the permittee desires to
perform additional work not in excess of an amount greater than 10% of
the amount specified in the permit, the permittee may apply to the Borough
Administrator or his or her designee for an amended permit to authorize
the additional work. If the additional work desired to be performed by the
permittee exceeds 10% of the amount specified in the original permit, an
application for a new permit shall be made. Any deposit or bond posted
in connection with the original permit shall be deemed to cover any such
additional work as may be added pursuant to the issuance of an amended
permit within the limit specified herein.
§ 343-7. Time for commencement of work.
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 30 days
after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit
shall be terminated automatically unless the permittee applies for an
extension of time within which to commence work. If such an extension is
granted, the original permit shall remain in force for the period of time
specified in the extension. Permits which terminate because of failure to
commence work within 30 days after issuance or within any extension of
time granted hereunder may be renewed only upon the payment of an
additional permit fee as originally required.
§ 343-8. Time limit.
Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be
set out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work
within the specified time, he or she shall, prior to expiration of the permit,
present, in writing, to the Borough Administrator or his or her designee a
in or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening
without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to
be done immediately, provided that the permit could not reasonably
and practically have been obtained beforehand. In such cases where
emergency openings are necessary, however, the municipality shall be
notified prior to such openings by:
(1) Fax notification.
(2) Telephone notification.
(3) PA One Call.
B. The person or entity shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first
regular business day on which the office of the Borough Administrator
or his or her designee is open for business, and said permit shall be
retroactive to the date when the work was begun.
§ 343-5 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 343-8
1:308
request for an extension of time setting forth therein the reasons for the
requested extension. If the Borough Administrator or his or her designee
finds that the failure to complete the work under the permit within the
time specified therein was due to circumstances reasonably beyond the
control of the permittee and that an extension of time to complete the work
under the permit is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the
permittee may be granted additional time for the completion of the work.
§ 343-9. State and county roads.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances
where the street or highway is maintained by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by Butler County; provided, however, that any person or
entity applying for a permit to do work within the right-of-way of a street
or highway maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by Butler
County which would otherwise require a permit under the terms of this
article shall notify the Borough Administrator or his or her designee at the
time that said application is made and at the time that the work under any
permit issued pursuant to said application is begun, so that proper safety
precautions may be taken by the municipality during the continuation of
said work.
§ 343-10. Revocation of permit.
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Borough Administrator or his or her
designee after notice to the permittee for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or any provision of this
article.
(2) Violation of any other applicable provision of the Municipal Code or
any law relating to the work.
(3) The creation of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the life or property of others.
B. The permittee shall be granted a period of three business days from the
date of the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the
diligent prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said
permit is revoked.
C. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his or her agent engaged in the work. The notice shall
contain a brief statement of the reasons for revoking the permit. Notice
may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person or entity
to be notified or by certified or registered United States mail addressed
to the person or entity to be notified.
D. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Borough Administrator or his or her
designee shall do or cause to be done such work as may be necessary to
restore the street or part thereof to as good a condition as before the
§ 343-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 343-10
1:309
§ 343-11. Requirements and specifications.
opening was made. All expenses thereby incurred by the municipality
shall be recovered from the deposit or bond the permittee has made or
filed with the municipality.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored.
B. No more than 250 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in any
street at any one time, except by special permission of the Borough
Administrator or his or her designee.
C. All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently, or their definite location
shall be determined ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage
to those facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary.
D. Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee and if damaged, they must be repaired inkind
with inspection by the Borough Engineer.
E. Any person whose facilities are damaged or caused to be relocated by
the permittee shall notify the permittee and the municipality of such
damage and thereafter may make the necessary repairs or relocation
and file a claim against the permittee with the municipality for the cost
of such repairs or relocation. Public utility companies concerned shall
be notified by the Borough in sufficient time to determine the validity of
the damage or relocation claims. The cost of such repair work or
relocation work may be withheld by the Borough Administrator or his or
her designee from the deposit pending determination of liability for the
damage.
F. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey
benchmark within the municipality shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained, in writing, from the Borough Administrator or his or her
designee. Permission shall be granted only upon the condition that the
permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of
the monument.
G. When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee
to provide proper drainage.
H. When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to flow,
roll or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause removal of the
same from the street within eight hours after deposit to permit safe flow
of traffic. In the event that the earth, gravel or other excavated material
so deposited is not removed as specified, the Borough Administrator or
§ 343-10 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 343-11
1:310
his or her designee shall cause such removal, and the cost incurred
shall be paid by the permittee or deducted from his or her deposit.
I. Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers,
barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be
determined by the Borough Administrator or his or her designee to be
necessary for the protection of the public. Additional safety
requirements may be prescribed by the Borough Administrator or his or
her designee and, where applicable, shall be in conformance with the
requirements set forth in 67 Pa. Code Chapter 212, dealing with work
zone traffic control. Copies of the publication shall be made available in
the office of the Borough Administrator or his or her designee for
inspection by the public.
(1) Whenever any permittee fails to provide or maintain the required
safety devices, such devices shall be installed and maintained by
the municipality. The amount of the cost incurred shall be paid by
the permittee or deducted from his or her deposit.
(2) No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed
or posted in accordance with the provisions of this section.
J. Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access.
Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
K. Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench
and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible
to public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate dirt or
dust nuisance, the Borough Administrator or his or her designee may
require the permittee to provide toe boards or bins; and if the
excavated area is muddy and causes inconvenience to pedestrians,
temporary wooden plank walks shall be installed by the permittee as
directed by the Borough Administrator or his or her designee. If the
street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using
part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a passageway at
least 1/2 the sidewalk width open along such sidewalk line.
L. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the
permittee obtains written consent from the Borough Administrator or
his or her designee to do the work at an earlier or later hour. Such
permission shall be granted only in the case of an emergency or in the
event that the work authorized by the pem1it is to be performed in
traffic-congested areas.
M. In granting any permit, the Borough Administrator or his or her
designee may attach such other conditions thereto as may be
reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or private property
or to prevent the operation from being conducted in a manner
§ 343-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 343-11
1:311
§ 343-11.1. Restoration.
hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a nuisance.
Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed.
(2) Restrictions as to the size, weight and type of equipment.
(3) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported.
(4) Designation of the place and manner of disposal of excavated
materials.
(5) Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof.
(6) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
N. Hydra-hammer, headache ball. The use of mechanical devices for the
breaking of pavement, such as a hydra-han1mer, headache ball, etc.,
will be permitted only under special written permission of the Borough
Administrator or his or her designee.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be made properly
and backfilled properly by the permittee according to Slippery Rock
Borough specifications. The permittee shall place a temporary surface
on the pavement cut, opening or excavation in accordance with
municipal specifications. If the permittee has been granted permission
to restore the street surface, but weather conditions are such as to
prevent the completion of permanent restoration of the street surface
at the time backfilling is completed, the permittee shall install a
temporary surface in accordance with municipal specifications until
such time as weather conditions will permit permanent restoration of
the street surface.
B. The Borough Administrator or his or her designee shall be notified by
the permittee during the forty-eight-hour periods preceding the
beginnings of backfilling and restoration and the approximate time
each will be begun.
C. No backfilling or restoration shall be accomplished unless or until the
Borough Administrator or his or her designee is present or permission
has been granted for backfilling or restoration after inspection by the
Borough Administrator or his or her designee.
D. The work of final restoration, including both paving surface and paving
base, shall be performed under the supervision of the Borough
Administrator or his or her designee; provided, however, that upon a
public utility company's application for permission to perform the work
of restoration, the municipality may grant permission to such public
§ 343-11 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 343-11.1
1:312
utility company to perform the work of restoration. In those cases,
where such permission is granted, the work of restoration, including
both paving surface and paving base, shall be performed by the
permittee according to Slippery Rock Borough specifications and shall
be subject to inspection by the municipality.
E. If the Borough Administrator or his or her designee finds that paving
surfaces adjacent to the street openings may be damaged where
trenches are made parallel to the street or where a number of cross
trenches are laid in proximity to one another or where the equipment
used may cause such damage, he or she may require negotiated
contribution from the permittee for the resurfacing in place of patching
of such street if the total area of the proposed patch damaged area
exceeds 25% of the total pavement surfacing between curb faces or
between concrete gutter edges. Such negotiations shall be carried on
and contributions agreed upon prior to issuance of a permit.
F. On any improved street, the persons performing the restoration shall be
required to rotomill the entire cartway 30 feet before and after the
utility patch and complete a bituminous overlay with 1.5 inches of 9.5
mm bituminous wearing course.
G. After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted with due diligence. Unless the provisions of
Subsection A of this section apply, the permittee is required to complete
permanent restoration of the street surface in accordance with
municipal specifications within seven days after repairs and/or
installation are completed. Furthermore, the permittee shall be
required to install and maintain a temporary surface in accordance with
municipal specifications during:
(1) The period between the completion of repairs and/or installation
and the commencement of final restoration; and
(2) The periods during the actual work when workers do not require
access to the excavation.
H. Inspections of all work authorized by a permit shall be made by the
Borough Administrator or his or her designee at such times and in such
manner as required to assure compliance with provisions of this article.
If the nature of the work to be performed under any permit is such as to
require the services of a full-time inspector, the Borough Administrator
or his or her designee shall provide for the services of such an
inspector.
I. All inspection costs shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs shall be
based upon a schedule of charges on file in the office of the Borough
Engineer.
J. Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions of a
permit, the permittee shall notify the Borough Administrator or his or
her designee, in writing. A certificate of final inspection shall be issued
§ 343-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 343-11.1
1:313
§ 343-11.2. Deposit.
by the Borough Administrator or his or her designee to each permittee
no sooner than one year and not later than 18 months after the
permanent restoration of the excavation has been made, provided that
the work authorized by the permit has been performed according to
municipal specifications. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the
Borough Administrator or his or her designee shall make a final
inspection of the restoration to determine whether municipal
specifications have been adhered to.
K. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of two years
from the date of completion of the permanent restoration and the
permittee fails to make such correction after notification, any expense
incurred by the municipality in correcting such settlement shall be paid
by the permittee or recovered from his or her bond, unless the
permittee submits proof satisfactory to the Borough Engineer that the
settlement was not due to defective backfilling.
A. Computation of deposit. The Borough Administrator or his or her
designee, upon receipt of a properly completed application, shall
determine the amount of the deposit to be made by the permittee in
accordance with the fee schedule; provided, however, that the minimum
deposit required shall not be less than $50. The deposit shall be paid at
the time the permit is issued, and the deposit shall be used to reimburse
the municipality for the cost of any work and/or materials furnished by
it in connection with work authorized by the permit, to cover the cost of
all necessary inspections of said work or any other expenses incurred
by the municipality in carrying out the provisions of this article. In the
case of a public utility company, the requirement of such deposit may be
waived if such public utility company files its corporate bond with the
municipality.
B. Form of deposit. The deposit may be either in the form of a certified,
treasurer's or cashier's check or in lawful money of the United States.
C. Insufficient deposit. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs,
the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the municipality an amount
equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such
deficiency, the municipality may institute an action to recover the same
in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in
full, no additional permits shall be issued to such permittee.
D. Yearly deposit. Whenever any public utility company shall anticipate
applying for permits for more than one street opening or excavation per
calendar year and does not elect to file a corporate bond as
hereinbefore provided, such public utility company may post one
deposit in an amount and form as herein before provided for the
calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of deposits which would
otherwise be required for the anticipated permits.
§ 343-11.1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 343-11.2
1:314
§ 343-11.3. Performance bond.
E. Deposit and cost schedules. The Borough Administrator or his or her
designee shall establish a schedule of charges for inspections, labor,
materials and other such expenses as may be incurred by the
municipality in carrying out the provisions of this article. This schedule
shall be established by the Borough Administrator or his or her
designee in accordance with the reasonably anticipated costs to be
incurred by the municipality in making such inspections, including
reasonable administrative and overhead expenses, and in accordance
with the currently prevailing costs in the area for any labor and
materials which may be provided by the municipality. The Borough
Administrator or his or her designee shall revise said schedule from
time to time to reflect any increase or decrease in the costs used to
establish said charges. The schedule shall be open to public inspection
in the office of the Borough Administrator or his or her designee upon
request.
F. Decision on costs. The decision of the Borough Administrator or his or
her designee as to the cost of any work done or repairs made by a
permittee under his or her direction, pursuant to the provisions of this
article, shall be final and conclusive as to such cost.
G. Refund of deposit. Upon notification by the permittee that all work
authorized by the permit has been completed and after restoration of
the opening, the Borough Administrator or his or her designee shall
refund to the permittee his or her deposit, less all costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with said permit. In no event shall the permit
fee be refunded.
A. A performance bond is required in those instances when the
municipality does not perform the restoration work. In those instances,
where the applicant has received or intends to apply for permission to
perform the work of restoration of the street surface, each such
applicant or permittee, upon receipt of a permit, shall provide the
municipality with an acceptable corporate surety bond to guarantee
faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit granted
pursuant to this article. The amount of the bond shall be 110% of the
estimated cost of restoring the street opening. The term of the bond
shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall terminate upon
the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of final inspection from the
Borough Engineer. If the permittee anticipates requesting more than
one permit per year, as required by this article, he or she may furnish
one continuing corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful
performance in such amount as the Borough Administrator or his or her
designee deems necessary. The amount of such bond shall be in relation
to the cost of restoring pavement cuts to be made by the permittee
throughout the year. In the case of a public utility company, its
corporate bond, in a form satisfactory to the Solicitor, may be accepted
in lieu of the corporate surety bond required by this section.
§ 343-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 343-11.3
1:315
§ 343-11.4. Liability insurance.
Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the municipality
with an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he or she is
insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against
claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance
of the work, whether such performance is by himself or herself, his or her
subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him or her. Such
insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground work
by equipment on the street and shall include protection against liability
arising from completed operations. The amount of the insurance shall be
prescribed by the Borough Administrator or his or her designee in
accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that
the liability insurance for bodily injury shall be in an amount no less than
$250,000 for each person and $500,000 for each accident, and for property
damages, in an amount no less than $100,000, with an aggregate of
$300,000 for all accidents. Public utility companies and authorities may be
relieved of the obligation of submitting such a certificate if they submit
satisfactory evidence that they are insured in accordance with the
requirements of this article or have adequate provision for self-insurance.
Public utility companies may file an annual certificate of insurance in lieu of
individual certificates for each permit.
§ 343-11.5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who shall violate any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600;
and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Default in performance. Whenever the Borough Administrator or his or
her designee shall find that a default has occurred in the performance
of any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof shall be
given to the principal and to the surety on the bond. Such notice shall
state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of
time deemed by the Borough Administrator or his or her designee to be
reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.
C. Completion of work. After receipt of such notice, the surety must,
within the time therein specified, either cause the required work to be
performed or, failing therein, indemnify the municipality for the cost of
doing the work as set forth in the notice.
§ 343-11.3 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 343-11.5
1:316
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair
[Adopted 8-2-2005 by Ord. No. 623 (Ch. 21, Part 1B, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 343-12. Adoption of Sidewalk Master Plan.
Slippery Rock Borough Council hereby adopts the Sidewalk Master Plan
prepared by the engineering firm of Herbert, Roland and Grubic, Inc.,
dated November 2, 2004, and revised on March 6, 2005, including, but
not limited to, the needs set forth therein, the goals, and the Sidewalk
Plan Legend, along with the recommendations set forth therein that said
property owners identified within said Sidewalk Plan Legend shall construct
sidewalks on the identified property on said legend within the time frame
set forth within said Sidewalk Plan Legend; provided, further, that all longterm
sidewalk construction shall be completed within five years of the date
of the adoption of this article or as directed by the Code Enforcement
Officer or the Borough Engineer, whichever date occurs first.
§ 343-13. Maintenance and repair required.
The owner or owners of any lot or lots in the Borough shall maintain
such sidewalks in a safe and passable condition, free of tripping hazards
and obstructions. Said owner or owners shall repair any defects in such
sidewalks and remove any obstructions which make them unsafe or
impassable to pedestrians.
§ 343-14. Maintenance obligation.
The obligation of maintenance shall include but not be limited to:
A. Repair of holes and cracks having a width in excess of 1/2 inch at any
point along a length of one foot or greater.
B. Maintenance of a constant grade.
(1) Repair shall be made when one or more sections of the sidewalk
rises above or drops below the grade of the edges of immediately
adjacent sections resulting in an irregular surface with depressions
greater than 1/2 inch in depth.
(2) Repair shall be made when the curb is out of vertical alignment
with the adjacent curb or adjacent section or slab of sidewalk in
excess of 3/4 inch.
C. Repair of any section of sidewalk that has spalling on 25% or more of its
surface in any section. A section shall mean the surface of concrete
from expansion joint to expansion joint. [Amended 9-13-2016 by Ord.
No. 623-A]
D. The removal of leaves, tree limbs, grass clippings, debris, cinders,
gravel, or any other refuse on such sidewalk or projecting branches and
§ 343-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 343-14
1:317
§ 343-15. Inspections.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect all sidewalks and
curbing in the Borough. Within 30 days of his/her inspection, he/she shall
forward notices to the respective property owners not in compliance with
the requirements of this article. The notice shall include a brief description
of each noncompliance and shall specify the required repairs.
§ 343-16. Notice to install and repair; time limits.
Every owner of property in the Borough shall, on 60 days' notice, install or
repair the sidewalk or curbing, in the manner stipulated in such notice, in
front of or alongside such property. If the 60 days concludes after November
15, then said repairs shall be made on or before April 30 of the following
year of said notice.
§ 343-17. Construction and repair on initiative of property owners.
Any property owner, upon his own initiative and without notice from any
Borough authority, may install or repair a sidewalk or curbing along his
property, provided that such owner shall obtain the permits specified in
this article and shall do such installation or repairs in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
other obstructions below six feet eight inches above the sidewalk. The
property owner shall be responsible for the prompt removal of any such
items. Such leaves, tree limbs, grass clippings, debris, cinders, gravel,
and other refuse shall be properly bagged and disposed of upon being
removed from such sidewalk. The sweeping or other removal of such
items onto Borough streets or state highways is prohibited.
E. Repair of any conditions which may create a pedestrian safety hazard
as determined by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
F. The use of concrete for repair of a sidewalk is required. The use of other
materials including asphalt are strictly prohibited. [Added 9-13-2016
by Ord. No. 623-A]
G. All sidewalk construction and repair shall be subject to the Slippery
Rock Borough’s sidewalk specifications, as set forth in § 343-18.
[Added 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 623-A]
H. Sidewalk repair is also subject to the terms and conditions set forth in
the Slippery Rock Borough Street Excavation Permit Ordinance.104
[Added 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 623-A]
104. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 343, Streets and Sidewalks, Article II, Openings and Excavations.
§ 343-14 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 343-18
1:318
§ 343-18. Construction, maintenance and repair specifications.
All installations, repairs or other maintenance required shall be performed
in accordance with the specifications set forth herein or in the Slippery
Rock Borough Sidewalk Master Plan referenced herein.
§ 343-19. Permit requirements.
A permit shall be obtained from the Borough Code Enforcement Officer
before doing any installation, repairs or maintenance required. Application
for the permit shall be made in accordance with the following rules and
regulations:
§ 343-20. Work performed by Borough; costs.
Upon failure of any owner of property in the Borough to install or repair any
curb or sidewalk after notice has been given in accordance with this article,
the Borough may cause the necessary repairs to be done at the expense
of said owner and may collect the cost thereof and all additional charges,
expenses and penalties as authorized by law and, if necessary, file a lien
against said property for said amount of money.
§ 343-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, in addition
to the liability under § 343-20 hereof, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding before any Magisterial District Judge of the county, be
punishable by fine of not more than $300, and costs of prosecution, for
each and every offense or, upon default in payment of the fine and costs
not caused by indigence or lack of sufficient assets, by imprisonment in
the county prison for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that such
violation is continued shall constitute a new and separate offense,
punishable by like fine, penalty or imprisonment.
A. The applicant shall submit the completed application form and shall
submit a set of plans defining the construction details as necessary to
conform with said Sidewalk Master Plan.
B. An application fee, if required, shall be submitted with the application
to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer. The amount of the
application fee shall be as set by Borough Council resolution.
[Amended 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 687]
C. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the work to
determine the degree of compliance with regulations governing the
work.
§ 343-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 343-21
1:319
Chapter 350
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 54.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 296.
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 309.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 334.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 338.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 343.
Water — See Ch. 368.
Zoning — See Ch. 375.
§ 343-21 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 343-21
1:320
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 350-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article V,
Section 501, of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.105
§ 350-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of the Borough of Slippery Rock."
§ 350-3. Applicability.
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be effected, no
street, sanitary sewer, stormwater sewer, water main or other facilities in
connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated
for public use or travel, no grading of the property shall be commenced, or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting said improvements,
except in strict accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
§ 350-4. Exclusions and waiver.
§ 350-5. Compliance required.
No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect alter or repair
any structure or building upon land in a subdivision shall be issued, and
no building shall be erected in a subdivision, or grading the property
commenced, unless and until a subdivision or land development plan has
been approved and recorded where required, and until the improvements
therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed as hereinafter
provided.
A. Land development that involves the conversion of an existing detached
or semidetached single-family dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless intended as a condominium, is hereby excluded
from regulations contained herein, as are additions of accessory
buildings, including farm buildings, on lots upon which a principal
structure exists, and additions or conversions of buildings or rides
within the confines of an amusement park. Newly acquired land to be
included within the confines of an amusement park, as defined, is not
excluded from the application of regulations contained herein.
B. If land development is proposed on a lot of record, verification of which
shall be supplied by the applicant, the required procedure for the
recording of plats is hereby waived.
105. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
§ 350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-6
1:321
§ 350-6. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To guide the orderly and efficient development of the Borough.
B. To promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
residents of the Borough.
C. To provide for the equitable processing of subdivision and land
development plans by establishing uniform procedures and standards.
§ 350-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-6
1:322
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 350-7. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 350-8. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or phrases shall,
for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated and
shall be literally applied by the Borough of Slippery Rock staff, members
of the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, consultants and by
the Borough Council. Words or terms used but not defined in this chapter
shall have the same meanings as stated in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code106 or Chapter 375, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of
Slippery Rock.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means
of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic
circulation.
AMUSEMENT PARK — A tract of land or an area used principally as the
location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Plans, profiles, cross sections and construction details
showing the exact final location, elevation, grade, size and material used in
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural.
C. Words used in the plural number shall include the singular.
D. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual, or an
association of individuals.
E. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
F. The word "may" is permissive or discretionary where compliance is
indicated.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 350-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-8
1:323
the construction of all facilities installed, to the same scale as the approved
construction drawings.
AVAILABLE SEWER — A municipal sewer is considered available if:
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter have been
prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation. Within
the approximated floodplain, the base flood elevation shall be established
as a point on the boundary of the approximate floodplain closest to the
construction site in question.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BOROUGH — Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for the
Borough of Slippery Rock, or its Planning Commission.
BUILDING — An independent structure having a roof supported by columns
or walls resting on its own foundation and includes but is not limited to
sheds, garages, stables, greenhouses, barns or other accessory buildings. A
detached building is one separate on all sides from adjacent buildings by
open spaces from the ground up.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest
the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches,
whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps or patios.
BUILDING LINE — The building line is that line fixed by the required yard
depths measured back from the nearest road right-of-way or property line.
CARTWAY — That portion of the street right-of-way surfaced for vehicular
use. Width is determined from face of curb to face of curb or from one edge
of driving surface to the other edge of driving surface.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — The triangular area formed by two intersecting
street center lines and a line interconnecting points established on each
center line, 75 feet from their point of intersection. This entire area is to
Connection is recommended and/or required in the regulations of the
Borough of Slippery Rock or any municipal authority with jurisdiction
by the Borough;
A.
Connection is recommended and/or required by the regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act107; or
B.
An existing municipal sewer line, with sufficient capacity, is located
within 1,000 feet of the nearest point of a subdivision.
C.
107. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 350-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-8
1:324
remain clear of obstructions to sight above a plane established 3 1/2 feet in
elevation from grade level at the intersection of the street center line.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water and water vapor.
CONTOUR — A line which joins all points of equal elevation on the ground.
CORNER LOT — A property which abuts two or more intersecting public
streets from each of which buildings on the property must be set back the
normal front yard distance for the zoning district in which such property is
located.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler
County, Pennsylvania.
COVENANT — An obligation defined by law or agreement, the violation of
which can be restrained by court action. These are usually stated in the
deed.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A street or road with one end open to traffic
and pedestrian access and permanently terminated at the other end by a
vehicular turnaround. A cul-de-sac is the vehicular turnaround at the end of
a cul-de-sac street.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRIVEWAY, COMMON — An improved vehicular access facility serving a
maximum of two parcels or lots which may be under separate or common
ownership which connects the parcels and provides access to a public
street. All subdivisions proposing to create a common driveway shall submit
a common driveway maintenance agreement for approval prior to plan
approval. Said maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the plat.
DRIVEWAY, MULTI — An improved vehicular access facility serving three
or more parcels or lots shall be considered a private street and shall
comply with the design and construction requirements for a private street.
(See "street, private.") All subdivisions proposing to create a multidriveway
§ 350-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-8
1:325
shall submit a multidriveway maintenance agreement for approval prior to
plan approval and comply with the requirements of § 350-64, Performance
requirements, § 350-65, Performance guarantees, and § 350-66, Release
from improvement bond.
DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE — An improved vehicular access facility serving only
one parcel or lot which connects and provides access to a public street but
which does not provide access to any other lot or parcel under separate
ownership.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted across private property generally for
public utility lines or for access to other properties beyond, passage over
which is guaranteed by the grantor to those using the easement.
ELEVATION — A point or series of points (See "contour.") which are a
known vertical distance above or below a predetermined elevation datum.
All elevations used shall be based on United States Geological Survey
Datum.
ENGINEER — See "Borough Engineer."
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the
structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other government agencies
of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission
or distribution systems, communications, or disposal systems, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment
and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of such service by such public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies; excluding, however, buildings, storage tanks,
towers, antennas, relay or transmission stations, substations and pumps.
FLOOD — A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas
from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation
of runoff or surface waters from any source or mudslides which are
proximately caused or precipitated by accumulations of water on or under
the ground.
FLOOD-FRINGE DISTRICT (FF) — That area of the one-hundred-year
floodplain not included in the floodway district. The basis for the outermost
boundary of this district shall be the one-hundred-year-flood elevations
contained in the flood profiles of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared
by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) and dated June 15, 1981,
revised August 15, 1983.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
§ 350-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-8
1:326
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) — Delineated for purposes of this chapter
using the criteria that a certain area within the floodplain must be capable
of carrying the waters of the one-hundred-year flood without increasing
the water surface elevations of that flood more than one foot at any point.
The areas included in this district are specifically defined in the Flood
Insurance Study dated June 15, 1981, revised August 15, 1983, prepared by
the Federal Insurance Administration.
FORM 408 — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408, latest
publications and bulletins, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Specification
Publication No. 408.
FRONT YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (FA) — That floodplain area for which
no detailed flood profiles and elevations are provided. Such areas are shown
on the maps accompanying the Federal Insurance Study prepared by the
Federal Insurance Administration. In determining the necessary elevations
for the purposes of this chapter, other sources of data may be used, such as:
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An organization of property owners of
lots in individual residential developments responsible for the maintenance
of common open space in each plan and the payment of taxes on that land
classified as commonly owned open space.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
include but are not limited to roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios,
garages, storage sheds and similar structures, parking or driveway areas,
and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface areas proposed to initially
be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious
surfaces.[Added 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 659]
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical changes to the land necessary to
produce usable and desirable lots from raw acreage, including but not
limited to grading, paving, curb, gutter, stormwater sewers, individual
sanitary sewage system, improvements to existing watercourses, sidewalks,
crosswalks, street signs, monuments, water supply and water distribution
A. Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports.
B. United States Geological Survey Flood-Prone Quadrangles.
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service County Soil Surveys
(Alluvial Soils).
C.
D. Known high-water marks from past floods.
E. Other sources.
§ 350-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-8
1:327
systems and facilities, sanitary sewers, sanitary sewerage collection
systems and sanitary sewage treatment plant facilities.
INSPECTOR — An authorized representative of the Borough Council
assigned to make any or all on-site inspection of work performed and
materials furnished by the developer or his agents.
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a
street into a block or across a block to another street. Such right-of-way
shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area of a horizontal plane measured at grade and bounded
by the front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — See "corner lot."
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.
LOT, FLAG — A tract, parcel or area of land abutting and located to the
rear or behind another tract, parcel or area of land and is connected to a
public or private street by a contiguous area of land that is a part of said
lot that has a minimum width of 25 feet for its total length and is for the
express purpose of providing vehicular egress, ingress, and utility access to
said tract, parcel or area of land. The area of the flag portion of the lot shall
not be used in computing the minimum lot area required by Chapter 375,
Zoning, of this Code. Lot width at the building line shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 375, Zoning.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenants; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503, Subsection 1.1, of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.108
C.
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 350-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-8
1:328
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The boundary line describing the limits of a property and
separating it from adjacent properties or a public street or way.
LOT WIDTH — The average horizontal distance across the lot between the
side lot lines, measured at the building line.
MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — Nonresidential development of a reduced
scale involving less than 1,200 square feet of new construction on a lot not
in excess of 21,780 square feet in area.
MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in
two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile
or manufactured home park which is designed and improved for the
placement thereon of a single mobile or manufactured home.
MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous
parcels of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of
two or more mobile or manufactured homes.
MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME STAND — That part of an individual
mobile or manufactured home lot which has been reserved for the
placement of the mobile or manufactured home, appurtenant structures or
additions.
MODIFICATION — When the subdivider can show that a provision of this
chapter would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where,
because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, and in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, a modification may be made without
destroying the intent of such provision, the Planning Commission may
recommend and the Borough Council may authorize relief from the strict
application of this provision. Any relief thus authorized shall be entered in
the minutes of the Borough Council along with the reasons which justify the
modification.
MONUMENT — A permanent marker constructed of concrete or metal and
placed in the ground by survey, to establish the legal right-of-way line of
streets. Each monument shall be constructed and placed as specified in this
chapter.
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A sanitary sewage collection system
approved by the Borough in which sewage is carried from individual lots or
dwelling units by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant
which may be publicly or privately owned and operated.
OFF-SITE WATER SERVICE — A potable water distribution system
approved by the Borough in which water is carried to individual lots or
§ 350-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-8
1:329
dwelling units by a system of pipes from a central water source, located
beyond the limits of the lot being serviced, which may be publicly or
privately owned and operated. Applicants for subdivision and land
development approval shall be required to connect to a public water
distribution system unless lots are to be served by private wells.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — An off-street space having dimensions of
nine feet in width and 18 feet in depth and an area of not less than 162
square feet, whether inside or outside of a structure, for the temporary
standing of an automotive vehicle, to be used exclusively as a parking stall
for one automotive vehicle.109
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A single system of piping, tanks or other
facilities approved by the Borough serving only a single lot and disposing of
sewage in whole or in part into the soil.
ON-SITE WATER SERVICE — A single system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving only a single lot and obtaining the water either in whole
or in part from a primary source located within the limits of the lot being
served.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot
with the building or on the same tract of land upon which building lots are
recorded.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purposes of this chapter.
PATIO — A paved, at-grade open area without a permanent covering, no
part of which shall be greater than three feet above adjacent ground level.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The duly constituted Planning Commission of
the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
PLAT, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plat, prepared for official
recording as required by statue, to define property rights and proposed
streets and other improvements.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plat, in lesser detail than a
final plat, showing approximate locations of proposed streets and lot layouts
on a topographic map as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a
final plat.
PORCH — (Also "deck.") An attachment to the exterior of a principal
residential use or structure primarily used for private recreation. This
attachment is considered a part of the principal structure for the purpose of
determining a minimum setback.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 350-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-8
1:330
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Sunshine
Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.110
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
REAR YARD — The area of any property between the rear line of the
property and the rear setback line parallel to it.
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land adjacent to a street intended to control
access to the street from an adjacent property.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on a major traffic street and a local street and with vehicular access solely
from the latter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, alley, interior walk, or
other public purpose.
SIDE YARD — The area of any property bounded by the required front and
rear yards and the side property line and parallel side setback line.
SITE DISTANCE — The maximum extent of unobstructed vision (in a
horizontal or vertical plane) along a street from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street. The safe stopping sight distance for the vertical
curves on roadway pavement shall be calculated with an eye height of 3.5
feet above the pavement and a height of an object of 0.50 foot.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS — The following street classifications shall
apply to streets in the Borough of Slippery Rock and shall be applied as
defined in the "Comprehensive Plan for the Borough of Slippery Rock,
Butler County, Pennsylvania":
ARTERIAL — Arterials accommodate intercommunity traffic flow and
afford connections to other communities or secondary regional traffic
generators, with direct access to adjoining property being a secondary
function. The average length of trip of such highway normally exceeds
three miles.
A.
COLLECTOR — These roads serve to funnel traffic onto arterials and
to provide linkage on an intercommunity basis. Providing access to
B.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 350-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-8
1:331
STREET, PRIVATE — A street, including the entire private right-of-way,
which is privately owned and maintained through private agreement and
which is intended for private use. A private street which provides access
to three or more lots or parcels which do not have access to a public
street shall be considered as access to a public street. (See also "driveway,
private," "driveway, common" and "driveway, multi.") Design standards for
private streets shall comply with the requirements of Article V herein, and
improvements shall comply with the standards of Article VI herein. Section
350-64, Performance requirements, § 350-65, Performance guarantees, and
§ 350-66, Release from improvement bond, shall apply to all developments
proposing to install a private street.
STREET, PUBLIC — A street, including the entire public right-of-way, which
has been dedicated to and accepted by the Borough or which has been
devoted to public use by legal mapping, use or other means.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER — See "developer."
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
properties abutting a collector street is likewise a secondary function.
The primary function of a collector street is to accept the traffic
generated on local streets with which they may be interlinked.
LOCAL — Such roadways are intended primarily to serve properties
fronting on their right-of-way. These roads generally do not carry major
traffic volumes since their function is to serve that traffic generated
from the residential properties.
C.
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure either:
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
(2)
A.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include either:
B.
§ 350-8 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-8
1:332
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — When, in the judgment of the Borough
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to § 350-64 of this chapter)
of those improvements required as a condition for final approval have been
completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be
able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing ground elevations by contour lines
and the location of important, natural and man-made features.
WATERCOURSE — The word "watercourse" shall include all existing
channels, creeks, ditches, drains, dry runs, springs and streams; also, all
proposed channels, ditches, drains and drainage facilities.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions as defined and
regulated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
United States Army Corps of Engineers (COE), and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer designated to administer
Chapter 375, Zoning, and issue zoning and building permits.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(2)
§ 350-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-8
1:333

ARTICLE III
Application Requirements
[Amended 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 659; 2-7-2012 by Ord. No. 663;
10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 687; 11-3-2015 by Ord. No. 689]
§ 350-9. Procedure.
A. The application requirements and procedures shall be followed as set
forth herein for all land development and subdivision applications
submitted to the Borough for consideration of approval.
B. Preliminary application. An application for preliminary approval shall
be submitted to the Borough 28 days prior to a regular meeting of the
Planning Commission and shall include 12 copies of the final
application.
C. Final application. Upon approval of the preliminary application, the
applicant shall submit an application for approval of a final plan unless
otherwise indicated. The application shall be submitted to the Borough
28 days prior to a regular meeting of the Planning Commission and
shall include 12 copies of the final application.
(1) After final approval by the Borough Council, no changes shall be
made in a plan unless changes are first reviewed and approved by
the Planning Commission, and resubmitted for approval by
Borough Council. A change in scheduling or sequence in the
development of a plan to be carried out over a time period and
approved on this basis shall require review and approval as for any
other change.
D. Revised applications. Revised applications that are to be resubmitted to
the Planning Commission or Borough Council for consideration are to
be submitted at least 10 days prior to the Planning Commission or
Council meeting at which the revised application is to be reviewed.
E. Application fee. At the time of filing an application for preliminary or
final approval, the applicant shall pay a fee set by resolution to defray
the cost of processing of such applications.
F. Decision. The Borough Council shall render its decision on the final plan
and communicate its decision to the applicant not later than 90 days
following the date of the regular Planning Commission meeting next
following the date the application is filed, provided that should the next
regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the date of filing,
the ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following the
day the application was originally filed.
(1) An application is considered filed with the Borough only when the
correct Borough application form and applicable fees are
submitted in accordance with the submission timing requirements
herein and includes such information as required by this article.
§ 350-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-9
1:335
§ 350-10. Recommended preapplication conference (optional).
§ 350-11. Preliminary application.
(2) The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and shall be
mailed to the applicant at the address provided on the application
form not later than 15 days following the decision.
A. Before submission of any application for subdivision or land
development, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the Borough
staff and Planning Commission to determine the feasibility, suitability
and timing of the application. The intent of the preapplication
conference is for the applicant to obtain information and guidance from
the Borough with regard to the proposed preliminary plan, prior to
entering into any commitments or incurring substantial expenses with
regard to the site and the plan preparation.
B. All preapplication conferences shall be scheduled with the Borough
staff. The request for a preapplication conference with the Planning
Commission shall be received and accepted by the Borough staff at
least 15 days prior to the date of the next regularly scheduled Planning
Commission Workshop meeting.
C. The submission of a preapplication conference request and any plans,
documents, or information related thereto that are presented at the
conference shall not be deemed by the Borough to be the submission or
filing of an application for subdivision or land development approval
with the Borough, nor shall it be the start of any statutorily prescribed
Borough review period. The preapplication conference shall not protect
the application from subsequent amendments to any applicable
Borough ordinance provision made prior to the date of the filing of a
complete application. The preapplication conferences are intended to
be advisory only and shall not bind the Borough to take any action on
any application subsequently submitted.
A. Application content. The preliminary plan shall be drawn at a scale of
100 feet to the inch or greater and shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
(1) Names and addresses of the owner or owners of the property.
(2) Name of the subdivision to be recorded.
(3) North point, scale and date.
(4) Name of professional engineer or the professional land surveyor
who surveyed the property and prepared the plan.
(5) Contours at vertical intervals of two feet, or in the case of relatively
level tracts, at such lesser interval as may be necessary for
satisfactory study and planning of the tract.
§ 350-9 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-11
1:336
(6) Datum to which contour elevations refer. Where reasonably
practicable, data shall refer to known, established elevations.
(7) Show all existing watercourses, wetlands, banks, tree masses, and
other significant natural features.
(8) Identify any floodplain, flood hazard area, floodprone area as
established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(9) Show location and size of all existing buildings, location, size and
invert elevation of all sanitary and stormwater sewers, and location
of all manholes, inlets, culverts and bridges; water mains, gas
mains, fire hydrants, telephone conduit lines, electric power
transmission lines, petroleum or petroleum products lines, and
other significant man-made features.
(10) All existing streets located on or adjacent to the tract, including
name, right-of-way widths and cartway width and type of
improvement materials used on the cartway.
(11) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been
established.
(12) Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way and
easements, proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions,
proposed minimum set back on public buildings, public areas and
parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use.
(13) The preliminary plan shall show the names of owners of all abutting
unplotted land and the names of all abutting subdivisions.
(14) A plan of the proposed public water distribution system for review
and approval by the appropriate authority or a plan showing the
location of individual wells in accordance with the requirements of
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537), as amended.111
(15) A plan of the proposed sanitary sewer collection system or
treatment facilities when proposed will be required for review and
approval of the appropriate authority.
(16) Where on lot sewage disposal systems are proposed, the applicant
shall submit a completed Department of Environmental Protection
Sewage Facilities Planning Module in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537),
as amended.
(17) Preliminary plan shall identify the zoning district in which the
property is located and show the zoning boundaries, if any, that
traverse or are within 300 feet of the area covered by the plan.
111. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 350-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-11
1:337
(18) Preliminary plan shall show such street extensions or spurs as are
reasonably necessary to provide adequate street connections and
facilities to adjoining or contiguous developed or undeveloped
areas.
(19) Profiles showing existing ground and proposed street centerline
grades.
(20) Typical cross-section of roadways showing cartways, water,
sanitary and stormwater sewers, gas, electric and telephone
utilities, and sidewalks.
(21) The applicant shall provide such additional information as may be
required by the Planning Commission, Borough Council, Borough
Engineer, Zoning Officer, or Sewage Enforcement Officer in order
to more fully evaluate the proposed plan and its effect on adjacent
property or the Borough as a whole.
(22) A utility plan showing the location and size of the proposed gas,
electric, telephone and cable television systems with written
approval from the appropriate utility company.
(23) A grading plan as per the requirements of this Code.
(24) A plan, calculations and narrative for the collection, management
and discharge of all stormwater. The applicant shall further provide
all information and plans necessary to indicate that the existing offlot
watercourse and drainage system is adequate to accommodate
the stormwater resulting from the proposed subdivision or a plan
for improving the off-lot drainage system to meet the demand.
Plans and reports shall be prepared in accordance with Borough
policy, guidelines and the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management
Act.112
B. Supplementary data required. The preliminary plan shall be
accompanied by the following supplementary data:
(1) A plan revision module for land development as required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) Typical street cross-section drawings for all proposed streets.
(3) A written report from the municipal water and sewer authority on
the availability of public water and sewer service to proposed
development.
(4) A traffic impact study shall be required if the proposed subdivision
or land development will result in the development of a use or
combination of uses which generates 50 a.m. or p.m. trips or more.
112. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 350-11 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-12
1:338
§ 350-12. Application.
In addition to the requirements for preliminary applications, applications
for final approval must meet the following specifications:
A. Attestation by the applicant stating that the applicant is the owner of
the tract of land proposed to be subdivided.
B. Certification by the owner of the tract of land that there are no
restrictions or covenants in place which would affect any future
development or which limits any existing development.
C. Shall be drawn with waterproof ink and all records, data entries,
statements, etc., thereon shall also be made with the same type of ink or
reproducible typing.
D. Shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch or larger; more than
one sheet may be used for larger tracts and must be indexed.
E. Shall contain a title block in the lower right hand corner with the name
under which the subdivision plan is to be recorded. In addition, blocks
for the following information shall be provided:
(1) Name of the recorded owner and subdivider.
(2) Municipality in which the subdivision is located.
(3) Name, address and seal of the registered professional land
surveyor preparing the plan.
(4) Certificate of ownership, including name of owner of record, deed
book volume, date of instrument and date of recording.
F. Beyond the boundary lines of the proposed subdivision all final plans
submitted shall be drawn according to the following:
(1) Streets and other ways of medium solid lines.
(2) Property lines of adjacent subdivision by medium dashed and two
dotted lines.
(3) Lot line by light dotted lines.
(4) Restriction lines, easements, etc., by light dashed lines.
G. Within the subdivision boundary lines all final plans shall be drawn
according to the following:
(1) Streets or ways of heavy solid lines.
(2) Perimeter property lines of subdivision by heavy dashed and two
dotted lines.
(3) Lot lines of medium solid lines.
(4) Restriction of building lines by medium dashed lines.
§ 350-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-12
1:339
§ 350-13. Land development plans.
In addition to any other required information, all applications for
preliminary or final land development shall include the following
information as prepared by a registered professional engineer, surveyor or
architect, unless otherwise specified:
(5) Easements of other reserved areas by light dotted lines.
A. Bearings and distances of all property lines and area of property in
square feet as prepared by a registered land surveyor.
B. Location of adjacent street road curbs or edge of paving and existing
and proposed curb cuts.
C. Public sanitary sewer, water supply, stormwater management, gas,
electric, telephone, and other utility lines overhead or underground,
existing and proposed, in street rights-of-way or in easements, inside
the property or within 50 feet of a boundary.
D. Existing contours, slopes in excess of 25% and proposed regrading at
two-foot intervals or spot elevations 50 feet apart in two directions over
the property where there are less than 4% slopes.
E. Location, height and use of all existing structures to remain and new
structures, with structures to be removed shown by a dotted outline.
F. Distances between all proposed structures or additions and property
lines.
G. Paving including access drives from adjacent streets and parking and
loading areas on the property, showing treatment of edges, parking
layout with dimensions of aisles and spaces, number of spaces,
pedestrian walkways, proposed sloping of surfaces to storm drainage
system, and devices to retard stormwater drainage.
H. Proposed landscaping by type of feature (tree, shrub, ground cover,
etc.), as well as walls, fences, outdoor lighting, etc.
I. Proposed signs showing elevation view and noting height of the top of
the sign above the ground below, and dimensions of sign faces and
distances from property lines.
J. Areas subject to soil erosion, landslide prone soils, natural
watercourses or drainageways, and wetlands.
K. Elevation of each wall of each proposed structure showing architectural
treatment, or, optionally, a rendered perspective drawing of a structure
showing two walls, at least one facing the access street.
L. The name and address of the owner, developer, engineer and architect
(if involved) with the Pennsylvania seals of the professional preparing
§ 350-12 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-13
1:340
§ 350-14. Final plan for recording.
All final plans for recording shall show the following information:
the surveys and drawings, together with verification from the owner, if
not the developer, that he concurs with the plan.
M. North arrow, graphic scale, title and date of submission.
N. A narrative describing the present and proposed use of the property.
O. Certification by the owner of the tract of land proposed to be subdivided
that there are no restrictions or covenants in place which would affect
any future development or which limits any existing development.
A. Shall be drawn and submitted on reproducible mylar.
B. Primary control points, or permanent monuments or description and
ties to such control points or monuments, to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings, and similar data shall be referred.
C. Accurate description shown by bearings and dimension in feet and
hundredths of a foot shall be shown on all tract boundary lines,
property lines of lots, radii, arcs, cord bearings and distances. The error
of closure for all descriptions subject to approval shall not exceed one
foot in 10,000 feet.
D. Profile sheets of all proposed streets and improvements with the
following information:
(1) Existing and finished profile along centerline of proposed street.
(2) Finished grade at fifty-foot stations located along the centerline of
the proposed street, all vertical curve elevations information,
length, including beginning-ending elevations, high and low points
located along said vertical curve.
(3) Finished profile for all sanitary sewers, stormwater sewers, and
water lines with stations, identification numbers, invert and top
elevations, size and type of materials, and percent of slope of each
utility proposed.
(4) The sight distance for all vertical curves shall be identified on the
street profiles.
E. Name and right-of-way width of each street or right-of-way.
F. Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements.
G. Number to identify each lot, site or parcel of land.
H. Building set back line on all lots and sites.
I. Location and description of survey monuments.
§ 350-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-14
1:341
§ 350-15. through § 350-27. (Reserved)
J. Names of recorded owner of adjoining plotted or unplotted land.
K. Certification of professional land surveyor who prepared the plan
certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plan.
L. Attestation by the applicant stating that the applicant is owner of the
tract or land proposed to be subdivided.
M. Statement by the owner dedicating the streets, the right-of-way,
easements and any sites proposed for public use.
N. A plan for the control of erosion and sedimentation for review by the
Butler County Conservation District office, as required by the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act or Chapter 102, Erosion Control, of the
rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
O. All plans which will require access to a highway under jurisdiction of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall contain a notice
that a highway occupancy permit is required.
P. Such other certificates, bonds, affidavits, endorsements or dedication
as may be required in the enforcement of this chapter.
Q. North point, scale and date.
§ 350-14 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-15
1:342
ARTICLE IV
Modifications
§ 350-28. Purpose.
Where the Planning Commission and Borough Council find that
extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with this
chapter, they may vary the requirements so that substantial justice may be
done and the public interest secured, provided that such modification will
not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of this chapter.
§ 350-29. Granting of modifications.
In granting modifications, the Planning Commission may recommend and
the Borough Council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment,
secure substantially the objectives of the standard or requirements so
varied or modified. The granting of administrative relief and modifications
by the Planning Commission shall be conditional and subject to the final
approval of the Borough Council.
§ 350-30. Procedures.
All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall be a part of
the application for final approval of a subdivision plat or land development,
or in the case of a consolidated review, the request shall accompany the
initial application. The request shall state the facts of unreasonableness or
hardship, the provision or provision involved and the minimum modification
necessary. The Borough Council may refer the request to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments prior to action and shall keep a written
record of action taken.
§ 350-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-30
1:343

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 350-31. Applicability.
The following minimum subdivision principles, standards, and requirements
will be applied by the Planning Commission, the Borough Council, Borough
staff and consultants hired to provide comment in evaluating applications
for preliminary and final plat approval.
§ 350-32. Land requirements.
§ 350-33. Street requirements.
A. Land shall be suited for the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
B. Land subject to hazards of life, health, and safety, such as strip- or
surface-mined land, quarry land, open ditches and land subject to
flooding or subsidence, shall not be subdivided for residential purposes
until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless guarantee is given
that adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the
subdivision plat.
A. Proposed streets shall be properly related to Borough, county and state
road and highway plans which have been prepared and officially
adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law.
B. Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades.
C. Local streets shall be so laid out in curvilinear fashion where practical,
so as to discourage through traffic, but provisions for street
connections into and from adjacent areas will be generally required.
D. Where a subdivision plat abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the Planning Commission and Borough Council may
require local access streets, reverse frontage lots, or such other
treatment which will provide protection for abutting properties,
reduction in the number of intersections with arterial streets, and
separation of local and through traffic.
E. New half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential
to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other
requirements and standards of this chapter and where, in addition,
satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street
can be secured.
F. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial
street, the unimproved part of the street shall be plotted within such
tract. The cost of said improvements shall be borne equally by the
developer/subdivider and the Borough.
§ 350-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-33
1:345
§ 350-34. Street alignment.
G. Cul-de-sac end streets may be permitted when it is clear that through
traffic at such a street end is not essential to the street system in that
district, or to the development of adjacent properties in the area, or the
topography of the ground prohibits the future extension of the streets.
The maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be 800 lineal feet,
exclusive of the turnaround portion.
(1) A turnaround with a cartway diameter of 80 feet, with a right-ofway
diameter of 100 feet, shall be required at the end of all streets.
(2) Unless future extension is clearly impracticable or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a property line,
and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried
to the property line in such a way as to permit future extension of
the street into an adjoining tract.
H. If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to permit
resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, adequate
street right-of-way to permit further resubdivision shall be provided as
necessary.
I. Reserve strips, restricting or controlling access to adjacent streets or
properties, shall be prohibited.
J. Maximum allowable grades, center line of streets:
(1) Arterial streets: 6%.
(2) Collector streets: 10%.
(3) Local streets: 12%.
K. Culs-de-sac. The maximum grade of the turnaround pavement portion
of the cul-de-sac shall be 5%.
L. Minimum grades on all streets shall not be less than 1%.
M. Vertical curves of proper and adequate length shall be installed on all
street grade changes exceeding 1% and provide a minimum sight
distance as follows:
Design speed = 60
mph
Arterial streets 500 feet
Design speed = 40
mph
Collector streets 275 feet
Design speed = 30
mph
Local streets 200 feet
A. Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 2°, connection shall be
made by horizontal curves.
§ 350-33 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-34
1:346
§ 350-35. Street widths.
§ 350-36. Street intersections.
B. To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum center-line radii for
horizontal curves shall be as follows:
Design speed = 60
mph
Arterial streets 1,000 feet
Design speed = 40
mph
Collector streets 400 feet
Design speed = 30
mph
Local streets 100 feet
A. Minimum street right-of-way widths and cartway (roadway) widths shall
be as follows:
Type of Street
Cartway
(feet)
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Arterial 40 60
Collector 26 50
Local 24 50
B. Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Borough Council for the following purposes:
(1) To promote public safety and convenience.
(2) To provide parking space in commercial districts and in areas of
high-density residential development.
(3) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of
inadequate right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width in
conformation with above standards may be required.
(4) Where anticipated traffic flows and vehicle size warrants additional
widths, increases in base material and cartway widths will be
established by the Planning Commission and the Borough
Engineer.
A. Curbs, where required, shall be installed by the subdivider along the
streets or where deemed necessary for public safety as determined by
the Borough Council. The curbs shall be of the type and material as
specified and approved by the Borough Council. All curbs at
intersections shall be rounded by a minimum radius of 25 feet for local
streets, 30 feet for collector streets, and 40 feet for arterial streets.
B. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 5%, a leveling area shall be provided with a transitional grade
§ 350-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-36
1:347
§ 350-37. Alleys.
§ 350-38. Driveways.
§ 350-39. Lots.
not to exceed 2% for a distance of 25 feet from the nearest right-of-way
line of the intersection.
C. Multiple intersection of more than four roads shall be prohibited.
D. Street offsets. Street offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
E. Reverse curves. Reverse curves shall be designed to accommodate
anticipated volumes of traffic at designed speeds.
A. Alleys are not permitted in residential areas.
B. Alleys are permitted in commercial and industrial areas, subject to
design approval of the Planning Commission and Borough Council.
A. Driveways shall be located to provide the best visibility possible within
the limits of the property that each driveway serves and shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
Borough.
B. Private driveways which function as local streets providing access to
individual residential lots shall be designed in accordance with this
article and in compliance with the minimum standards for public
streets.
A. Residential lots shall be subdivided in accordance with the terms of
Chapter 375, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Slippery Rock and
the provisions contained herein.
B. Subdivision and development of land other than for residential
purposes shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission and the
Borough Council insofar as size, depth, width of lots, access to public
roads and parking are concerned.
C. The frontage width of lots fronting a cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of
50 feet at the right-of-way line. The side yard setback requirements will
be calculated from the front of the structure and extended from both
sides of the structure to the side property lines.
D. All lot lines shall be set perpendicular or radial to the center line of the
street whenever possible. All nonradial lines shall be denoted as such
on the plat.
E. Lots abutting local streets shall front upon the streets which parallel
the long dimension of the block, if possible.
§ 350-36 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-39
1:348
§ 350-40. Building lines.
The building lines shall be in accordance with the terms of Chapter 375,
Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Slippery Rock.
§ 350-41. Blocks.
§ 350-42. Easements.
F. Where two such vehicular access areas abut one another, a combined
driveway shall be required to a distance of 150 feet. The minimum
twenty-foot width may be reduced to 15 feet on each lot.
G. Lots proposed as flag lots shall not be recommended for approval by the
Planning Commission and/or approved by the Borough Council unless
the developer/subdivider can demonstrate that a modification is
warranted in accordance with the following provisions: [Amended
9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 659]
(1) The extended portion of the flag lot shall have a minimum frontage
of 50 feet at the right-of-way line.
(2) A maximum of two additional lots shall be accessible via the
extended portion of the lot.
(3) The extended portion of the lot shall be included in the area
calculation of the lot being accessed.
A. Block length shall not exceed 1,200 feet nor be less than 500 feet.
B. Blocks shall be at least two lots in depth, except for reverse frontage
lots.
C. Exceptionally long blocks shall be provided with crosswalks with a
minimum right-of-way reservation of 12 feet and a four-foot paved walk.
D. The depth-to-width ratio of usable lot length shall be at a maximum of
2 1/2 to one.
A. Easements for sanitary sewer and stormwater sewer shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet and be placed at the side or rear of lots
whenever possible. When the Borough Council determines that
easements are required to extend proposed or future utilities, the
required easements shall be provided.
B. Anchor easements shall be approximately four feet by 30 feet and
placed on a lot line, at such locations as deemed appropriate by the
utility requiring such easements.
C. Aerial easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet and located as deemed
appropriate by the utility requiring such easements.
§ 350-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-42
1:349
§ 350-43. Reserved areas.
Reserve strips surrounding the property or areas reserved for any purpose
which shall make any area unprofitable for regular or special assessments
or which may revert to untended nuisance areas will not be approved by the
Planning Commission and the Borough Council.
§ 350-44. Street names.
The subdivider may choose his street names subject to the approval of the
Planning Commission and the Borough Council. No street, other than an
extension, may be given the name of an existing street in the Borough of
Slippery Rock postal service area of which the Borough of Slippery Rock is
a part.
§ 350-45. Access.
In subdividing land, it shall be done in a manner that will not have the effect
of barring adjacent property owners from access to the streets and ways of
the allotment.
D. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially
with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate
to preserve the natural flow of water and to provide sufficient width for
maintenance, but not less than 20 feet.
§ 350-42 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-45
1:350
ARTICLE VI
Improvements
§ 350-46. Grading.
§ 350-47. Underdrainage.
A. Streets shall be graded to street profile grades and cross sections as
established on and presented with the preliminary plats and as
approved by the Borough Council. Street cross sections shall be in
accordance with standards and specifications established by the
Borough.
B. Streets shall be graded to the full width of the street right-of-way, and
slopes of a minimum of two feet to one foot shall be constructed
commencing at the street right-of-way and extending on to the lots of
properties adjoining the street right-of-way; this applies to both cut and
fill sections.
C. Subgrade of streets shall be brought to the proper grade and contour
and shall be rolled and cross-rolled using compaction equipment
meeting the requirements of Form 408, or an acceptable alternative.
Compaction of the subgrade shall also meet the density requirements of
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408, or an acceptable
alternative. Where subgrades displaying pronounced elasticity or
deformation under rolling equipment are found and stability cannot be
obtained, the unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced until
the subgrade is suitability stabilized.
D. No base course shall be placed until the street subgrade has been
inspected and approved by the Borough Engineer. Said inspections
shall be paid for as specified in Article VII of this chapter.
A. In areas where springs, poor soil drainage conditions, wet weather
springs or where conditions exist that underground drainage is
necessary to properly protect the proposed street pavement, there shall
be constructed pipe underdrain, stone underdrain or subgrade drains
according to current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
specifications, subject to approval of drawings by the Borough
Engineer.
B. If during construction unknown poor drainage conditions are
encountered by the owner, he shall notify the Borough Engineer and
correct such conditions encountered at the direction of the Borough
Engineer to his complete satisfaction.
C. Permanent pipe underdrain of a size, depth, width and slope as
determined by the Borough Engineer shall be installed on the upper or
high side and all cut areas where they are required or necessary to
prevent the infiltration of water under the paved roadway.
§ 350-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-48
1:351
§ 350-48. Curbing.
§ 350-49. Base course.
§ 350-50. Pavement wearing course.
A. The type of curb used and location required is to be determined by the
Borough Council and subject to its approval before installation of the
same.
B. Concrete curbs shall be of the following types in accordance with
standards and specifications established by the Borough:
(1) Straight curb (eight inches by 24 inches).
(2) Battered curb (six inches by eight inches by 24 inches).
(3) Rolled curb and gutter.
(4) Combined curb and sidewalk.
(5) Extruded concrete.
C. Bituminous curbing shall be wedged construction and installed on both
sides of street in accordance with standards and specifications
established by the Borough.
A. The base course shall be constructed to lines, grades and cross sections
as approved, with all materials used and all construction requirements
performed in conformity with the latest edition of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408, and consist of a subbase
course and a bituminous concrete base course as follows:
(1) A crushed aggregate subbase course with a compacted thickness of
not less than eight inches in depth, all in accordance with Section
350, "Subbase," of Form 408.
(2) A bituminous concrete base course with a compacted thickness of
not less than three inches in depth, all in accordance with Section
305, "Bituminous Concrete Base Course," of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408, shall be constructed on
the subbase course.
(3) A bituminous seal course using FJ-1 bituminous material with a
compacted depth of 1/2 inch, all in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408, current edition, Section
422, "Bituminous Wearing Course FJ-1," shall be installed on the
bituminous concrete base course for use during the construction
phase of development.
B. The base course shall be installed and constructed in accordance with
standards and specifications established by the Borough.
§ 350-48 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-50
1:352
§ 350-51. Sidewalks.
§ 350-52. Street signs.
A. The pavement wearing course shall not be installed until 90% of the
dwellings are completed and construction equipment is not using
roadway. All damaged base course shall be replaced using the same
depth and materials specified herein in § 350-49. Any uneven base
course shall be leveled with a bituminous leveling course. All repairs
shall be completed and approved by the Borough Engineer prior to the
placement of the final wearing course.
B. The pavement wearing course shall be constructed to lines, grades and
cross sections as approved, with all materials used and all construction
requirements performed in conformity with the latest editions of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408 as follows:
(1) A bituminous wearing course (ID-2) with a compacted thickness of
not less than 1 1/2 inches in depth, all in accordance with the latest
edition of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Section
420 of Form 408, shall be constructed on the bituminous concrete
base course.
C. The pavement wearing course shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with standards and specifications established by the
Borough.
A. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street in a residential
subdivision or a land development. The design, construction, and
location of said sidewalks shall be consistent with the standards and
criteria of the Slippery Rock Sidewalk Master Plan Report, as hereafter
amended, and the standard details contained in Appendix A, Standard
Details. [Amended 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 659113]
B. Sidewalks shall be of portland concrete four inches in thickness, except
at driveways, where they shall be a minimum of six inches in thickness.
Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width, exclusive of the
width of the curb, in the manner approved in the preliminary plat.
C. Sidewalks shall be provided where streets of a proposed subdivision are
extensions of existing streets having sidewalks on one or both sides.
D. Sidewalks, where provided, shall be within the right-of-way and in
residential areas, where conditions permit, 2 1/2 feet from the curb.
Sidewalks should line up with walks in adjoining subdivisions.
A. Street name signs shall be installed at each street intersection in
accordance to type of materials, design and standards established by
the Borough Council prior to the occupancy of any dwellings.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 350-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-52
1:353
§ 350-53. Sanitary sewers.
§ 350-54. Sanitary sewage treatment plant.
B. A traffic control signage plan and supporting documentation shall be
submitted for approval and shall be installed prior to occupancy of any
dwellings.
C. All traffic control, no-parking and speed limit signs shall meet PennDOT
standards and locations for such signs or, where applicable, shall be
determined by the Borough Council on recommendation from the
Borough Engineer.
A. Installation of sanitary sewers, including house lines, laterals, trunk
lines, manholes, and other appurtenances, shall comply with the rules
and regulations of the municipal authority having jurisdiction and
subject to inspection by the same.
B. In areas where a municipal sewer is not available (over 1,000 feet from
the nearest point of the subdivision), is not planned, is not
topographically feasible, or where an easement cannot be obtained
through adjoining property, individual septic tanks, individual on-lot
septic disposal systems or private sanitary sewage treatment systems
may be permitted, subject to approval of drawings and design by the
Borough Council on recommendation from the Borough Engineer and
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
C. In areas where a municipal sewer is available, all properties within the
subdivision shall be connected thereto.
D. In areas where a municipal sewer is planned to be available, but not yet
built, laterals shall be extended to the center of the street or into the
right-of-way and trunk lines provided to the edge of the subdivision
closest to the municipal trunk location and capped. Until such times as
the municipal sewer becomes available, individual septic tanks, or a
private sanitary sewage treatment system, must be installed. In the
case of a private treatment system, a trunk line sewer shall be provided
to connect into the municipal system.
E. All individual properties now using sanitary sewage facilities and all
future properties requiring sanitary sewage facilities shall be
connected to the municipal sewage system if it is available.
A. Installation of sanitary sewage treatment plants and other
appurtenances shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Borough Council.
B. No building permit will be issued for any construction or development
until either an individual sanitary sewage disposal system or a sanitary
sewage treatment plant installation has been approved by the Borough
Council on recommendation from the Borough Engineer upon receipt of
written approval of said system by the Pennsylvania Department of
§ 350-52 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-54
1:354
§ 350-55. Stormwater management.116
For provisions relating to stormwater management, see Chapter 338,
Stormwater Management.
§ 350-56. Water supply.
§ 350-57. Monuments.
Permanent monuments of reinforced concrete or metal shall be installed
after all grading and improvements have been installed to identify all street
rights-of-way and set in locations as determined by the Borough Engineer.
The developer shall furnish a certification that monuments have been set in
the locations as shown on the recorded subdivision plan.
§ 350-58. Street trees.
Should the subdivider plan to provide trees, their proposed locations,
spacing and species must be submitted for approval by the Planning
Commission and Borough Council. On narrow rights-of-way or where the
planting strip between sidewalk and the curb is less than five feet wide,
trees will not be permitted, but are to be placed inside the property lines.
§ 350-59. Space for special purposes.
Environment Protection pursuant to the requirements of the
"Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act" (Act 537),114 as amended.115
A. If public water supply is available or definitely planned for the area by
the Slippery Rock Municipal Authority, then provisions shall be made
for its immediate and eventual use.
B. Community wells or project wells for water supply shall be approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Borough Council.
C. All water supply systems shall be constructed as per the specification of
the municipal authority with jurisdiction and approved by the same, and
copies of such agreements for supply of water service shall be
submitted to the Borough Council for approval.
D. Fire hydrants shall be installed as per the Borough's specifications for
locations and must meet minimum static pressure levels as specified for
fire protection.
A. Easements, adequate for all utilities: See § 350-42.
114. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
115. Editor's Note: Original § 610, Stormwater Management, of the 1983 Code, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-2-2011 by Ord. No. 656.
116. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 350-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-59
1:355
§ 350-60. Existing natural conditions.
In wooded areas or where other natural conditions exist, in such a manner
that their presence adds to the desirability of a subdivision, the Borough
Council shall require that the subdivider preserve as much of the original
trees and natural conditions as is economically feasible and require that a
minimum of grading be done other than the grading and excavating which
is required for the construction of the improvements in accordance with
the improvement standards included herein and approved by the Borough
Council.
§ 350-61. Grading plans.
B. Buffer area or planting screen, minimum width: 10 feet, where
required.
C. When adequate public play space does not exist in the opinion of the
Borough Council, within 1/2 miles of the site, the Council will request
the developer to provide recreational space on a pro rata schedule
based on minimum recreation needs as defined by the Slippery Rock
Borough Council on recommendation from the Slippery Rock Borough
Parks Commission. A fee in lieu of dedication of open space may be
accepted by the Council at its sole discretion and based upon a formula
developed to assess minimum Borough recreation land or facility needs
in relation to the size and location of the development being considered
for approval. Procedures for collection of fees in lieu of dedication shall
conform to Section 503, Subsection 11, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.117
A. At the time of submission of a subdivision plan or development plan for
preliminary approval, a grading plan shall be presented for review. The
grading plan shall identify the existing and proposed grade contours at
two-foot intervals with sufficient elevations to show proposed grading
of streets, lots, drainageways, stormwater detention ponds and any
other proposed grading activity.
B. Topsoil preservation. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used
as spoil. Topsoil must be removed from the areas of construction and
stored in accordance with the approved erosion and sedimentation
control plan as required under § 350-16N of this chapter. Upon
completion of the construction, the topsoil must be redistributed on the
site uniformly. All areas of the site shall be stabilized by seeding, both
temporary and permanent, or planted in accordance with the approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan as required under § 350-16N of
this chapter.
117. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(11).
§ 350-59 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-62
1:356
§ 350-62. As-built plans.
After completion of all required improvements, the developer shall have
his engineer or surveyor prepare and submit for Borough approval plans
and profiles showing the exact location, elevation, grade, size, stormwater
detention pond volumes and material used to install all facilities. Said plans
shall be dated, signed and sealed by the person preparing the plan and be
submitted on reproducible linen or Mylar.
§ 350-63. Underground utilities. [Added 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 659]
All new construction, whether residential or nonresidential, shall be served
by underground utilities, except that existing overhead electric service may
be extended or supplemented where utility easements for underground
service lines cannot be secured.
§ 350-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-63
1:357

ARTICLE VII
Conditions of Acceptance
§ 350-64. Performance requirements.
§ 350-65. Performance guarantees.
A. Before approving any subdivision plan, the Borough Council shall
require a written agreement that necessary grading, paving and street
improvements, sidewalks, streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains and
sanitary sewers, as may be required by the Borough, shall be installed
by the subdivider in strict accordance with the design standards and
specifications of the Borough, within a specified time period. Such
agreement shall be prepared by the Borough Solicitor at the expense of
the developer.
B. When requested by the developer in order to facilitate financing, the
Borough Council shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining satisfactory financial security. The final plat shall
not be signed nor recorded until the financial improvements agreement
is executed. If within 90 days, unless written extension is granted by the
Borough Council, the financial improvement agreement is not executed,
then the resolution or letter of contingent approval shall expire.
A. The Borough Council shall insure, through receipt of certificates of
compliance submitted and attested by the Borough Engineer, that
required improvements have been installed according to the
specifications of the final plat, or alternately require the posting of
adequate surety to cover the cost for such improvements. The Borough
Council shall specify one of the following alternatives for guaranteeing
compliance with the requirements of this section for the developer
requesting final approval of a plat. The decision of which alternative
shall be required is that of the Borough Council, and final approval of a
plat shall not be granted until the surety required is fully provided.
B. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the subdivider's scheduled date of
completion. The amount estimated shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer for submittal to the Borough by the applicant or
subdivider. If the amount of the estimated financial security is contested
by the Borough Engineer, a third licensed professional engineer chosen
mutually by the applicant or subdivider and the Borough shall estimate
the amount of financial security necessary, which estimate shall be
presumed fair and reasonable. Fees for the services of the third
engineer shall be paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or
subdivider.
(1) Completion of improvements prior to final approval. Prior to final
plat approval, the subdivider shall complete, in a manner
§ 350-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-65
1:359
satisfactory to the Borough Council and the Borough Engineer,
all improvements required in these regulations specified in the
final subdivision plat and as approved by the Borough Council
and shall dedicate same to the Borough in accordance with these
regulations. Final plat approval shall not be granted until the
dedication of said improvements has been accepted by the Borough
Council.
(2) Guarantee of future performance. In lieu of requiring the
completion of all improvements prior to final plat approval, the
Borough may, at its discretion, enter into a contract with the
subdivider whereby the subdivider shall guarantee to complete all
improvements required by this chapter or otherwise specified by
the Borough Council in a manner satisfactory to the Borough
Council. To secure this contract, the subdivider shall provide,
subject to the approval of the Borough Council, one of the following
guarantees:
(a) Surety bond. The subdivider shall obtain a security bond from a
surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State
of Pennsylvania. The bond shall be payable to the Borough and
shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the entire cost, as
estimated by the Borough Engineer, as herein provided, for the
installation of all improvements. The duration of the bond shall
be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the
Borough in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Escrow account. The subdivider shall deposit cash, or other
instruments readily convertible into cash at face value, either
with the Borough or in escrow with a bank. The form of any
instruments other than cash, and, in the case of an escrow
account, the bank with which the funds are to be deposited,
shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Solicitor. The
amount of the deposit shall be at least equal to the cost, as
estimated by the Borough Engineer, of installing all required
improvements, plus 10%. In case of an escrow account, the
subdivider shall file with the Borough Council an agreement
between the financial bank and himself guaranteeing the
following:
[1] That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust
until released by the Borough Council and may not be used
or pledged by the subdivider as security in any other
matter during the period; and
[2] That, in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider
to complete said improvements, the bank shall
immediately make the funds in said account available to
the Borough for use in the completion of those
improvements.
§ 350-65 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-65
1:360
§ 350-66. Release from improvement bond.
(c) Irrevocable letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit in an
amount equal to the cost of all required improvements, as
estimated by the Borough Engineer, plus 10%, shall be posted
naming the Borough Council as beneficiaries. The financial
institution which provides the irrevocable letter of credit shall
be first approved by the Borough Council. Failure on the part of
the subdivider to complete said improvements shall cause the
funds posted as an irrevocable letter of credit to be more
available to the Borough upon written notice of a claim against
said funds.
A. Procedure.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the required
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
required improvements and shall send a copy to the Borough
Engineer.
(2) The Borough Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of such
notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall,
thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Borough Council, and
shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified
or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30
days after receipt by the Borough Engineer of the aforesaid
authorization from the Borough Council; said report shall be
detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements
or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by
the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of
reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
(3) The Borough Council shall notify the developer, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, within 15 days of receipt of the
engineer's report of the action of said Borough Council with
relation thereto.
(4) If any portion of the required improvements shall not be approved
or shall be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall
proceed to complete the same, and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
(5) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
subdivider's or developer's right to contest or question, by legal
proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Borough
Council or the Borough Engineer.
§ 350-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-66
1:361
(6) The Borough may prescribe that the applicant shall reimburse the
Borough for the reasonable and necessary expense incurred in
connection with the inspection of improvements. The applicant
shall not be required to reimburse the Borough Council for any
inspection which is duplicative of inspections conducted by other
governmental agencies or public utilities. The burden of proving
that any inspection is duplicative shall be upon the objecting
applicant. Such reimbursement shall be based upon a schedule
established by ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees
charged by the Borough's professional consultant for work
performed for similar services in the community, but in no event
shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the professional
consultant to the Borough for comparable services when fees are
not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.118
(a) The Borough Council shall submit to the applicant an itemized
bill showing the work performed in connection with the
inspection of improvements performed, identifying the person
performing the services and the time and date spent for each
task. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any
such expense in connection with the inspection of
improvements, the applicant shall, no later than 100 days after
the date of transmittal of a bill for inspection services, notify
the Borough and the Borough's professional consultant that
such inspection expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary and shall explain the basis of their objections to
the fees charged, in which case the Borough shall not delay or
disapprove a request for release of financial security, a
subdivision or land development application or any approval or
permit related to development due to the applicant's dispute of
inspection expenses. Failure of the applicant to dispute a bill
within 100 days shall be a waiver of the applicant's right to
arbitration of that bill under this section.
(b) Subsequent to the final release of financial security for
completion of improvements for a subdivision or land
development or any phase thereof, the professional consultant
shall submit to the Borough Council a bill for inspection
services, specifically designated as a final bill, which the
Borough Council shall submit to the applicant. The final bill
shall include inspection fees incurred through the release of
financial security.
(c) If the professional consultant and the applicant cannot agree
on the amount of expenses which are reasonable and
necessary, then the applicant shall have the right, within 100
days of the transmittal of the final bill or supplement to the
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 350-66 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-66
1:362
final bill to the applicant, to request the appointment of
another professional consultant to serve as an arbitrator. The
applicant and professional consultant whose fees are being
challenged shall, by mutual agreement, appoint another
professional consultant to review any bills the applicant has
disputed and which remain unresolved and make a
determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable
and necessary. The arbitrator shall be of the same profession
as the professional consultant whose fees are being
challenged.
(d) The arbitrator so appointed shall hear such evidence and
review such documentation as the arbitrator in his or her sole
opinion deems necessary and shall render a decision no later
than 50 days after the date of appointment. Based on the
decision of the arbitrator, the applicant or the professional
consultant whose fees were challenged shall be required to pay
any amounts necessary to implement the decision within 60
days. In the event the Borough has paid the professional
consultant an amount in excess of the amount determined to be
reasonable and necessary, the professional consultant shall
within 60 days reimburse the excess payment.
(e) In the event that the Borough's professional consultant and
applicant cannot agree upon the arbitrator to be appointed
within 20 days of the request for appointment of an arbitrator,
then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Borough is located (or, if at the time there be no President
Judge, then the senior active Judge then sitting) shall appoint
such arbitrator, who, in that case, shall be neither the
Borough's professional consultant nor any professional
consultant who has been retained by, or performed services for,
the Borough or the applicant within the preceding five years.
(f) The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid by the applicant if the
disputed fee is upheld by the arbitrator. The fee of the
arbitrator shall be paid by the charging party if the disputed
fee is $2,500 or greater than the payment decided by the
arbitrator. The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid in an equal
amount by the applicant and the charging party if the disputed
fee is less than $2,500 of the payment decided by the
arbitrator.
(g) In the event that the disputed fees have been paid and the
arbitrator finds that the disputed fees are unreasonable or
excessive by more than $10,000, the arbitrator shall:
[1] Award the amount of the fees found to be unreasonable or
excessive to the party that paid the disputed fee; and
§ 350-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-66
1:363
§ 350-67. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
§ 350-68. Maintenance bond.
[2] Impose a surcharge of 4% of the amount found as
unreasonable or excessive to be paid to the party that paid
the disputed fee.
(h) The Borough or the applicant shall have 100 days after paying
a fee to dispute any fee charged as being unreasonable or
excessive.
(7) At the time of final approval and prior to the issuance of any
required Borough permit, a deposit of 10% shall be made by the
applicant with the Borough for the costs of review and inspection
where public utilities and facilities are proposed. Said 10% shall be
calculated as 10% of the total costs of installation of said public
utilities and facilities. Any funds unexpended at the time of
acceptance of the aforementioned public utilities and facilities shall
be returned to the applicant.
A. In the event that any improvements which may be required have not
been constructed and installed as provided for in the written
agreement, this chapter and the requirements of the Borough Council
or in accord with the approved final plan, the Borough Council shall
enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies.
B. If proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the
cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable
action to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of
the improvements.
C. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any
legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be
used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security, and not for any other municipal purpose.
A. Before the Borough Engineer shall issue to the Borough Council a
written certification that all improvements specified and required have
been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the agreement and
requirements relative to the land development and in compliance with
the specifications, standards, ordinances and requirements of the
Borough, the subdivider or developer shall be required to deposit with
the Borough a corporate maintenance bond, or other surety acceptable
to the Borough Solicitor, in such amount, under such conditions, and in
such form as shall be required by the Borough Council. The
maintenance bond shall guarantee the repairs and maintenance by the
§ 350-66 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-68
1:364
§ 350-69. Acceptance of public improvements.
Upon completion of the inspection and approval of the public
improvements, the developer shall submit a request to the Borough Council,
in writing, to accept the dedication of the public improvements. The request
for acceptance shall include deeds of dedication and all other legal
descriptive documents necessary to prepare a resolution or ordinance and
shall be submitted at least 20 days prior to the regular meeting of the
Borough Council. At the regular meeting, the Borough Council shall enact
a resolution or ordinance accepting the public improvements as part of the
Borough's public facilities, subject to the posting of the maintenance bond
required by this chapter.
§ 350-70. Final inspection of public improvements.
Prior to the end of the eighteen-month period when the maintenance bond
expires and before the maintenance bond is released, the Borough Engineer
shall make a final inspection and certify in writing to the Borough Council
that all the public improvements are in good order. If any repairs are
required or maintenance needed, the subdivider shall be notified in writing,
and such repairs or maintenance shall be done and approved prior to
certification by the Borough Engineer.
§ 350-71. Snowplowing.
The applicant shall be responsible from the time there is at least one
occupant in the proposed development to plow snow and disperse anti-skid
material on development roads as may be necessary to provide ingress and
egress to the occupants at the applicant's cost, prior to the acceptance of
dedicated streets. The applicant shall post with the Borough the sum of
$1,000 as an escrow to provide for snow removal and the dispersal of antiskid
material prior to acceptance of dedication of the streets. All payments
to the Borough for said snow removal and dispersal of anti-skid material
shall be made from the escrow fund. In the event that the escrow should
subdivider or developer of the streets, roads, pavement, sidewalks,
curbs, gutters, stormwater drains and facilities, sanitary sewer and
facilities and any other improvements constructed and installed in the
subdivision or development for a period of 18 months from the date
of final and official acceptance of the above said improvements and
facilities by the Borough Council. The amount of the maintenance
bond shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements.
B. The repairs and maintenance required to be performed by the
subdivider or developer shall extend only to making good any inherent
defects which become manifested in the materials and workmanship
under ordinary conditions and shall not be held to cover any breakage
or damage caused by improper use or by accident resulting from
circumstances over which the subdivider or developer has no control.
§ 350-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-71
1:365
become depleted, the applicant shall post an additional sum of $1,000 and
such further amounts as may be necessary until such time as the dedication
of the streets is accepted by the Borough.
§ 350-72. Compliance with standards required.
§ 350-73. Recording of plats.
A. No road, street, land, way or related improvement shall be accepted as
a part of the highway system of the Borough or for maintenance unless
opened, laid out, graded and improved in strict accordance with the
standards and regulations of the Borough. The requirements,
specifications and standards of construction, material and
appurtenances as designated herein are considered as minimum, and
the Borough Council may, as it deems advisable, revise said
specifications and requirements to secure a higher standard of
improvements and community development.
B. No stormwater drainage facilities, sanitary sewer and sewage
treatment facilities, water supply and water distribution system and
facilities or any other facilities or improvements will be accepted as a
part of the Borough's facilities for operation and maintenance unless
designed and constructed in strict compliance with all the standards,
specifications, rules, regulations, ordinances and requirements of the
Borough.
A. Upon approval of this final plat, the subdivider or developer shall within
60 days of such final approval deliver to the Borough offices the
following plats and documents for Borough signatures:
(1) One original linen or Mylar and two duplicate Mylars and six prints.
(2) Four sets of prints of the final construction drawings and
supporting documents.
(3) Executed homeowners' association document, signed and recorded
by participating property owners, where applicable.119
(4) Executed developer's agreement meeting the requirements of
§ 350-64, Performance requirements, and of § 350-65, Performance
guarantees, of this chapter.
B. At the time of submittal of the plans and documents as specified in this
section, the developer shall pay to the Borough a fee equal to the
prevailing fee of the Butler County Recorder of Deeds for recording the
original plat and any homeowners' association documents required to
be recorded in such office, plus a fee for all municipal services rendered
as set forth in the appropriate fee resolutions.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 350-71 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-73
1:366
§ 350-74. Reconsideration.
Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the
Borough of Slippery Rock Planning Commission or the Borough Council may
present additional relevant information and request reconsideration of the
original finding, decision or recommendation upon written request within
30 days of notification of the Planning Commission or Borough Council
decision on either the preliminary or final plat application.
§ 350-75. Appeals.
In any case where the Borough Council shall refuse to approve any plats
submitted to it in accordance with this chapter, any person aggrieved by the
action of the Borough Council may appeal as provided by law to the Court
of Common Pleas of Butler County, Pennsylvania.
§ 350-76. Unauthorized work; responsibility of Borough.
If any road or any drainage facilities in connection therewith shall be
opened, constructed, or dedicated for public use or travel except in strict
accordance with plats approved and recorded as herein provided, neither
C. Upon recording of plats and homeowners' association documents, the
Borough shall apprise the subdivider or developer of the official filing
date as well as the appropriate recording reference data and make
available one duplicate Mylar plat and one set of approved construction
drawings, plus a copy of the homeowners' association documents.
D. After an approved subdivision plan shall have been officially recorded,
the streets, parks, and other public improvements shown thereon shall
be considered to be a part of the official plan of the Borough.
E. Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a subdivision
plan to be recorded may be offered for dedication to the Borough by
formal notation thereof on the plan, or the owner may note on such plan
that any improvements have not been offered for dedication to the
Borough.
F. Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision plan
shall be deemed to be a private street, park or improvement until such
time as the same shall have been offered for dedication to the Borough
and accepted by ordinance or resolution, or until it shall have been
condemned for use as a public street, park or other improvement.
G. Any single nonresidential land development, whether occurring on one
lot or on a combination of parcels under single ownership and phased
over a period of years, shall be recorded with Butler County as an
approved land development plan following completion of all
contemplated improvements and structures. One Mylar drawing shall
be submitted to the Butler County Recorder of Deeds and two paper
copies filed with the Borough of Slippery Rock.
§ 350-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-76
1:367
the Borough Council nor any public authorities shall place, construct, or
operate any sewer, drain, water pipe or other facilities, or do any work of
any kind, in or upon such road, and neither the Borough Council nor any
other public authorities shall have responsibility of any kind with respect
to any such road or drainage facilities, notwithstanding any use of the
same by the public; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall
prevent the laying of trunk sewers, drains, water or gas mains, if required
by engineering necessity for the accommodating of other territory.
§ 350-76 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-76
1:368
ARTICLE VIII
Fees
§ 350-77. Fees and charges.
A. All applications submitted for the review and approval of plans of
subdivision and plans of land development prepared in preliminary or
final form shall be accompanied by a review fee and a deposit in
accordance with a schedule of fees and charges established, or to be
established, and adopted by resolution of the Borough Council to
defray, or to help defray, any cost that may be incurred by the Borough
in viewing and inspecting the site of the subdivision or land
development and reviewing the application, data and the plans
submitted relative to the same.
(1) A deposit shall be made, at the time of application for preliminary
and final subdivision approval or land development approval, with
the Borough of Slippery Rock in order to cover the costs of
engineering review and inspection of proposed improvements,
legal fees and other consultants' fees whose services are required
in order to provide a comprehensive review of the subdivision
application.
(2) A review fee, as established by resolution of the Borough Council,
and fees as charged to the Borough for activities related to the
subdivision application shall be deducted from the deposit as
invoices are received.
(3) A full accounting of all expenses incurred during the review and
approval of a subdivision application, whether preliminary or final,
shall be kept by the Borough Administrator/Secretary and made
available to the applicant.
(4) Upon completion of all improvements to the satisfaction of the
Borough Engineer, and upon a full and complete release of all
sureties posted relative to the improvements proposed, the
remaining balance of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant
upon receipt of a written request to do so.
B. The schedule of fees and charges established or to be established may
vary and be regulated in accordance to the scope and complexity of the
plan of subdivision and land development project, such as:
(1) Number of parcels or lots in plan;
(2) Site development plans;
(3) Utility development plans;
(4) Applicant's plan of construction and development of the land,
structures and facilities thereon, and appurtenant thereto; and
§ 350-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-77
1:369
(5) Number of times that a plan is submitted or resubmitted for review
and request is made for approval of the same.
C. Where a plan of subdivision or land development for any reason has
been rejected by the Borough Planning Commission and/or Borough
Council, the applicant, when resubmitting plans and application for
review and approval of the same, shall be required to pay a fee as set
forth in the Borough's schedule of fees and charges for such submittals.
D. All review fees shall be made payable to the Borough of Slippery Rock.
All review fees deducted from the original deposit are nonrefundable,
and the approval or rejection for any reason of any plan of subdivision
or land development will not be reason or cause for the return of any
fee submitted.
E. The applicant shall reimburse the Borough of Slippery Rock for all costs
associated with the review and approval, or denial, of an application for
subdivision or land development which exceed the amount of the
original deposit.
§ 350-77 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-77
1:370
ARTICLE IX
Amendments
§ 350-78. Amendment procedure.
§ 350-79. Publication and advertisement; availability of provisions.
A. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice in the manner prescribed for
enactment of a proposed subdivision and land development ordinance
by Section 504 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.120 In
addition, in case of an amendment other than that prepared by the
Planning Commission, Borough Council shall submit each such
amendment to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least
30 days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed
amendment.
B. At least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing on the amendment, the
Borough shall submit the proposed amendment to the Butler County
Planning Commission for recommendation.
C. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to this chapter to the Butler County
Planning Commission.
A. Proposed amendments to this chapter shall not be enacted unless
notice of proposed enactment is given and shall include the time and
place of the meeting at which passage will be considered, a reference to
a place within the Borough where copies of the proposed chapter
amendment may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge
not greater than the cost thereof. The Council shall publish the
proposed chapter amendment once in one newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality not more than 60 days nor less than
seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed chapter
amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a
brief summary, prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all
the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included in the
public notice:
(1) A copy of the full text shall be supplied to the newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed chapter amendment shall be filed
in the Butler County Law Library, which may impose a fee no
greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said
chapter amendments.
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10504.
§ 350-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-79
1:371
B. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed chapter
amendment before voting upon enactment, the governing body shall, at
least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality, a brief summary setting forth all
the provisions in reasonable detail, together with a summary of the
amendments.
C. Amendments to this chapter may be incorporated into official ordinance
books by reference with the same force and effect as if duly recorded
therein.
§ 350-79 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-79
1:372
ARTICLE X
Enforcement Remedies
§ 350-80. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter enacted under Act 247, Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, and all amendments thereto, shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the
Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating the chapter to have
believed there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough of Slippery Rock
the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
§ 350-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-80
1:373

ARTICLE XI
Preventive Remedies
§ 350-81. Preventive remedies authorized.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Borough of Slippery Rock may
institute and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction,
to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling
or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough of Slippery Rock may refuse to issue any permit or grant
any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property
which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of
real property in violation of any ordinance adopted pursuant to Act 247,
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.121 This authority to deny
such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation, without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 350-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-81
1:375

ARTICLE XII
Interpretation
§ 350-82. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to permit any waiver of the
restrictions or requirements of Chapter 375, Zoning, of the Code of the
Borough of Slippery Rock, as now enacted or hereafter amended.
§ 350-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-82
1:377
Chapter 368
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 334. Stormwater management — See Ch. 338.
§ 350-82 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 350-82
1:378
ARTICLE I
Water Connections
[Adopted 5-2-1972 by Ord. No. 281 (Ch. 26, Part 1, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 368-1. Connection required.
Any owner of property abutting upon any street in which there is a water
main constructed or acquired by the Borough shall make connection with
the waterline for the purpose of supplying water to such property.
§ 368-2. Notice to connect; failure to comply.
Any owner not complying with the above requirement shall be given 45
days' notice that such water connection is required, and, upon failure of
the owner to make such connection, the Borough may make the same and
collect the cost thereof from the owner by a municipal claim or an action of
assumpsit.
§ 368-3. Individual wells and private water systems prohibited.
No person, partnership or corporation owning property within the Borough
of Slippery Rock, which is now or which hereinafter may be connected
to the Borough water system, will be permitted to establish an individual
well or private water system for the supplying of water for human use and
consumption.
§ 368-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-3
1:379

ARTICLE II
Water and Sewer Rates and Service
[Adopted 12-6-1989 by Ord. No. 349 (Ch. 26, Part 2, of the 1983
Code)]
§ 368-4. Rates.
A. All owners of property who are users of water and sewer service
rendered and metered by the Borough of Slippery Rock shall pay the
following monthly rates or minimum charges, whichever is greater:
Water Service Sewerage Service
Minimum charge $4.85 $4.85
First 2,000 gallons per
1,000 gallons
$3.15 $3.15
Next 2,000 gallons per
1,000 gallons
$3.02 $3.02
Next 12,000 gallons per
1,000 gallons
$2.90 $2.90
Next 20,000 gallons per
1,000 gallons
$2.77 $2.77
Next 60,000 gallons per
1,000 gallons
$2.60 $2.60
Over 100,000 gallons per
1,000 gallons
$2.45 $2.45
B. Minimum monthly charges:
Size of Meter Water Service Sewerage Service
1 inch or less $4.85 $4.85
1 1/2 inches $17.50 $17.50
2 inches $22.50 $22.50
3 inches $29.00 $29.00
C. Private fire hydrants: $150 per year.
D. Restoring service after shutoff for any reason: $20.
E. A minimum deposit of $70, plus restoration fee (see Subsection D of this
section, when applicable), for any renter; $35 if only water or sewer
service is provided.
F. A charge of $20 for nonsufficient funds checks given in payment of
water/sewer bill.
G. A charge of $30 for checking meter where the meter is found to check
within the allowable limits of accuracy.
§ 368-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-4
1:381
§ 368-5. Meters.
It shall be the duty of the Borough to furnish and install meters. Every
building hereafter constructed shall be metered before any water shall
be furnished to the building. All meters shall be owned and provided by
the Borough. The Borough reserves the right to require the owner of
the building to provide a backflow prevention valve where there is risk
of contamination of the water system. The applicant shall inquire as to
whether the installation of a pressure-regulating valve would be desirable
at the location of the property.
§ 368-6. Billing.
H. Sprinkler systems:
Private Sprinkler System Charge Per Year
2-inch riser $50
2 1/2-inch riser $70
3-inch riser $95
4-inch riser $176
6-inch riser $378
8-inch riser $693
10-inch riser $1,070
12-inch riser $1,638
I. Bulk water sales: $20 tank truck load, plus the price of the water in
accordance with Subsection A above.
J. Septic tank pumpers shall be permitted, until further notice, to dump
holding tank wastes and septic tank wastes at the dump station
provided near the Borough sewage treatment plant upon arrangement
with the sewage treatment plant operator and shall pay the Borough for
that service at the following rates:
(1) Holding tank wastes: $0.02 per gallon.
(2) Septic tank wastes: $0.04 per gallon.
A. Bills for water and sewer service will be rendered monthly based on
monthly meter readings, with the Borough reserving the right to
periodically render a bill based on estimated usage.
B. All bills for water service and sewage service shall be rendered to the
owner of the premises to which the water and sewer service is
furnished, and such owner shall in all cases be liable for payment of
such bill.
C. The owner may request the Borough to render the bill in the name of
the tenant by a written order from the owner. Also, the owner, upon
§ 368-4 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 368-6
1:382
§ 368-7. Change of ownership of property.
The owner of property served by the water and sewer system shall notify the
Borough immediately of any change of ownership of such property so that
the Borough may cause the meter to be read so that the final consumption
shall be billed to the seller and all future billings shall be made to the buyer.
§ 368-8. Payments.
All charges shall be payable monthly at the First National Bank of Slippery
Rock or at the Borough office at 306 East Water Street, being due and
payable on the first day of each month. Every customer who shall fail to
pay in full any charge within 18 days after the same shall become due and
payable shall be subject to a penalty of 10% of the amount of such charge.
If not paid within 48 days after the same shall become due, said charge
plus penalty shall bear interest at 1 1/2% per month or fraction thereof. The
Borough shall have the right to cut off service from the delinquent premises
and not to restore the same until all delinquent charges and a fee of $20 for
the cost of restoring service shall have been paid.
§ 368-9. Management of water and sewer system.
The Borough shall have charge and management of the water and sewer
system and shall issue from time to time such rules and regulations
governing the use, operation and maintenance of said water and sewer
system as it shall deem necessary.
§ 368-10. Fire hydrant or hose connection charge.
Each applicant providing a fire hydrant or hose connection for their own
benefit shall be charged additionally according to the current rate schedule
a monthly charge for each said connection as a ready-to-serve charge.
§ 368-11. Water service connection charges.
termination of occupancy by any tenant or occupant, shall notify the
Borough, and the owner shall be liable for payment, including
delinquent charges unpaid as of the date of termination and not
covered by the tenant security deposit.
A. The service connection charge for water connection is hereby set at
$650 for a single equivalent dwelling unit. An additional charge for
multiple equivalent dwelling units to be individually metered will be at
the rate of $125 per unit for the next four units; $100 per unit for the
next 20 units; and $75 per unit over 25 units.
B. If a property owner requests a single meter for multiple-dwelling-unit
property and agrees that the property will perpetually be served by a
single meter and is willing to record this on the property deed and
further agrees to pay the monthly service charges as they exist or may
change in the future on a multiple-building basis broken monthly into
§ 368-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-11
1:383
§ 368-12. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for water service and sewer service:
§ 368-13. Meters for independent water systems.
All properties, except multiunit, connected to the sanitary sewer and having
an independent water supply shall be metered and charged for sewer
service according to the above rates. The Borough shall install and maintain
the required meter on the independent water supply, but installation and
maintenance shall be at the owner's expense.
§ 368-14. Meters in multiunit buildings.
All owners of property having a master metered mobile home park or
a multiunit building or buildings thereon ("multiunit" being defined as a
increments based on the number of occupied units as certified monthly
and integrated back to a single billing (see § 368-14) to the property
owner and further to pay the costs of any additional metering,
plumbing, etc., if the owner should wish to and the Borough agrees to
allow reversion to individual meters and billing procedures at a later
date, then the service connection charge shall be $100 per unit for
the second through 50 units, $75 per unit for the next 20 units and
$35 per unit for each unit over 25 units. In this instance, a recordable
legal agreement shall be executed setting forth the proper conditions
of providing service.
C. In any event, the minimum water service connection charge shall be
$650.
A. Buildings or properties served by a single service line but used for
apartments, industrial, public or mixed use, that is, residential and
commercial or residential and industrial or any combination thereof,
shall be charged a fee for connection into the water system as per
§ 368-11 and the sewer system as per § 368-26, with each self-sufficient
area considered as a unit.
B. Each apartment, mobile home or dormitory-type structure having a
separate kitchen and bath shall be considered one unit.
C. If a mobile home development would construct a water and sewer
system in accordance with Borough standards and said development
would deed the system, including rights-of-way, to the Borough and
would request the Borough to maintain the system in accordance with
Borough policy, then each service connection into the system for each
mobile home would be at the rate of $650. For a mobile home park with
a privately owned distribution system, the service connection fees
would be as in § 368-11, above, and would have to be master metered
even if individually metered, with the park owner responsible for any
water loss in his private system.
§ 368-11 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 368-14
1:384
building with more than one apartment or living quarters and/or business
establishment), presently having one water meter, shall be billed at the
applicable rates in the following manner:
§ 368-15. Meters in new multiunit buildings.
All newly constructed multiunit buildings shall be constructed so as to
accommodate, through a water header within the building, individual water
meters for each unit within the multiunit building or sign a binding
agreement with the Borough which will allow the Borough to charge
according to § 368-14 above. Said agreement shall be recorded and run with
the property.
§ 368-16. Multiunit buildings with independent water supply.
For all properties having multiple units connected to the sanitary sewer,
which units are not connected to said water facilities of the Borough but
have an independent source of water supply, said sewage service shall be
metered at the current rates in the following manner:
§ 368-17. Metering mobile home parks.
All owners of mobile home parks connected to the municipal water system
and sanitary sewer system shall have one meter or the option described
under § 368-12 above and shall be metered at the current rates in the
following manner if the individually metered option is not chosen:
A. The total meter reading in gallons to be divided by the number of
occupied units in the multiunit, thereby establishing the average
reading in gallons per unit. This average reading shall be applied to the
current schedule of rates for water and sewer service thereof
establishing a cost per unit, but not less than the current minimum per
occupied unit per month, whichever is greater. This cost in turn shall be
multiplied by the number of occupied units in the multiunit as
established above, thus totaling the bill to be rendered to the owner of
the property.
A. The total meter reading in gallons is to be divided by the number of
units in the multiunit building, thereby establishing the average
reading in gallons per unit. This average reading shall be applied to the
current minimum for sewer service only per occupied unit per month
and be multiplied by the number of occupied units in the multiunit
building to be rendered to the owner of the property. The water meter is
to be furnished and installed by the Borough, but the costs for
installation and maintenance of said meter shall be at the property
owner's expense.
A. The total reading in gallons to be divided by the number of occupied
mobile homes in the park as determined by the Borough official and
certified by the mobile home park manager during the monthly reading
of the meter, thereby establishing the average reading in gallons per
§ 368-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-17
1:385
§ 368-18. Prohibited acts.
For the protection of the water system, the following regulations shall be in
force:
§ 368-19. Application for water and sewer service.
Applications for water and/or sanitary sewerage service shall have been
made to the Borough by the owner of such premises or by his authorized
agent. Such application shall be made upon a form to be furnished by
the Borough, and, upon such application, the applicant shall state fully all
purposes for which he shall desire such water and shall answer fairly and
without concealment all necessary questions relating to number of units,
accessibility of neighbor and all possibilities for illegal use of water.
§ 368-20. Only Borough may tap lines.
No person, except an authorized employee of the Borough, shall tap any
main or distributing pipe. Service connections shall be furnished and
installed by the Borough from the street to the rights-of-way or property
line, including stop cock and box.
§ 368-21. Owner responsibility for service pipe.
The service pipe shall be the property of the owner of the premises to which
it is connected and shall be installed according to the specifications of the
occupied mobile home. This average reading shall be applied to the
current schedule of rates for water and sewer service, thereby
establishing a cost per mobile home, but not less than the current
minimum per mobile home per month, whichever is greater. The mobile
home park operator shall certify to the owner the number of units in
the park monthly. The cost, in turn, shall be multiplied by the number of
mobile homes as established above, thus totaling the bill to be rendered
to the owner of the mobile home park.
A. No person shall damage, injure, molest, disturb or interfere with any
pipe, hydrant, stop cock, reservoir, machinery, tool or any other
property belonging to or appurtenant to the water system.
B. No person shall, except with authority from the Borough, open, close,
interfere with, or attach to or connect with any fire hydrant, stop valve
or stop cock operated or maintained by the Borough; provided,
however, in the case of fire and the opening and use of the fire hydrants
needed in the fighting thereof, shall be under the direction of the Fire
Chief or presiding officer at the fire.
C. Any violation under this section would be punishable under the
Pennsylvania Criminal Code.122
122. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 368-17 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 368-21
1:386
Borough. All repairs to the same shall be made at the expense of such
property owner, who shall keep his pipes and fixtures in good repair so as to
avoid unnecessary waste and protect the meter against frost. The property
owner shall be held responsible for any waste or damage that may result
from any defective service pipe or other pipe located within the premises or
any fixtures. No water shall be turned on permanently in any location until
the Borough shall be satisfied that every applicable provision of this article
has been complied with. Prior to such approval of the Borough, water may
be turned on by the person doing such work only as may be necessary in
order to test his work. Shutoff valves shall be located where accessible at
all times and shall be provided for each metered unit to allow for Borough
operation as required without entering other occupied units.
§ 368-22. Meter failure.
If a meter fails to register or otherwise becomes out of order, such meter
shall be repaired or replaced by the Borough, and the current bill shall
be estimated and determined by the average amount of water used in a
previous corresponding period. No deduction from any water bill shall be
allowed on account of leakage.
§ 368-23. Damaged meters.
Any water meter owned by Slippery Rock Water and Sewer Authority, and
as leased to Slippery Rock Borough, which is installed on the premises of
a user of the Borough water and becomes damaged while installed shall be
repaired by the Borough for such user at a cost of $30.
§ 368-24. Testing meters.
If any customer shall doubt the correctness of the meter measuring the
water delivered to his premises, he may, upon application to the Borough,
have such meter tested. Should such test show the meter registering
incorrectly beyond 4% of the accurate amount, his account shall be adjusted
accordingly. If such test shows a deviation of less than 4%, his account shall
be charged a service charge of $30.
§ 368-25. Bypassing meter.
No customer or property owner shall take, allow or receive, or permit to
be taken or received, any water from the water system into a building,
except that such water shall have passed through and been registered by
such meter. Any violation under this section would be punishable under the
Pennsylvania Criminal Code.123
§ 368-26. Sewer service connection charges.
A. The service connection charge for sanitary sewer connections is hereby
fixed at $850 for a single equivalent dwelling unit where construction of
123. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 368-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-26
1:387
§ 368-27. Manufacturing plants.
In all manufacturing plants where water is used but not discharged into
the sanitary sewer system, the plant shall segregate the system and use
reduction meters to arrive at the sanitary sewer rental charge. Water
entering the sewer from industrial process or sanitary facilities would be
charged in accordance with the rate schedule, provided that the
characteristics of the industrial waste is similar to sanitary sewerage.
§ 368-28. Surcharges.
§ 368-29. Special charges.
the gravity service is required of the Borough. Where a gravity service
lateral is provided to the property, the fee is $250. The minimum
sanitary sewer connection charge shall be $250. All customers shall be
connected to the sewers as directed by the Borough at the actual cost
to the Borough plus the minimum fee of $250 and shall be connected
only after the applicant has deposited with the Borough an amount
estimated by the Borough. Alternative pressure (§ 368-30) sewer
service connections being similar to water service connections shall be
constructed at the applicable water service connection rate in § 368-11
above, $650.
B. Further, the Borough shall stipulate the size of sewer line and types of
material to be used. The minimum size line for a single equivalent
dwelling unit shall be four inches. If the Borough deems it necessary
due to the location of the connection, it can require, at the owner's
expense, the installation of a backwater valve to protect the owner.
A. The Borough reserves the right to impose surcharges for collection and
treatment of trade, industrial and commercial wastes should such
wastes be acceptable to the Borough. Further, the Borough can require
pretreatment of the waste prior to discharge into the Borough system
or, if completely incompatible, provide its own treatment facilities with
the discharge to a natural waterway, all in accordance with the
regulations promulgated and enforced by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection or its successor.
B. The surcharge charged by the Borough would be based on the strength
and character of the waste produced. The determination of the strength
and character shall be done by the Borough at the cost of the
establishment requesting service.
A. Special charges shall be paid to the Borough prior to obtaining service
from certain waterlines and sewer lines constructed in Slippery Rock
which were constructed under waterline and sewer line construction
agreements entered into pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan for Water
and Sewer Service (two agreements) and benefiting properties that did
not contribute to said line construction, excluding lots in a subdivision
by a developer party to contract for construction of sewer lines and
§ 368-26 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 368-29
1:388
§ 368-30. Alternative pressure sewers.
In areas where conventional gravity sewers are not available and as
provided in Ord. No. 346, dated April 4, 1989, alternative pressure sewer
connections can be made as individually approved by the administrative
staff. Approval shall be granted only after a construction sketch and
specifications are submitted which show the placement of the facilities,
especially the location of the check valve on the sewage discharge line;
the motor pump control and the alarm; and the interlocked solenoid valve
with manual override in the water supply line to prevent water damage to
the property served. The applicant must acknowledge his responsibility to
pay pumping costs, maintain pumps, pump septic or holding tank at least
each second year, all at his expense (pumper can dump free at the Borough
approved location), pay applicable sewer rates and agree that the Borough
may enter his property to pump septic or holding tank when needed if not
voluntarily pumped when directed by the Borough. Cost for the pumping
shall be charged to the applicant. Each new subdivision with lots requiring
the alternative system shall be so noted on the recorded Mylar for the
subdivision plan.
§ 368-31. Use of lead in piping prohibited.
No lead in any form, solder, piping or fittings shall be used in any part of the
water system, private or public.
waterlines into Slippery Rock Township. The fees shall be the
proportionate pro rata share of documented construction cost of the
line, per front foot of property served.
B. Any developer of property in the Borough limits of Slippery Rock
Borough may, at time of construction and prior to transfer of title of
lines to the Municipal Authority, request to enter into an agreement to
recover costs of line across properties of other owners at time they
request service. This section shall not preclude collection of usual tapin
charges in accordance with Borough regulations.
§ 368-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-31
1:389
Chapter 375
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 54.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 217.
Rental property — See Ch. 221.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 296.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 338.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 343.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
350.
§ 368-31 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 368-31
1:390
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 375-1. Title.
This chapter and attached Zoning Map shall be known as and may be
cited as the "Slippery Rock Borough Zoning Ordinance," Chapter 375,
Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Slippery Rock and Official Zoning
Map in accordance with and exercising the authority of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,124 to:
§ 375-2. Intent; continuation of prior regulations.
A. Regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and
land for residence, agriculture, trade, commerce, industrial and other
purposes which were in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter
and all future land and structures added within the boundaries of
Slippery Rock Borough.
B. Regulate the height, number of stories, size and placement of buildings
and other structures which were in existence at the time of adoption of
this chapter and all future land and structures added within the
boundaries of Slippery Rock Borough.
C. Divide the Borough or any portion thereof into districts of such size,
shape and area, and to establish such Official Maps as may be deemed
best suited to carry out the regulations and provide for their
enforcement.
A. This chapter has been adopted in order to:
(1) Establish zoning districts. Establish zoning districts and to regulate
therein the use of land and structures for residential, commercial,
manufacturing and other purposes, all in accordance with the
Slippery Rock Borough Comprehensive Plan and its goals and
objectives.
(2) Regulate buildings and population density. Regulate the location,
height, bulk, use and size of buildings and structures, the size of
yards, courts and open spaces, the percentage of a lot which may
be occupied by a building or a structure, and the density of
population.
B. Continuation of effect. The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are
common to those zoning regulations in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such prior
regulations and not as new enactments. Such parts of the prior
regulations that are omitted from this chapter shall be deemed as
abrogated, except as they may continue to apply to uses, structures,
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 375-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-2
1:391
§ 375-3. Purpose.
Such regulations are deemed necessary in order to:
§ 375-4. Community development objectives.
The aforementioned goals are intended to further facilitate the
implementation of the following selected community development
objectives of Slippery Rock Borough:
and subdivided lots existing legally as of the date of enactment of this
chapter and protected by express provisions of this chapter.
A. Promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare;
B. Facilitate coordinated and practical community development;
C. Promote the proper density of population;
D. Provide adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and
loading space, transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, public
grounds and parks, and other public requirements;
E. Conserve and stabilize property values; and
F. Prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in
travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, panic
and other dangers.
A. General objectives:
(1) To further develop and maintain a pleasant, attractive, healthful,
and safe environment for those living in or visiting the Borough.
This would include adequate provision for basic human needs in
relation to living and working activities; maximum feasible choice
in regard to the location and kind of living units desired; proper
distribution of population at adequate densities; rational and
integrated land use relationships and patterns; and the
minimization of health and safety hazards.
(2) Assurance of a safe, adequate and attractive housing inventory for
the entire Borough population.
(3) Development of a transportation system that provides safe and
efficient movement of people and goods in and through the
Borough.
(4) Provision of public facilities and services capable of providing
adequate levels of service and located so as to be conveniently
accessible to existing and future population.
(5) Preservation of the natural and man-made historic, scenic, and
other amenities of the Borough.
§ 375-2 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-4
1:392
(6) Coordination of local planning efforts and activities with those of
other agencies, groups, organizations, and governmental units in
time, space, and in relation to expenditures.
(7) Preservation and enhancement of the Borough's economic
resources.
(8) Reduction to the lowest possible levels of activities or actions that
contribute directly or indirectly to unhealthful environmental
pollution or unnecessary environmental intrusions.
(9) To integrate to the greatest feasible extent plans for expansion of
and/or addition to the Slippery Rock University.
B. Land use objectives:
(1) Regulations of land developmental patterns with the intent of
discouraging urban sprawl, incompatible and/or unrelated land use
groupings, and the excessive and unrealistic extension or alteration
of public utilities and facilities created thereby.
(2) Promotion of the use of land in harmony with its inherent natural
characteristics to avoid adverse effects upon both the man-made
and natural environment resulting from disregard of those
characteristics.
(3) Provision for and promotion of the use of the most advanced
mechanisms or methods for land development as applicable or
necessary for the orderly and up-to-date development of the
Borough.
(4) Provision of reasonable amounts of land area for the various land
uses deemed necessary to a viable functioning of the Borough as
well as provision of such land areas in adequate locations to insure
their efficient, convenient and safe utilization, especially those uses
serving a distinctly public purpose.
C. Housing objectives:
(1) Promotion of all responsible public and private efforts directed
towards the protection, conservation and/or increased availability
of sound housing and the rehabilitation or removal of unsound
housing.
(2) Development of programs to provide safe and decent housing for
the elderly or disadvantaged.
(3) Provision of an adequate mixture of residential structural types and
densities to satisfy the existing and potential needs or demands of
the Borough's population.
(4) Provision of adequate regulations, controls, or other devices to
upgrade, maintain or otherwise increase the aesthetic and physical
§ 375-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-4
1:393
attractiveness of residential areas in general and individual home
sites in particular.
D. Community facility and utility objectives:
(1) Promotion of public and private efforts to improve the number,
appearance and levels of service provided by institutional,
recreational or open space facilities.
(2) Coordination with and the provision of all possible assistance to
public and private organizations supplying these and other utilities
and facilities to avoid duplication of efforts and unnecessary
expenditures and further to promote the creation of the widest
range of such services as is possible at the lowest feasible social
and economic costs.
(3) Institution of land use concepts capable of affording adequate
population and structural densities to avoid inefficient utilization of
such utilities and facilities.
(4) Location of public facilities and utilities to stimulate and
complement future or existing development without bias and based
upon rational and logical planning considerations.
E. Transportation objectives:
(1) Provision of vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems that
conflict with each other at a minimal level.
(2) Encouragement of the separation of through traffic from local
traffic.
(3) Foster efforts aimed at increasing the accessibility of Borough
residents to places within the Borough by means of public and
private transportation, especially for those unable to fulfill their
personal transportation needs due to infirmity or other similar
physical or age-related constraints.
(4) Promotion of increased off-street parking facilities and limitation of
grades and intersections to avoid street congestion, eliminate
safety hazards, and generally improve circulation characteristics.
(5) Development of a cohesive, integrated, and logical street system to
avoid unnecessary construction of new streets that would result in
untoward public expenditures for maintenance and undesirable
design of lots.
§ 375-4 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-4
1:394
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 375-5. Word usage.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter:
§ 375-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDINGS — A use or building customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use or principal building and
located on the same lot as the principal use or building.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — A commercial establishment having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, photographs or
other materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or portion
devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT BUSINESS — Any adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motionpicture
theater, adult motel or adult sexual encounter center which offers
activities or sales of products related to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and which, under the State Obscenity Code,
Section 5903, Title 18, PA Cons. Statutes,125 must exclude minors.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An establishment used for
presenting motion pictures distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting or relating to specified anatomical areas for observation
by patrons therein.
AGENT FOR OWNER — Any person who can show written proof that he has
authority to act for the property owner.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
C. The word "building" shall include the word "structure."
D. The word "used" shall include "arranged, designed, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used."
E. The word "shall" is mandatory and not optional.
F. The word "abut" shall include the words "directly across from."
125. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903.
§ 375-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:395
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged in
the commercial production and preparation for market of crops, livestock
and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and preparation
for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and
aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that
implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of
crops, livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent
with practices and procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or are
consistent with technological development within the agricultural industry.
ALLEY — A public right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors, and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including, but not limited to, an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE AND REPAIR STATION — Any building, land area
or portion thereof used for the servicing, repair, maintenance, and cleaning
of automobiles and accessory sales of tires, batteries and similar vehicle
accessories.[Amended 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 613; 4-3-2012 by Ord. No.
664]
AUTOMOTIVE FUELING STATION — A building, premises or portions
thereof which are used, arranged, designed, or intended to be used for the
retail sale of gasoline or other fuel for motor vehicles, boats or aircraft and
may include retail sales of goods other than gasoline.[Added 4-3-2012 by
Ord. No. 664]
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted or incorporated into a roof-like cover, often
made of fabric, metal or glass, designed and intended for protection from
the weather or as a decorative embellishment which projects from a wall or
roof over a window, walk or door.[Amended 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 613]
BASEMENT — A story or that portion of a building having more than 50% of
its story height above finished grade. A basement may be used as a dwelling
unit.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A private owner-occupied business with guest
rooms where overnight accommodations and a morning meal are provided
to lodgers for compensation.[Amended 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 687]
BEDROOM — A room within a dwelling unit that is marketed, designed,
or otherwise likely to function for residential sleeping purposes.[Added
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 692]
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or
under this chapter to render final adjudications.
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:396
BOROUGH — The Borough of Slippery Rock.
BUILDING (also see "structure") — An independent structure having a roof
supported by columns or walls resting on its own foundation and includes,
but is not limited to, a shed, garage, stable, greenhouse, barn or other
accessory building. A detached building is one separate on all sides from
adjacent buildings by open spaces from the ground up.
BUILDING GROUP, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL — A complex of two or
more principal buildings, whether detached or attached by a common wall,
occupying a lot or property in single ownership and having any yard, court,
service or facility in common, provided that yards and other requirements
shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean level
of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the
highest and lowest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, spires,
mechanical penthouses, towers, tanks and similar projections.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUILD-TO LINE — The line that defines the placement of the building in
relationship to the street on which the building fronts. The build-to line of
the building typically forms a street wall line. On a corner lot, the build-to
line is located on each side of a lot abutting a street.[Added 10-7-2014 by
Ord. No. 681]
CABARET — A club, bar, tavern, theater, hall or similar place which features
topless or bottomless dancers, entertainers or employees, strippers,
simulated sex acts, live or actual sex acts, or similar entertainers or
entertainment.
CELLAR — A story or that portion of a building having 50% or more of its
story height below the average level of adjoining ground. No portion of any
cellar shall be used as a dwelling or rooming unit.
CLINIC — Any professional medical building or establishment where people
are examined or treated by doctors or dentists but are not hospitalized
overnight therein.
CLUB, LODGES and FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS — An establishment
operated for social, recreation or educational purposes, open only to
members and their guests and not the general public, but excluding college
fraternity or sorority houses.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle other than a private passenger
vehicle, such as trucks, trailers and construction equipment.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:397
CONCESSION TRAILER — A vending unit which is pulled by either a
motorized unit or any other device, animal, or human, and has no power or
ability to move on its own.[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district by the
Borough Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Article VI of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.
CONSISTENCY — An agreement or correspondence between matters being
compared which denotes a reasonable, rational, similar connection or
relationship.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance or immediate precursor
as defined in Schedules I through V of the Pennsylvania Controlled
Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, 35 P.S. § 780-104, or any
amendments thereto.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County,
Pennsylvania.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot or site area covered by principal
and accessory use structures.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common
Pleas of Butler County.
DENSITY, NET — The term describing the result of dividing the number
of dwelling units contained on a lot or group of lots into the area of said
lot(s), excluding from that computation any portion of the right-of-way of
any street or road contained thereon, and shall be expressed as the amount
of square feet of area per family or housing unit, or the amount of families
or dwelling units per net acre.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT — Any land
development that, because of its character, magnitude, or location, will have
A. The Borough Council;
B. The Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under the subdivision and land development or planned residential
development provisions. Determinations shall be appealable only to the
Boards designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
C.
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:398
substantial effect upon the health, safety, or welfare of citizens in more than
one municipality.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DISTRICT — A "district" or a "zone" shall be any portion of the territory
of the Borough of Slippery Rock within which certain regulations and
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of
this chapter.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS — Any animal that has been bred and/or raised to live
in human habitation and is dependent on people for food and shelter.
DORMITORIES, TO INCLUDE FRATERNITY AND SORORITY HOUSES —
A building designed for or used solely or primarily to provide housing for
college or university students. The building may be publicly or privately
owned, leased, operated, managed or otherwise controlled. Staff or
monitors may also reside therein. The term "primarily" shall be construed
to mean over 75% of the total design capacity of the building as permitted
by local or state regulations, whichever is the more stringent.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — Any objects, devices, instruments, apparatus
or contrivances whose primary and traditionally exclusive use is involved
with the illegal use of any and all controlled substances under the laws of
Pennsylvania.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof arranged, designed, or used
exclusively for residential occupancy on a permanent basis, but not
including hotels, motels, hospitals, boardinghouses, lodging or rooming
houses, and travel trailers or like camping or recreational equipment.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY, TO INCLUDE GARDEN APARTMENTS —
A building or portion thereof containing or designed to contain three or
more separate dwelling units with or without common access facilities. (See
"townhouse or row house.")
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed and used
exclusively for occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for and used exclusively
for occupancy by two families living independently of each other, including a
duplex (one dwelling unit above the other) or a double house (two dwelling
units side by side having one common wall).
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, not part of a hotel/motel, designed
for and occupied for residential living purposes and collectively containing
cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities. All rooms comprising a
dwelling unit shall have access through an interior door to other parts of
the dwelling unit.[Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 692]
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:399
DWELLING UNIT FOR RENT — A dwelling unit that is occupied for
residential use by a tenant other than the dwelling unit owner where such
owner is paid a fee for such use of the dwelling unit by the tenant.[Added
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 692]
EDIBLE GOODS — Including, but not limited to: prepackaged food (e.g.,
candy, beverages, and ice cream); off-site prepared food (e.g., hot dogs,
desserts, and pizza); and on-site prepared food (e.g., shaved ice,
sandwiches, and tacos).[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
ELECTRONIC NOTICE — Notice given by a municipality through the
Internet of the time and place of a public hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing.[Added 10-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 687]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
of underground or overhead gas, electrical, communication, steam or water
transmission, distribution or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories
in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of such
service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies; excluding, however, buildings, storage tanks, towers, antennas,
relay or transmission stations, substations and pumps.126
FENCES — An enclosure or an enclosing barrier intended to prevent
straying from within or intrusion.[Amended 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 687]
FLOOR AREA OR SPACE — For the purposes of applying the requirements
for off-street parking and loading, "floor area," in the case of offices,
merchandising, or service types of uses, shall mean the gross floor area
used or intended to be used by tenants, or for service to the public as
customers, patrons, clients, or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures
and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. It shall not include
areas used principally for nonpublic purposes such as storage, incidental
repair, processing or packaging of merchandise, for shop windows, for
offices incident to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings,
for toilet rooms or restrooms, for utilities, or for dressing rooms, fitting
rooms or alteration rooms.
FOOTCANDLE — One footcandle is the amount of illumination provided by
one lumen uniformly distributed on one square foot of surface.[Amended
6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 613]
FOREST — Areas or stands of trees, at least 20 of which are greater than
24 inches in caliper, covering an area at least 1/2 acre (21,780 square feet)
in size.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principals, through developing,
126. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “family,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 692.
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:400
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.
GAME COURTS — Recreational facilities which utilize a court for
participation, including but not limited to tennis, basketball, horseshoe and
croquet courts.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building or a portion of a
principal building used only for the storage of automobiles and/or farming
implements by the families resident upon the premises, and further
provided that, except on farms, such garage shall not be used for storage of
more than one commercial vehicle and such commercial vehicle shall not be
larger than one ton rated capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A structure or portion thereof, other than a private
garage, operated for gain and which is used for the storage, sale, hire,
care, repair or refinishing of automobiles, not including a structure or
part thereof used only for storage or display of automobiles for other than
transients.
GATEWAY SIGN — A collective freestanding or monument sign located at
the entrance to a destination area such as a downtown, recreational area or
mixed-use development.[Amended 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 613]
GENERAL CONSISTENCY, GENERALLY CONSISTENT — That which
exhibits consistency.
GROUP RESIDENCE FACILITY — Any private residence licensed by the
commonwealth to provide care to a maximum of six clients with mental or
physical disabilities on a twenty-four-hour basis, not including staff.
HEAD SHOP — Any business, the operation of which involves the sale,
lease, trade, gift or display for sale of any and all types of drug
paraphernalia.
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by a board pursuant
to Section 909.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.127
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit solely
by members of the family residing on the premises. The use of the dwelling
unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to
its use for residential purposes.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An organization of property owners of
lots in individual residential developments responsible for the maintenance
of common open space in each plan and the payment of taxes on that land
classified as commonly owned open space.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building containing rooming units designed for or
intended to be used solely or primarily to provide temporary lodging for
more than 10 transient individuals for compensation, with or without meals.
A dwelling unit may be provided solely for the use of the owner, manager or
similar staff whose presence on site is necessary. If more than 75% of the
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:401
total design capacity of the building, excluding dwelling units, as permitted
by local or state regulations, whichever are more stringent, are for college
students, the building shall be classified as a dormitory.
HOUSE PETS — For the purposes of this chapter, a "house pet" shall include
dogs, cats, and songbirds, including parrots, canaries and parakeets.
IMMEDIATE PRECURSOR — A substance which, under the regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Health, is a principal compound commonly
used or produced primarily for use, and which is an immediate chemical
intermediary used or likely to be used, in the manufacture of a controlled
substance.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that prevents absorption of
stormwater into the ground.
INDUSTRIAL SERVICES — Establishments providing primary service to
industries such as machinery sales and repair, supply sales and
warehousing, transportation services, restaurants serving industrial
concerns, and the like. Industrial services shall not include the sales,
salvage, or repair of passenger vehicles.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The processing, cleaning, servicing, testing,
repair or storage of material, goods or products of these types: beverages,
confections, cream, all food products (exclusive of meat and fish packing),
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development other than those activities specified as exclusions in
Section 503, Subsection 1.1, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.128
C.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:402
ceramics, clothing, dyes, patterns, scientific instruments, jewelry,
timepieces, optical goods, musical instruments, toys, cosmetics, tobacco
products, drugs, and of products from the following previously prepared
materials: wood, glass, textiles, cork, leather, bone, horn, shell, fur,
feathers, hair, rubber, paper, metals, when conducted wholly within an
enclosed structure.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot which, individually or as part of a subdivision,
has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Butler County.
MAILED NOTICE — Notice given by a municipality by first-class mail of the
time and place of a public hearing and the particular nature of the matter
to be considered at the hearing.[Added 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 687]
LOT TYPES —
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection or upon two parts of the same streets, such streets or
parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135°.
The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the corner.
(1)
(2) LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot other than a corner or interior lot with
frontage on more than one street.
(3)
A.
LOT LINES — The boundary line describing the limits of a property and
separating it from adjacent properties or a public street or right-of-way.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot boundary from a
street right-of-way.
(1)
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot boundary line opposite and most distant
from the front lot boundary line.
(2)
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot boundary line other than a front or rear
lot line.
(3)
B.
LOT DEPTH — The minimum horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
C.
LOT WIDTH — The least horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the lot depth.
D.
LOT AREA — The area of a horizontal plane measured at grade and
bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines.
E.
BUILDING LINE — A line located a fixed distance from the front lot line
and interpreted as being the nearest point that any part of a building,
excluding steps, shall be constructed to the front lot line.
F.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:403
MAIN STREET CORRIDOR — A major thoroughfare that runs northwest
to southeast through the Central Business District of the Borough, along
which are located areas of unique architectural interest and value.[Added
10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 681]
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading or any similar treatment accomplished by hand or by the
use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building or structure or portion thereof, located
within Slippery Rock Borough, which is open to members of the general
public, with or without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are
offered.
MASTER SIGNAGE PLAN — Graphics and text describing all types of signs
proposed to be erected on a site, including the sizes, colors, materials,
illumination, content and exact locations.[Amended 6-1-2004 by Ord. No.
613]
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not
coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite,
sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore,
vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and
crude oil and natural gas.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A two- or three-story building which houses
nonresidential uses, including retail shops and offices on the ground floor.
Uses within the upper floors include residential uses other than singlefamily
dwellings and/or nonresidential uses.[Added 10-7-2014 by Ord.
No. 681]
MOBILE — The capability of moving freely or easily, but not necessarily in
continuous motion.[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK — A vehicle-mounted unit engaged or utilized in the
sale of edible goods.[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — Any business or person which sells edible goods
from a mobile vending unit within the Borough of Slippery Rock.[Added
5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two
units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives as a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:404
MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile
or manufactured home park, improved with the necessary utility
connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of
a single mobile or manufactured home.
MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous
parcels of land which has been so designed and improved that it contains
two or more mobile or manufactured home lots for the placement thereon
of mobile or manufactured homes.
MOBILE VENDING UNIT — The unit from which a mobile vendor operates.
This term includes, but is not limited to, mobile food trucks; any motor
vehicle used to sell edible goods; any type of wagon, trailer, concessions
cart, sled or other equipment that must be moved by nonmotorized means
(pulled or pushed); and concession trailers.[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No.
708]
MODEL STUDIO —
MONUMENT SIGN — A sign in which a stone or brick structure is used
to mount the sign area on, in or as an integral part of such structure. The
permissible sign area of such sign shall begin at a height of not greater than
four feet above normal grade.[Amended 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 613]
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any film or plate negative; film or
plat positive; film designed to be projected on a screen or other surface
for exhibition; films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or
positive form, designed for exhibitions by projection on a screen or other
Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing
figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being observed,
sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly
depicted for persons who pay a fee, compensation or gratuity for the
right or opportunity to so depict said model.
A.
Also, any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration, figure models
who pose in the nude to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn,
photographed, sculptured or otherwise depicted.
B.
Exception. The term "model studio" does not include:
Any studio which is operated by a university, college, public school
or governmental agency wherein the operators have met the
requirements established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
for the issuance or conferring of a diploma.
(1)
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in Subsection C(1) of this definition.
(2)
Any studio operated by a tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation devoted
to art and its appreciation.
(3)
C.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:405
surface; and videotape or any other medium used to electronically
reproduce images on a screen or other surface.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.[Amended
10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 687]
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city of the second class A or third class, Borough,
incorporated town, township of the first or second class, county of the
second class through eighth class, home rule municipality, or any similar
general purpose unit of government which shall hereafter be created by the
General Assembly.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use.[Added 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 687]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter
or amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment
to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures
include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or prior
to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
NONREFRIGERATED — Edible goods that are not required to be kept
at a temperature below 41° F. according to the federal Food and Drug
Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, Bureau of
Food Safety and Laboratory Services rules.[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No.
708]
NUDE — Completely without clothing or showing the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering or
showing the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering or any
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:406
portion thereof below the top of the areola or showing the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.129
OFF-SITE ADVERTISING SIGN — A billboard or sign that directs attention
to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An open area for the same uses
as a private garage or carport and regulated as such, together with properly
related access to a public or private street or alley.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — An open area, other than a street
or other public way, improved and used for the parking of automobiles and
available to the public, whether for a fee, free or as an accommodation for
employees, clients or customers, together with properly related access to a
public or private street or alley.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — An off-street space having dimensions of
nine feet in width and 18 feet in depth and an area of not less than 162
square feet, whether inside or outside of a structure, for the temporary
standing of an automotive vehicle, to be used exclusively as a parking stall
for one automotive vehicle.
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT — A zoning district that encompasses one or
more underlying zones and that imposes requirements in addition to or as a
supplement to those required in the underlying zone.[Amended 10-7-2014
by Ord. No. 681]
PERSONAL CARE HOME — A home licensed by the commonwealth in
which bed care and inpatient services are provided to aged or infirm
individuals for compensation, not including clinics or institutions devoted to
the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured.
PERSONAL SERVICE — A commercial business providing individual
services related to personal needs, including, but not limited to, beauty
shops and barbershops, shoe repair, tailoring or therapeutic massage.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Slippery Rock.
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:407
PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE — The single primary or predominant use to
which a property is or may be devoted and to which all other uses on the
property are accessory.
PRESERVATION or PROTECTION — When used in conjunction with natural
and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these
resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to
authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful
uses of natural resources.
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land used for agricultural purposes that
contains soils of the first, second, or third class as defined by the United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service
County Soil Survey.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (OR SERVICE) — The office of a person engaged
in any occupation, vocation, or calling, not purely commercial, mechanical
or agricultural, in which a professed knowledge or skill in some area of
science or learning is used by its practical application to the affairs of
others, either advising or guiding them in serving their interest or welfare
through the practice of an act founded thereon.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign that is supported by any exterior wall of
a building or suspended beneath any awning, canopy or marquee with the
exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately perpendicular to the
plane of the supporting wall and projecting more than 12 inches from the
building.[Added 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 649]
PUBLICATION — Includes any book, magazine, article, pamphlet, writing,
printing, illustration, picture, sound recording or motion-picture film which
is displayed or contained in an area open to the public or is offered for sale
or exhibited in a coin-operated machine.
PUBLIC EDUCATION FACILITY — A classroom building, laboratory, science
building, faculty or administrative office building, recreation facility, or
other facility used exclusively for the conduct of the educational,
administrative, and on-campus student housing functions of a publicly
owned institution of primary, secondary, or higher education.[Added
12-3-2013 by Ord. No. 677]
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:408
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under 65 Pa.C.S.A.
Chapter 7 (relating to open meetings).130
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
RECREATION —
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE — Any method, process or substance
whose supply is rejuvenated through natural processes and, subject to those
natural processes, remains relatively constant, including, but not limited
to, biomass conversion, geothermal energy, solar and wind energy and
hydroelectric energy, and excluding those sources of energy used in the
fission and fusion processes.131
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.
RETAIL SALE — The sale of commodities and services directly to
consumers.[Added 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 664]
ROOMING HOUSE, TO INCLUDE A BOARDING, LODGING OR TOURIST
HOME — A building other than a dormitory, hotel, fraternity or sorority
house containing not more than one dwelling unit occupied by a family and
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — Recreational facilities operated as a
business and open to the general public for a fee.
A.
RECREATION, PRIVATE, NONCOMMERCIAL — Clubs or recreation
facilities operated by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona
fide members of such organization.
B.
RECREATION, PUBLIC — Recreation facilities operated as a nonprofit
enterprise by the Borough or any other governmental entity which is
open to the general public.
C.
130. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
131. Editor's Note: The original definition of "renovation narrative," as amended 6-1-2004 by
Ord. No. 613, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 10-7-2014 by Ord.
No. 681.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:409
providing, for compensation, rooming units for the lodging of not more than
10 individuals in addition to the family.
ROOMING UNIT — A room or rooms constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping unit that is physically separated from any other rooms,
dwelling units, or rooming units in the same structure. The rooming unit
shall contain living and sleeping facilities but not cooking or eating facilities
and shall be occupied by no more than one family.
SETBACK — The distance between the building and any lot line. Setbacks
establish the required yards, front, rear and side.
SETBACK LINE — That line which is the required minimum distance from
any lot line and that establishes the area within which the principal
structure must be placed.
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product,
place, activity, persons, institution, organization, or business. However, the
above definition of a "sign" shall not prohibit the display of any official
court or public office notices nor any official or municipal traffic control or
parking sign or device, nor shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a
nation, state, county, municipality, school, or a religious group. A sign shall
not include a sign located completely within an enclosed building. Each
display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a sign.
ADDRESS MARKERS — The following signs shall be considered
address markers:
Signs indicating address and/or name of residential properties and
the occupants. Such sign shall not exceed two square feet in area.
(1)
Address markers shall be provided on every parcel in every
commercial or industrial zoning district. Such signs shall:
Be located at every entrance, or in front of any building or
fence.
(a)
(b) Have a white background and dark letters.
(2)
A.
BANNER — Any sign intended to be hung, either with or without
frames, of lightweight material such as paper, plastic or fabric of any
kind. National flags, state or municipal flags or the official flag of any
institution or business shall not be considered banners.
B.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign attached to a roof extension of a building with
or without support, but no walls.
C.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign that provides on-site directional
assistance or instruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic relative to
parking area, entrances and exits. Such sign shall contain no
advertising other than the business name or logo.
D.
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:410
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of Article VI and IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.132
SPECIALTY RETAIL — Uses which are linked together by an architectural,
historic or geographic theme or a commonality of goods and services and
whose shops cater to a specific market.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
FREESTANDING SIGN — The general term for any on-site sign which
is supported from the ground and not attached to a building. The sign
may be attached to a pole, mast, frame or other structure that is not
itself an integral part of, or attached to, a building.
E.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this section.
F.
MARQUEE — A permanent structure, other than a roof, attached to,
supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection
from natural elements.
G.
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to, and made a part of, a marquee
or any other similar projection from a building.
H.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN/BILLBOARD — Any sign which communicates
information or a message or a business activity which is provided at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
I.
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign directly associated with any
national, state or local election.
J.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground
or other permanent structure or designed to be transported.
K.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is displayed only for a specified
period of time.
L.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached to a wall of a building and parallel to
the wall.
M.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
132. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10601 et seq. and 10901 et seq.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:411
STATIONARY LOCATION — The position of the mobile food vendor when
not in motion and addressing the public for the purpose of sales.[Added
5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — The following street classifications shall apply to streets in
the Borough of Slippery Rock and shall be applied as defined in the
"Comprehensive Plan for the Borough of Slippery Rock, Butler County,
Pennsylvania":
STREETSCAPE — The pedestrian-scaled space formed by buildings located
close to the street, which is embellished with such features as sidewalks,
street trees, streetlights, curbs, on-street parking, benches and waste
receptacles. The streetscape is framed by buildings that create the outdoorroom
character of the Main Street Corridor Overlay District.[Added
10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 681]
STREET WALL — The wall of a building adjoining a sidewalk at the edge of
the street right-of-way.[Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 681]
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
ARTERIAL — Arterials accommodate intercommunity traffic flow and
afford connections to other communities or secondary regional traffic
generators, with direct access to adjoining property being a secondary
function. The average length of trip of such highway normally exceeds
three miles.
A.
COLLECTOR — These roads serve to funnel traffic onto arterials and
to provide linkage on an intercommunity basis. Providing access to
properties abutting a collector street is likewise a secondary function.
The primary function of a collector street is to accept the traffic
generated on local streets with which they may be interlinked.
B.
LOCAL — Such roadways are intended primarily to serve properties
fronting on their right-of-way. These roads generally do not carry major
traffic volumes since their function is to serve that traffic generated
from the residential properties.
C.
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:412
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Borough
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of
§ 350-64 of Chapter 350, Subdivision and Land Development) of those
improvements required as a condition for final approval have been
completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be
able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, either permanently
constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the
level of the surrounding land or an above-surface pool having a depth of
more than 30 inches, designed, used, and maintained for swimming and
bathing.
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT — Authorization issued by the Zoning Officer
to conduct short-term activities, special events or seasonal sales within the
Borough.133
TOWNHOUSE or ROW HOUSE — Three to eight separate dwelling units
attached to each other by party or common walls, with each unit having
individual access and rear common or private garden orientation.
TRADITIONALLY EXCLUSIVE USE — A use which is primary and inherent
as opposed to secondary and incidental and is associated with certain
knowledge or beliefs derived from statements of contemporary persons and
handed down through a considerable period of time.
TRAVEL UNIT — A portable vehicle or structure built on a chassis and
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreation
purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length
not exceeding 25 feet. A travel unit shall include a travel trailer, collapsible
trailer, pickup camper, chassis-mount camper, tent trailer, motor home,
and conversion unit. Such units shall not be utilized for permanent human
habitation.
UNRELATED PERSONS — Person occupying a dwelling unit for rent who
are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, excluding services and
nursing caregivers.[Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 692]
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.
VEHICLE SIGN — A sign that is attached to or painted on a vehicle that
is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which
is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the
property.[Added 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 649]
VISUAL HAZARD — Any fixed or temporary physical object or structure
which, because of its presence, causes danger, risk, or peril to motor vehicle
operators or pedestrians by making it difficult or impossible for:
133. Editor's Note: The original definitions of "Town Center Association" and "Town Center
Overlay District Renovation Design Guidelines," as amended 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 613,
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 681.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-6
1:413
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Borough.
YARD — An open space, as may be required by this chapter, of uniform
width or depth on the same lot with a building or a group of buildings, which
open space lies between the principal building or group of buildings and the
nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from 30 inches above
the ground upward, except as herein permitted.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — A Board appointed by the Borough Council
to examine appeals for relief from strict conformance to application of this
chapter, to consider special exceptions and to hear testimony regarding the
validity of any regulations upon development in the Borough.
ZONING MAP — The official plan of zoning districts in the Borough, a part
of this chapter, showing precisely the boundaries and title of each zoning
district.134
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer appointed by the Borough
Council who shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. Motorists to see each other clearly;
B. Pedestrians to see motorists clearly;
C. Motorists to see pedestrians clearly; or
D. Pedestrians to see pedestrians clearly.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot
between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
A.
YARD, REAR — The area of any property between the rear line of the
property and the rear setback line parallel to it.
B.
YARD, SIDE — The area of any property bounded by the required front
and rear yards and the side property line and parallel side setback line.
C.
134. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 375-6 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-6
1:414
ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
§ 375-7. Designation of zoning districts. [Amended 9-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 657; 12-3-2013 by Ord. No. 677; 10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
681]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough is hereby divided into 11
zoning districts, differentiated according to permitted uses and building
regulations. These 11 zoning districts are designated as follows:
R-A Residential District
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
R-3 Residential District
MU Mixed-Use District
C-1 Central Business District
C-2 General Commercial District
I-1 Educational District
P-1 Parks and Recreation District
M-1 Light Manufacturing District
MSCO Main Street Corridor Overlay District
§ 375-8. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of said zoning districts are hereby established
as shown on the Official Zoning District Map adopted by the Borough and
on file in the office of the Borough Administrator/Secretary. Said Official
Zoning District Map, together with any map inserts, amendments,
notations, references or designation shown thereon, is hereby made a part
of this chapter as if the same were all fully described and set forth herein.
§ 375-9. Interpretation of boundaries.
A. Designation of zone boundaries. The zone boundary lines are intended
to follow the right-of-way lines of streets, existing lot and property lines,
and Borough corporation lines, all as shown in the Zoning District Map;
but where a zone boundary line does not follow such a line, its position
is shown in the Zoning District Map by a specific dimension expressing
its distance in feet from a street line or other boundary line as
indicated, or by reference to a contour line delineated on the United
States Geological Survey Maps.
B. Determination of locations for boundaries. In the event of uncertainty
as to the true location of a zoning boundary line in a particular instance,
any decision of the Zoning Officer may be appealed before the Zoning
§ 375-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-9
1:415
§ 375-10. Limitation of land use.
Except as provided in this chapter, no building or part thereof or other
structure shall be erected, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land,
building, structure or premises be used, designated, or intended to be used
for any purpose other than for the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in
the zone in which such buildings, land or premises is located.
§ 375-11. Classification of annexed lands.
§ 375-12. Use regulations.
The principal, accessory and conditional uses and uses by special exception
for each zoning district are enumerated by district, beginning with Article
IV. Uses given in the following schedules shall be according to common
meanings of the terms or according to definitions as given in Article II.
Hearing Board by any affected property owner. It shall be the duty of
the Board to render its determination with respect thereto.
C. Division of a lot or parcel in single ownership. Where a zoning boundary
line divides a lot or parcel in single ownership at the time of passage of
this chapter, any use authorized or permitted in either zone may be
extended a distance not to exceed 50 feet beyond the boundary of the
zone in which such use is authorized or permitted.
A. Any land annexed to or made a part of the Borough subsequent to the
adoption of this chapter shall immediately be classified as an R-1
Residential District as of the effective date of annexation.
B. Within 60 days from the effective date of any annexation proceedings,
the Borough Planning Commission shall prepare and submit to the
Borough Council a report and study of its recommendations for
rezoning of the annexed territory. The Planning Commission shall hold
at least one public hearing thereon before submitting its final report to
the Council.
C. At its next regular meeting following receipt of the final report of the
Planning Commission, the Borough Council shall authorize the
necessary legislation to amend the Zoning Chapter and/or map in
accordance with Article XXV hereof.
§ 375-9 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-12
1:416
ARTICLE IV
R-A Residential District
§ 375-13. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-A Residential District is to provide areas with rural
characteristics for low-density residential use with indirect access to
neighborhood-scaled commercial development.
§ 375-14. Permitted uses.
§ 375-15. Conditional uses.
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Agricultural operation.
(2) Essential services. (See § 375-79.)
(3) Forestry.
(4) Public recreational facilities.
(5) Single-family detached dwelling.
(6) The keeping of domestic animals in this district shall be limited to
house pets, as defined, and horses and shall not include any activity
of a commercial nature such as a kennel, stable, or coop.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Game courts, erected on the same lot as the principal structure,
shall be set back 15 feet from all property lines and constructed
only in the rear yard of the lot.
(2) Home occupations.
(3) Other accessory structures and uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
(4) Private garages and parking areas.
(5) Private swimming pools, permanent and portable.
(6) Seasonal sale of produce grown on the same property.
(7) Signs. (See Article XX.)
(8) Horse barns.
A. See Article XVII.
B. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
§ 375-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-15
1:417
§ 375-16. Uses by special exception.
There are no uses by special exception in the R-A Zoning District.
§ 375-17. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations.
For permitted and conditional uses:
§ 375-17.1. Rental of residential uses. [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No.
692]
(1) Accessory residential structure for house caretakers, servants, or
nonpaying guests. (See § 375-89.)
A. Minimum lot area: 87,120 square feet (2 acres).
B. Minimum lot width: 300 feet, measured at the building setback line.
C. Minimum width, each side yard: 75 feet.
D. Minimum front yard:
(1) Front yard and/or side yard abutting a street: 100 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 75 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage (percent of gross lot area): 10%.
G. Maximum building height: three stories or 40 feet.
A. Rental of single-family detached residential dwellings. Each singlefamily
detached residence may include no more than one dwelling unit
for rent. Where a single-family detached residence includes a dwelling
unit for rent, the maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit by unrelated
adult persons shall be no greater than one more than the number of
bedrooms within the dwelling unit.
B. Rental of dwelling units. The number of adult unrelated persons
occupying a dwelling unit for rent shall not exceed two, except as may
be permitted for the rental of single-family detached dwellings.
§ 375-15 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-17.1
1:418
ARTICLE V
R-1 Residential District
§ 375-18. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-1 Residential District is to provide areas for singlefamily
residential neighborhoods with other compatible uses.
§ 375-19. Permitted uses.
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Agricultural operation.
(2) Churches and other places of worship, including parish houses.
(3) Essential services. (See § 375-79.)
(4) Forestry.
(5) Public recreation facilities.
(6) Single-family detached dwelling.
(7) The keeping of domestic animals in this district shall be limited to
house pets, as defined, and shall not include any activity of a
commercial nature such as a kennel, stable or coop.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Other accessory structures and uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
(3) Private garages and parking areas.
(4) Private home gardening and the seasonal sale of produce grown on
the property.
(5) Signs. (See Article XX.)
(6) Private swimming pools, permanent and portable, regulated as
follows, except that these regulations shall not apply to portable
swimming pools which shall not be more than three feet in height
nor more than 15 feet in length:
(a) Shall be erected only on the same zoning lot as the principal
structure.
(b) Shall be erected only in the rear yard of such structure and
shall be distant not less than 20 feet from the rear lot line nor
less than 10 feet from any side yard line, principal structure or
accessory structure attached thereto.
§ 375-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-19
1:419
§ 375-20. Conditional uses.
There are no conditional uses in the R-1 District.
§ 375-21. Uses by special exception.
§ 375-22. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations.
For permitted and conditional uses:
(c) Fences, barriers and gates for swimming pools shall comply
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code.135
(d) All pumping, cleaning, filtering and screening devices and
water supply and discharge shall be of a type and source
approved by local and/or state health officials.
(7) Game courts, erected on the same lot as the principal structure,
shall be set back 15 feet from all property lines and constructed
only in the rear yard of the lot.
A. See Article XVII.
B. Uses by special exception shall be as follows:
(1) Hospitals, clinics and philanthropic institutions landscaped in
accordance with § 375-85 and located on a public street. (See
§ 375-109.)
(2) Nursery school and day-care center for more than five persons
situated on a lot of not less than 20,000 square feet, screened in
accordance with § 375-85, and meeting all other state and local
requirements. (See § 375-108.)
(3) Nursing homes, retirement homes and convalescent homes for
more than five persons situated on a lot of not less than 20,000
square feet, screened in accordance with § 375-85, and meeting all
other state and local requirements. (See § 375-107.)
A. Minimum lot area: 11,250 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 75 feet, measured at the building setback line.
C. Minimum width, each side yard: 10 feet.
D. Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage (percent of gross lot area): 35%.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-19 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-22
1:420
§ 375-22.1. Rental of residential uses. [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No.
692]
G. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
A. Rental of single-family detached residential buildings: Each singlefamily
detached residence may include no more than one dwelling unit
for rent. Where a single-family detached residence includes a dwelling
unit for rent, the maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit by adult
unrelated persons shall be no greater than one more than the number
of bedrooms within the dwelling unit.
B. Rental of dwelling units. The number of adult unrelated persons
occupying a dwelling unit for rent shall not exceed two, except as may
be permitted for the rental of single-family detached dwellings.
§ 375-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-22.1
1:421

ARTICLE VI
R-2 Residential District
§ 375-23. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-2 Residential District is to provide areas for moderatedensity
residential use with other compatible uses.
§ 375-24. Permitted uses.
§ 375-25. Conditional uses.
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Agricultural operations.
(2) Churches and other places of worship, including parish houses.
(3) Essential services. (See § 375-79.)
(4) Forestry.
(5) Public buildings.
(6) Public recreational facilities.
(7) Single-family detached dwelling.
(8) The keeping of domestic animals in this district shall be limited to
house pets, as defined, and shall not include any activity of a
commercial nature such as a kennel, stable or coop.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Other accessory structures and uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
(3) Private garages and parking areas.
(4) Private swimming pools, permanent and portable, regulated as
described in § 375-81.
(5) Signs. (See Article XX.)
(6) Game courts, erected on the same lot as the principal structure,
shall be set back 15 feet from all property lines and constructed
only in the rear yard of the lot.
A. See Article XVII.
B. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
§ 375-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-25
1:423
§ 375-26. Uses by special exception.
Uses by special exception shall be as follows:
§ 375-27. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations.
For permitted and conditional uses:
§ 375-27.1. Rental of residential uses. [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No.
692]
(1) Schools, public, private and parochial, provided such schools are
chartered or licensed by the commonwealth. (See § 375-102.)
(2) Boarding and breeding of domestic animals. (See § 375-101.)
(3) Two-family dwelling duplex. (See § 375-92.)
(4) Group residence facility. (See § 375-103.)
(5) Bed-and-breakfast. (See § 375-104.)
(6) Personal care homes. (See § 375-105.)
(7) Schools, public, private and parochial. (See § 375-102.)
A. Hospitals, clinics and philanthropic institutions, landscaped in
accordance with § 375-85, with access from a public street. (See
§ 375-109.)
B. Nursery school and day-care center for more than five persons situated
on a lot of not less than 20,000 square feet, screened in accordance
with § 375-85, and meeting all other state and local requirements. (See
§ 375-108.)
C. Nursing homes, retirement homes and convalescent homes for more
than five persons situated on a lot of not less than 20,000 square feet,
screened in accordance with § 375-85, and meeting all other state and
local requirements. (See § 375-107.)
A. Minimum lot area: 8,712 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 60 feet, measured at the building setback line.
C. Minimum width, each side yard: 10 feet.
D. Minimum front yard: 30 feet; front yard and/or side yard abutting a
street: 30 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage (percent of gross lot area): 35%.
G. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
§ 375-25 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-27.1
1:424
A. Rental of single-family detached residential dwellings. Each singlefamily
detached residence may include no more than one dwelling unit
for rent. Where a single-family detached residence includes a dwelling
unit for rent, the maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit by unrelated
adult persons shall be no greater than one more than the number of
bedrooms within the dwelling unit.
B. Rental of dwelling units. The number of adult unrelated persons
occupying a dwelling unit for rent shall not exceed two, except as may
be permitted for the rental of single-family detached dwellings.
§ 375-27.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-27.1
1:425

ARTICLE VII
R-3 Residential District
§ 375-28. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-3 Residential District is to provide a transitional
area between lower-density residential land use and commercial or higherdensity
use and to provide for a wide variety of residential options.
§ 375-29. Permitted uses.
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Agricultural operations.
(2) Churches and other places of worship, including parish houses, and
educational facilities.
(3) Essential services. (See § 375-79.)
(4) Forestry.
(5) Multiple-family dwellings.
(6) Public buildings.
(7) Public recreational facilities.
(8) Single-family detached dwelling.
(9) Townhouse or row house.
(10) Two-family dwelling, duplex.
(11) The keeping of domestic animals in this district shall be limited to
house pets, as defined, and shall not include any activity of a
commercial nature such as a kennel, stable or coop.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Other accessory structures and uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
(3) Private garages and parking areas.
(4) Private home gardening and similar minor residentially related
structures.
(5) Private swimming pools, permanent and portable, regulated as
follows, except that these regulations shall not apply to portable
swimming pools which shall not be more than three feet in height
nor more than 15 feet in length.
§ 375-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-29
1:427
§ 375-30. Conditional uses.
§ 375-31. Uses by special exception.
(6) Signs. (See Article XX.)
(7) Game courts, erected on the same lot as the principal structure,
shall be set back 15 feet from all property lines and constructed
only in the rear yard of the lot.
A. See Article XVII.
B. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Schools, public, private and parochial, provided such schools are
chartered or licensed by the commonwealth. (See § 375-102.)
(2) Boarding and breeding of domestic animals. (See § 375-101.)
(3) Mobile or manufactured home parks. (See Chapter 350,
Subdivision and Land Development, and § 375-93.)
(4) Motels and hotels. (See § 375-95.) Such uses shall provide a
minimum of 150 square feet of floor space for each unit of
occupancy and shall include adequate sanitary facilities in
accordance with commonwealth and Borough requirements.
(5) Planned residential developments. (See Article XV.)
(6) Rooming houses, boardinghouses and lodging houses. (See
§ 375-94.) Such uses shall provide a minimum of 150 square feet of
gross floor space for each unit of occupancy and shall include
adequate sanitary facilities in accordance with commonwealth and
Borough requirements.
(7) Group residence facility. (See § 375-103.)
(8) Bed-and-breakfast. (See § 375-104.)
(9) Personal care home. (See § 375-105.)
A. See Article XVII.
B. Uses by special exception shall be as follows:
(1) Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations, social halls. (See
§ 375-110.)
(2) Hospitals, clinics and philanthropic institutions. (See § 375-109.)
(3) Nursery school and day-care center for more than five persons
situated on a lot of not less than 21,780 square feet (0.5 acre),
screened in accordance with § 375-85, and meeting all other state
and local requirements. (See § 375-108.)
§ 375-29 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-31
1:428
§ 375-32. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations.
For permitted and conditional uses:
(4) Nursing homes, retirement homes and convalescent homes for
more than five persons situated on a lot of not less than 21,780
square feet (0.5 acre). (See § 375-107.)
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Residential uses:
(a) Single-family dwelling: 7,260 square feet.
(b) Two-family dwelling: 8,412 square feet.
(c) Townhouse or row house: 10,890 square feet.
(d) Multiple-family: 14,520 square feet.
(2) All other uses: 10,890 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width measured at the building setback line:
(1) Residential uses:
(a) Single-family dwelling: 50 feet.
(b) Two-family dwelling: 60 feet.
(c) Townhouse or row house: 70 feet.
(d) Multiple-family dwelling: 70 feet.
(2) All other uses: 60 feet.
C. Minimum width, each side yard:
(1) Residential uses:
(a) Single-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(b) Two-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(c) Townhouse or row house:
[1] When no dwelling unit fronts on a side yard: 10 feet.
[2] When any dwelling unit fronts on a side yard: 30 feet.
(d) Multiple-family dwelling:
[1] When no dwelling unit fronts on a side yard: 10 feet.
[2] When any dwelling unit fronts on a side yard: 30 feet.
(2) All other uses: 10 feet.
§ 375-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-32
1:429
§ 375-32.1. Rental of residential uses. [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No.
692]
D. Minimum front yard:
(1) Single- or two-family dwelling, front yard and/or side yard abutting
a street: 30 feet.
(2) Townhouse or row house or multiple-family dwelling: 30 feet.
(3) All other uses: 30 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Single- or two-family dwelling: 40 feet.
(2) Townhouse or row house or multiple-family dwelling: 25 feet.
(3) All other uses: 40 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage (percent of gross lot area):
(1) Single- or two-family dwelling: 40%.
(2) Townhouse or row house: 50%.
(3) Multiple-family dwelling: 60%.
(4) All other uses: 60%.
G. Maximum building height:
(1) Single- or two-family: 2.5 stories or 35 feet.
(2) Townhouse or row house: 2 stories or 35 feet.
(3) Multiple-family dwelling: 4 stories or 50 feet.
(4) All other uses: 2.5 stories or 35 feet.
A. Rental of single-family detached residential buildings: Each singlefamily
detached residence may include no more than one dwelling unit
for rent. Where a single-family detached residence includes a dwelling
unit for rent, the maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit by adult
unrelated persons shall be no greater than one more than the number
of bedrooms within the dwelling unit.
B. Rental of dwelling units: The number of adult unrelated persons
occupying a dwelling unit for rent shall not exceed four, except as may
be permitted for the rental of single-family detached dwellings.
§ 375-32 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-32.1
1:430
ARTICLE VIII
MU Mixed-Use District
[Amended 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 657]
§ 375-33. Purpose.
The purpose of the Mixed-Use (MU) District is as follows:
A. Encourage innovations in residential and nonresidential development
and redevelopment that make use of a mixed-use form of development
so that demand for residential and certain nonresidential development
and redevelopment may be met by greater variety in type, design, and
layout of development sites and by more effective use of developable
lands and effective conservation open space.
B. Extend greater opportunities for better housing and diversity of
housing types, recreation, and access to goods, services, and
employment to citizens of the Borough of Slippery Rock.
C. Allow for the development and redevelopment of fully integrated,
mixed-use pedestrian-oriented development, providing residential
spaces, shopping, employment, business, and personal services.
D. Minimize traffic congestion, infrastructure costs, and environmental
impacts through compact development modeled after smart growth
principles.
E. Promote the implementation of the objectives of the Borough of
Slippery Rock Comprehensive Plan for guiding the location of growth
and redevelopment.
F. Provide opportunity to meet development potential in a manner
responsive to particular market demands and in a manner consistent
with the preservation of property values within the existing residential
and nonresidential areas of the Borough.
G. Promote an efficient, compact land use pattern to promote easy access
among stores and services by pedestrians, to shorten trips, and to
lessen dependence on the vehicle.
H. Encourage developments that produce a relationship between
individual buildings, the circulation systems of a particular area of the
Borough, and adjacent areas.
I. Encourage development sites to be designed to create a compact,
clustered development pattern using rectilinear building layout and
interconnected street systems.
J. Minimize the number of access points along arterial and collector
streets to maintain the long-term mobility function of a roadway and to
improve service to adjacent properties.
§ 375-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-34
1:431
§ 375-34. Permitted uses.
§ 375-35. Conditional uses.
Conditional uses shall be as follows:
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Multifamily dwelling.
(3) Townhouse or row house.
(4) Two-family dwelling, duplex.
(5) Churches and other places of worship, including parish houses,
educational facilities, and required parking and landscaping, all
located on a public street.
(6) Essential services.
(7) Public buildings.
(8) The keeping of domestic animals in this district shall be limited to
house pets, as defined, and shall not include any activity of a
commercial nature such as a kennel, stable, or coop.
(9) Mobile food vendors, permitted only on a parcel that abuts Franklin
Street or Grove City Road. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Other accessory structures and uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
(3) Private swimming pools, permanent and portable, regulated as
follows, except that these regulations shall not apply to portable
swimming pools which shall not be more than three feet in height
nor more than 15 feet in length.
(4) Public and private garages and parking areas.
(5) Signs.
(6) Game courts, erected on the same lot as the principal structure,
shall be set back 15 feet from all property lines and constructed
only in the rear yard of the lot.
A. Bakeries.
B. Banks.
C. Eating and drinking establishments, without drive-in or drive-through.
§ 375-34 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-35
1:432
§ 375-36. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations. [Amended
2-7-2012 by Ord. No. 662]
D. Personal and professional services and clinics.
E. Retail sales and services, excluding automotive; maximum size of any
one tenant space to be 10,000 square feet.
F. Combination commercial/residential uses with dwelling units above the
first floor.
G. Business services.
H. Professional offices.
I. Delicatessens and coffee shops.
J. Financial institutions.
K. Specialty retail; maximum size of any one tenant space to be 10,000
square feet.
A. Building height:
(1) Minimum building height: two stories or 20 feet.
(2) Maximum building height: three stories, up to 35 feet. [Amended
2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 678]
B. Residential density and land use mix:
(1) Minimum lot sizes: [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 678]
(a) Single-family detached: 7,260 square feet.
(b) Two-family dwellings: 8,412 square feet.
(c) Townhouses: 10,890 square feet.
(d) Multifamily dwellings: 14,520 square feet.
(2) A mix of compatible land uses within developments of all sizes is
encouraged.
(3) Where a development is 20 acres or larger in gross acreage, a mix
of two or more residential use types (e.g., single-family, townhouse,
apartment) within a development is required.
(4) Where a development is 20 acres or larger in gross acreage, a mix
of mixed residential use types and compatible nonresidential uses
is required. A minimum of 30% of the development square footage
must be dedicated to compatible nonresidential or residential
uses.136
C. Setbacks:
§ 375-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-36
1:433
(1) Minimum yard setbacks:
(a) Front: 20 feet.
(b) Side: 10 feet. The side yard may be reduced to zero feet when
the side lot line is located along a shared common wall
between building uses or between separate buildings that
directly abut one another.
(c) Rear: 40 feet.
(2) Buildings that are three stories in height shall be set back from
properties in the R-A Residential Zoning District 150 feet.
[Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 678]
D. Building layout and design:
(1) Maximum building facade length: 200 feet.
(2) Buildings shall be located and arranged in a manner that creates
compact, clustered development patterns.
(3) All buildings within a development shall reflect a continuity
obtained by maintaining a consistent building scale and material.
(4) At least 50% of at least two sides of nonresidential buildings must
be transparent. In particular, building facades facing public or
private streets.
(5) The front building facade of every building shall face a street,
plaza, or landscaped walkway that is visible and directly accessible
from a street.
(6) Mechanical equipment and utilities such as furnaces, air
conditioners, elevators, transformers, and utility equipment,
whether on the roof or mounted on the ground, shall be completely
screened from adjacent properties and adjacent streets. Screening
shall be compatible with the architectural treatment of the
principal structure and/or adjacent area landscape treatments.
(7) To illustrate conformity with the requirements herein, submission
of architectural elevations for any proposed building may be
required.
(8) Mixed-use buildings are encouraged. Such buildings house
nonresidential uses on the ground floor and residential or office
uses on upper floors.
(9) Mixed-use development and mixed-use buildings are intended to
service needs of the surrounding neighborhood. They are to be
136. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 5, regarding increased maximum density in a mixeduse
development, of the 1983 Code, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 678.
§ 375-36 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-36
1:434
buffered from adjacent residential areas while incorporating design
features that are compatible with surrounding residential
neighborhoods. Mixed-use developments shall provide a gradual
transition between adjacent residential districts and commercial
areas or major roadways.
E. Vehicle and pedestrian access.
(1) An internal street network shall be provided. The street network
internal to the development site may connect at one or both ends to
a perimeter public street or adjacent development. The internal
street system is intended to provide vehicle and pedestrian access
and circulation to all uses within a development site and provide
connections to adjacent development. The internal street system
shall provide access to parking via a minimum number of curb cuts.
(2) Sidewalks shall be constructed along any side of a public or private
street that is within or adjacent to the development.
(3) Access to residential units via alleys at the rear of buildings is
encouraged.
(4) Convenient and safe pedestrian circulation shall be provided
through a system of walkways, paths, and/or sidewalks between
parking areas and buildings and to adjacent developments and
residential neighborhoods.
(5) Pedestrian circulation shall be separated from vehicular traffic.
(6) Sidewalks shall connect buildings with all parking areas and
sidewalks along nearby streets.
(7) Sidewalks parallel to parking lots and/or streets shall be separated
from such areas by a curbed landscaped area measuring a
minimum of four feet in width.
(8) Crosswalks shall be constructed to move people safely to and from
buildings and parking areas and shall be constructed of a material
that provides strong contrast with the vehicular travel surface,
such as stamped concrete with integral coloring.
(9) Curb cuts along streets shall be minimized. Where possible, shared
vehicle access between adjacent properties shall be used.
F. Parking.
(1) Off street parking areas shall be designed to reduce the negative
impacts of large paved areas and contain landscaped areas and
defined pedestrian walkways.
(2) Parking lots shall be divided by landscaped strips into smaller
parking areas of no more than fifty parking spaces. Such landscape
strips shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and shall contain a
§ 375-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-36
1:435
§ 375-36.1. Rental of residential uses. [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No.
692]
minimum of one canopy tree (minimum 2.5 inches caliper in size)
every thirty feet.
(3) All parking lots that serve multifamily buildings and nonresidential
buildings shall be screened from streets and adjacent properties
through the use of landscaping and/or decorative walls or fences
along the parking lot perimeter. The perimeter screening shall be
continuous and include masonry walls, decorative fencing, or a row
of shrubs and one shade tree planted every 30 feet, or a
combination of wall, fencing, or landscaping. The walls, fencing, or
landscaping (at time of planting) must be between approximately
42 inches and 48 inches in height, such that the headlights from
parked vehicles are screened from view.
(4) A maximum of one bay of parking having a maximum depth of 65
feet may be placed between a public street and the front facade of a
building.
(5) Parking areas shall be designed to allow for logical
interconnections to abutting properties for the purpose of
providing effective and safe circulation that supports access
management strategies for collector and arterial roadways.
G. Outdoor eating areas.
(1) Restaurants or other similar food services may provide outdoor
seating in sidewalk areas, provided that a four-foot clear pedestrian
passage is maintained and building access is not impaired.
H. Accessory structures. Accessory structures in the Mixed-Use District
shall be regulated as such structures are regulated in the R-3
Residential District. [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 692]
A. Rental of single-family detached residential buildings: Each singlefamily
detached residence may include no more than one dwelling unit
for rent. Where a single-family detached residence includes a dwelling
unit for rent, the maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit by adult
unrelated persons shall be no greater than one more than the number
of bedrooms within the dwelling unit.
B. The number of adult unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit for
rent shall not exceed four except as may be permitted for the rental of
single-family detached dwellings.
§ 375-36 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-36.1
1:436
ARTICLE IX
C-1 Central Business District
§ 375-37. Purpose.
The purpose of the C-1 Central Business District is to provide for a variety of
retail and commercial uses in the downtown area. While concentrations of
commercial and service land use exist, the character of adjacent residential
use and convenience of pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall be protected.
§ 375-38. Permitted uses.
§ 375-39. Conditional uses.
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Amusement centers when conducted within the confines of a
building.
(2) Bakeries for retail sales on the premises only.
(3) Banks, offices and studios.
(4) Eating and drinking establishments, without drive-in or drivethrough
facilities.
(5) Forestry.
(6) Personal and professional offices and clinics.
(7) Printing establishments.
(8) Retail sales and services, excluding automotive sales and services.
(9) Essential services. (See § 375-79.)
(10) Mobile food vendors. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Other accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
(2) Public and private garages and parking areas. (See § 375-128.)
(3) Signs. (See Article XX.)
A. See Article XVII.
B. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Automotive fueling and automotive service and repair stations and
the usual business practices of same, excluding the storage and
dismantling of inoperative and junk vehicles. (See §§ 375-98 and
375-99.) [Amended 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 664]
§ 375-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-39
1:437
§ 375-40. Uses by special exception.
There are no uses by special exception in the C-1 Central Business District.
§ 375-41. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations.
(2) Combination commercial/residential uses with dwelling units above
the first floor. (See § 375-100.) All present combination commercial/
residential uses in commercial districts are considered to be in
compliance with permissible occupancy standards. All subsequent
commercial/residential uses, whether rooming or dwelling units,
must comply with the permissible occupancy standards of the R-1
Residential District from this chapter's effective date of passage.
(3) Eating and drinking establishments with drive-in or drive-through
facilities providing a minimum lot area of 18,000 square feet. (See
§ 375-97.)
(4) Signs. (See Article XX.)
A. Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 20 feet, measured at the building setback line.
C. Minimum width, each side yard: none.
D. Minimum front yard: none.
E. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage (percent of gross lot area): 70%.
G. Maximum building height: three stories, 40 feet.
§ 375-39 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-41
1:438
ARTICLE X
C-2 General Commercial District
§ 375-42. Purpose.
The purpose of the C-2 General Commercial District is to provide areas with
access to high-volume roadways and separated from low-density residential
use for a variety of commercial and service uses.
§ 375-43. Permitted uses.
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Banks, offices and studios.137
(2) Churches, education buildings and other places of worship.
(3) Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations, social halls.
(4) Commercial indoor and outdoor recreation facilities. (See
§ 375-81.)
(5) Eating and drinking establishments, with or without drive-in or
drive-through facilities, on a minimum lot area of 18,000 square
feet. [Amended 10-11-2016 by Ord. No. 694]
(6) Essential services. (See § 375-79.)
(7) Forestry.
(8) Funeral homes.
(9) Hospitals, clinics and philanthropic institutions.
(10) Hotels, motels, and motor courts.
(11) Mobile home sales and service, trailer sales and service.
(12) Personal and professional services.
(13) Plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, ventilation and electrical
shops.
(14) Printing establishments.
(15) Public buildings.
(16) Repair services.
(17) Retail business.
(18) Wholesale businesses when conducted entirely within a building.
137. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A.1., Automobile service stations, of the 1983 Code,
which immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 664.
§ 375-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-43
1:439
§ 375-44. Conditional uses.
§ 375-45. Uses by special exception.
§ 375-46. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations.
(19) Mobile food vendors, permitted only on a parcel that abuts Main
Street, Franklin Street or Grove City Road. [Added 5-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 708]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Other accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
(2) Public parking garages and public and private parking areas. (See
§ 375-128.)
(3) Signs. (See Article XX.)
A. See Article XVII.
B. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Automobile fueling and automobile service and repair stations.
(See §§ 375-98 and 375-99.) [Added 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 664]
(2) Combination commercial/residential uses with dwelling units above
the first floor. All present combination commercial/residential uses
in commercial districts are considered to be in compliance with
permissible occupancy standards. All subsequent combination
commercial/residential uses, whether rooming or dwelling units,
must comply with the permissible occupancy standards of the R-1
Residential District from this section's effective date of passage.
(See § 375-100.)
A. See Article XVII.
B. Uses by special exception shall be as follows:
(1) Bus and motor freight terminals. (See § 375-112.)
(2) Commercial activities similar to any permitted principal use but not
specifically listed (to be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board).
(3) Contractor's equipment storage. (See § 375-113.)
(4) Research laboratories. (See § 375-114.)
(5) Supply yards, but not including scrap yards or junkyards. (See
§ 375-115.)
(6) Wholesale businesses. (See § 375-116.)
§ 375-43 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-46
1:440
A. Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 50 feet, measured at the building setback line.
C. Minimum width, each side yard: five feet.
D. Minimum front yard: 10 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 15 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage (percent of gross lot area): 60%.
G. Maximum building height: four stories, 40 feet.
§ 375-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-46
1:441

ARTICLE XI
I-1 Educational District
[Amended 12-3-2013 by Ord. No. 677]
§ 375-47. Purpose.
The purpose of the Educational District is to provide for areas where public
education facilities are located, including administrative and residential
uses associated with the education and training of children, youths or
adults, in a location and manner consistent with the surrounding community
context with regard to land use and building form, designed to provide
pedestrian accessibility within the district and to surrounding development.
§ 375-48. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 375-49. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations.
§ 375-50. Parking requirements.
The number of parking spaces required in the Educational District shall be
calculated by the public education facility user and verified and approved
by the Borough.
A. Public education facility.
B. Dormitories.
C. Recreation.
D. Off-street parking area, private.
E. Off-street parking area, public.
F. Professional office.
A. Minimum front building setback: 20 feet.
B. Minimum side and rear setback: 10 feet.
C. Residential building setback. Any building containing a nonresidential
use shall be set back 50 feet from any property line where the property
abuts residentially zoned property.
D. Maximum building height: four stories.
§ 375-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-50
1:443

ARTICLE XII
P-1 Parks and Recreation District
§ 375-51. Purpose.
The purpose of the P-1 Parks and Recreation District is to provide areas
for active and passive recreational activities and facilities as determined
appropriate by Borough Council.
§ 375-52. Permitted uses.
§ 375-53. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations.
Dimensional standards shall be determined based on the characteristics of
the use proposed and the physical attributes of the land being developed.
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Appropriate recreational uses as determined by the Borough
Council and in accordance with the current Park and Recreation
Commission rules and guidelines.
(2) Forestry.
(3) Mobile food vendors. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
§ 375-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-53
1:445

ARTICLE XIII
M-1 Light Manufacturing District
§ 375-54. Purpose.
The purpose of the M-1 Light Manufacturing District is to provide areas
for light manufacturing, assembly, transportation and high-technology uses
with access to high-volume roadways.
§ 375-55. Permitted uses.
§ 375-56. Conditional uses.
§ 375-57. Uses by special exception.
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Bus and motor freight terminals.
(2) Contractor's equipment storage.
(3) Essential services. (See § 375-79.)
(4) Forestry.
(5) Light manufacturing, as defined.
(6) Machine shops.
(7) Offices.
(8) Research laboratories.
(9) Supply yards, but not including scrap yards or junkyards.
(10)Warehousing.
(11) Wholesale businesses.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Other accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
(2) Public parking garages and loading areas. (See § 375-128.)
(3) Signs. (See Article XX.)
A. See Article XVII.
B. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Adult businesses. (See § 375-90.)
(2) Cellular transmission towers. (See § 375-91.)
§ 375-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-57
1:447
§ 375-58. Lot, yard, bulk and height regulations.
A. See Article XVII.
B. Uses by special exception shall be as follows:
(1) Industrial services similar to any permitted principal use but not
specifically listed (to be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board).
(2) Industrial services. (See § 375-118.)
(3) Retail uses. (See § 375-117.)
A. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet, measured at the building setback line.
C. Minimum width, each side yard: 20 feet from any property or street
right-of-way line.
D. Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage (percent of gross lot area): 70%.
G. Maximum building height: five stories, 50 feet.
§ 375-57 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-58
1:448
ARTICLE XIV
Main Street Corridor Overlay District
[Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 681138]
§ 375-59. Purpose.
The purpose of the Main Street Corridor Overlay District is to promote
business and provide for a mix of commercial uses that provide shopping,
entertainment, and employment opportunities as well as limited residential
uses in mixed-use buildings in the Main Street Corridor and to stimulate
infill and the adaptive reuse and development along a pedestrian-oriented
corridor that preserves, highlights and enhances the Main Street
streetscape and the Borough's unique architecture and community
character in this district.
§ 375-60. Location and district boundaries.
Recorded parcels in the Main Street Corridor Overlay District are identified
on the Borough's Official Zoning Map, as may be amended.139
§ 375-61. Applicability.
A. The provisions of the Main Street Corridor Overlay District are
mandatory under the applicability provisions described in this section,
pursuant to Section 605 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10605, as amended.
B. The regulations of the Main Street Corridor Overlay District supersede
the regulations of the applicable base zoning districts where a conflict
exists.
C. The provisions of the Main Street Corridor Overlay District shall be
applicable to the following circumstances within the district
boundaries:
(1) Land development.
(2) Change of a residential use to a commercial use accompanied by
reconstruction, expansion or rehabilitation of an existing
commercial or mixed-use building such that a Borough building
permit is required.
(3) Reconstruction, expansion or rehabilitation of an existing
commercial or mixed-use building such that a Borough building
permit is required and such that 50% or more of the gross building
square footage is to be modified. The portion of the building to be
reconstructed, expanded, or rehabilitated under this subsection
shall be such that there is consistency in the design and
construction/reconstruction of any improvements to the building
138. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Article XIV, Town Center Overlay
District, of the 1983 Code, as amended 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 613.
139. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 375-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-61
1:449
§ 375-62. Permitted uses.
facade, and, at a minimum, the first-floor Main Street facade
frontage of the building is compliant with the provisions of this
overlay district.
(4) Any new accessory use or building, except where the use or
building is wholly to the rear of the existing building and not visible
from street level along Main Street.
A. Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Bed-and-breakfasts.
(2) Business services, including but not limited to office and copy
centers, electronics repair and equipment rental stores.
(3) Delicatessens and coffee shops.
(4) Retail, not to exceed 4,000 square feet.
(5) Financial institutions.
(6) Professional offices.
(7) Mixed-use buildings with nonresidential uses on the first floor and
residential or nonresidential uses above.
(8) Public or private parking lots open to the public servicing three or
more tenant spaces that are located within the overlay district.
(9) Personal services, including but not limited to barbershops and
beauty shops, tax preparation, physical therapy and dry cleaning
(dropoff and pickup only).
(10) Residential uses, except single-family residential. No residential
uses are permitted on the first floor of any building.
(11) Restaurants without drive-through facilities, except as permitted
by and pursuant to the requirements of this section.
(12) Social halls.
(13) Movie theaters.
B. Permitted conditional uses: none.
C. Permitted uses by special exception: none.
D. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Public and private garages and parking areas.
(2) Other accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
§ 375-61 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-63
1:450
§ 375-63. Site regulations.
A. Building height. Building scale shall be compatible with the existing
structures on Main Street. No building shall exceed three stories.
B. Building location. To preserve the existing streetscape character and
maintain a consistent street wall, a minimum of 70% of the building
facade of any proposed building or building addition or renovation with
frontage adjacent to the Main Street right-of-way shall be located along
a build-to line equivalent to the linear location of the building side edge
of the existing Main Street sidewalk or within five feet of that location.
C. Building facade.
(1) Building and streetscape character shall be pedestrian-oriented,
allowing for street-level views into the first floor of the Main Street
buildings and pedestrian access along the building frontages.
(2) The maximum length of a building facade shall be 100 linear feet.
(3) The facade of any street-level floor of any building abutting or
within five feet of the Main Street sidewalk or road right-of-way,
where the street-level floor is occupied by a commercial use, must
provide for building transparency and variation on the facade of
that street-level building floor. Such transparency and variation
area, excluding translucent glass block, shall account for 50% of
the linear foot frontage of the building facade and 25% of the
square foot area of the building facade between ground level and a
height of 10 feet, including windows, operational doors and
building entrances.
(4) The front building facade or any portion thereof constructed or
reconstructed pursuant to the provisions of this overlay district
shall be constructed or reconstructed with materials and design
that are consistent with the historic nature and community
character of the Borough and in a manner consistent with the
purpose of this overlay district as defined herein.
D. Setbacks. The minimum building setback for all principal structures
from all property lines shall be zero feet. The setback for accessory
structures shall be five feet.
E. Lighting.
(1) All lighting of nonresidential or mixed-use buildings adjacent to
single-family residential uses shall be provided via sharp cutoff,
shielded and/or directed light fixtures that direct the light away
from the single-family residential use.
(2) All parking lot lighting shall be provided using sharp cutoff fixtures
such that the lens, clear covering, or light bulb does not extend
beyond the horizontal plane of the light fixture opening.
§ 375-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-63
1:451
F. Streetscape. The construction or installation of any streetscape element
along Main Street, including but not limited to sidewalks, landscaping,
street furniture, or street lighting, shall be done in a manner consistent
with the Borough's existing streetscape program, as reviewed by the
Borough Council and installed by Slippery Rock Development. All Main
Street sidewalks must maintain safe pedestrian sidewalk clearance, a
minimum five-foot horizontal width.
G. Parking. Parking lots must be located to the side or rear of the principal
building on the property. All parking lots adjacent to any road right-ofway
must include a landscaped perimeter buffer, a minimum of four feet
in width, comprised of vegetation that grows to a maximum of two feet
in height at maturity, located between the parking lot and adjacent
roadway or sidewalk, if present.
H. Layout. All dumpsters, trash enclosures, and other refuse collection
points, as well as delivery areas or loading docks, garages, and storage
buildings, must be located to the rear of a building.
I. Screening. The following shall be screened from view from adjacent
existing single-family residential uses and from views from Main Street
at street level. Such screening shall be decorative fencing constructed
of commercially manufactured wood panels or similar materials (no
wire fencing materials are permitted), vegetation, masonry wall or a
combination thereof such that the screening substantially reduces the
visual impacts to the adjacent single-family use or Main Street. Any wall
constructed must be a minimum of four feet in height and a maximum of
six feet in height. No more than the first three feet of the wall,
measuring from the ground plane upward, shall be solid. Any portion of
a wall higher than three feet must be a minimum of 50% open or
transparent.
(1) Dumpsters/trash collection areas.
(2) Parking lots.
(3) Delivery areas/loading docks.
(4) Outdoor eating/patio/gathering space, except that no screening of
views from Main Street shall be required.
J. Drive-through windows. Drive-through windows are not permitted,
except on property where a drive-through window is existing as of the
date of adoption of this overlay district. On property where a drivethrough
window exists as of the date of adoption of this overlay district,
the drive-through window may continue on that property in its current
configuration without restriction, and in the event of renovation,
reconstruction, reuse or redevelopment on the property, however, in
these instances the following shall apply:
(1) Only two drive-through lanes are permitted on a property.
§ 375-63 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-63
1:452
(2) The drive-through window must be located to the rear of a building.
(3) The drive-through window and associated vehicle stacking lanes
shall be screened from street-level view from Main Street with
vegetation, fencing constructed of commercially manufactured
wood panels or similar materials (no wire fencing materials are
permitted), or a decorative masonry wall consistent with the
character of Main Street. Any fencing or wall shall be a minimum of
four feet and a maximum of six feet in height, with any opaque
construction limited to a maximum portion of the screen of up to
three feet in height. The remaining portion of the screen must have
a minimum of 50% transparency.
K. Monuments and memorials. No person or entity may place, install or
construct a monument or memorial on Borough property.
L. Signs. In addition to any other applicable sign regulation found within
the Code of the Borough of Slippery Rock, the following shall apply:
(1) Temporary sandwich board signs up to a maximum of five square
feet per side of the sign are permitted to be located within the
sidewalk frontage of a nonresidential or mixed-use building,
provided that only one sandwich board is permitted per building.
The sandwich board may be placed on the sidewalk immediately in
front of the building.
(2) Flashing or animated signs are not permitted.
§ 375-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-63
1:453

ARTICLE XV
Planned Residential Development
§ 375-64. Purpose.
The provisions contained in previous parts of this chapter do not allow for
a comprehensive development of a large parcel or tract of land; therefore,
the provisions of this article are established to:
§ 375-65. Administration.
The Slippery Rock Borough Council is designated the body to administer
the provisions of this article and, pursuant to such provisions, may approve,
modify or disapprove any planned residential development proposed within
the Borough, following review and recommendation by the Borough
Planning Commission.
§ 375-66. Permitted uses.
Uses permitted in a planned residential development may include:
A. Permit a flexibility that will encourage innovations in residential and
nonresidential development;
B. Permit a greater variety in type, design and layout of dwellings and
other buildings and structures and the conservation and more efficient
use of open space ancillary to said dwellings and structures;
C. Encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development; and
D. Provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout of
residential and nonresidential development to the particular site and
the particular demand for housing existing at the time of development
in a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values
within existing residential and nonresidential areas.
A. Dwelling units of any dwelling type or configuration, or any
combination thereof;
B. Churches and other places of worship;
C. Schools, both public and private, if such schools are chartered or
licensed by the commonwealth;
D. Municipal and public utility service buildings, structures and facilities
to serve the planned development;
E. Community assembly halls, recreation centers and membership
clubhouses related to the planned residential development;
F. Real estate sales and rental office serving the planned residential
development only;
§ 375-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-66
1:455
§ 375-67. Bulk and dimensional requirements.
G. Swimming pools and recreation areas serving the planned residential
development only;
H. Private or group garages and parking areas;
I. Those nonresidential uses deemed to be appropriate for incorporation
in the design of the planned residential development;
J. Signs related to all development.
A. Minimum site size: five acres.
B. Maximum building coverage of site: 20%.
C. Minimum distances between multifamily residential buildings on the
site:
(1) End walls face each other but contain no apartment windows: 20
feet.
(2) End walls face each other and contain apartment windows: 35 feet.
(3) End wall of one building faces principal facade (front or rear) of
neighboring building: 45 feet.
(4) Principal facades (front or rear) of neighboring buildings face each
other: 60 feet.
(5) Connected groups of abutting buildings shall not exceed in total
length: 300 feet.
(6) Distances shall be construed as the shortest dimension between
any parts, including projecting balconies, of adjacent buildings.
D. Minimum setback from property boundary line: a fifty-foot setback for
all structures shall be maintained along the perimeter property lines of
the tract or parcel proposed for development.
E. Maximum height of buildings, measured between the average finished
grade elevation and the top of the parapet on a flat-roof building or
halfway between eave and ridge on a sloped-roof building: 35 feet or
three stories, whichever is less.
F. Any lots available for sale and development for single-family buildings
within a planned residential development shall be subject to the same
standards as for single-family lots in the zone in which the development
occurs, if municipal zoning is in force, or the standards of this chapter.
The minimum lot standards may be reduced where the developer makes
provisions for additional common open space held for the common
enjoyment of the residents, beyond that which is required.
§ 375-66 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-68
1:456
§ 375-68. Recreation requirements.
An area or areas developed for recreation use totaling 200 square feet for
each dwelling unit shall be provided convenient to the residential areas
by the developer. Recreational areas shall be on land that does not slope
at any point more than 10% and shall be provided with appropriate play
equipment, benches and landscaping by the developer. The developer may
provide a swimming pool and other recreational facilities to be operated
by him or by an association of residents of the planned residential
development.
§ 375-69. Miscellaneous requirements.
§ 375-70. Application for tentative approval.
A. All improvements shall be installed, at no expense to the Borough or
county, in accordance with the standards of the Borough and in this
article.
B. Roads, parking areas and sidewalks shall be maintained in a serviceable
condition by the developer or his successors.
C. All areas of the site not occupied by buildings or paved shall be either
planted in natural materials or left in the state existing prior to
development.
D. All structures in any planned residential development shall be
connected to public or community sewage disposal and water supply
systems.
E. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with two off-street parking spaces
within 200 feet of the dwelling thus served.
F. All electric, telephone lines, television cable, etc., within a planned
residential development shall be placed underground.
A. An application for tentative approval of the development plan for a
planned residential development shall be filed by or on behalf of the
landowner or, if several adjacent parcels are included in the plan, by the
several landowners. The application shall be submitted to the Slippery
Rock Borough Planning Commission no later than 10 days prior to the
regular monthly meeting of the commission at which the development
plan is to be considered.
B. The application shall consist of plans, drawings, data specifications,
etc., in conformance with the required information for land
developments, § 350-23 of Chapter 350, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(1) Density of residential development to be allocated to various parts
of the site, such parts to be outlined on the map;
§ 375-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-70
1:457
§ 375-71. Public hearings.
(2) The form of organization proposed to own and maintain the
common open space;
(3) The feasibility of proposals for the disposition of sanitary sewage
waste and stormwater as related to existing or proposed public
systems;
(4) The substance of any covenants, grants, easements or other
restrictions to be imposed upon the use of lands or buildings in the
development;
(5) A schedule showing the approximate dates when the developer
proposes to make application for final approval of various segments
of the development, such segments to be outlined on the plan and
such schedule to be updated annually on the anniversary of its
initial approval;
(6) A written statement by the landowner setting forth reasons why, in
his opinion, a planned residential development on his site would be
in the public interest and would be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for Slippery Rock Borough;
(7) An environmental impact analysis for review by the Butler County
Conservation District; and
(8) Public water. Public water shall be provided to all building lots
proposed in a planned residential development by a municipal
authority.
C. All applications for tentative approval shall be referred to the Butler
County Planning Commission for study and recommendation. The
County Planning Commission shall be required to report to the Borough
within 30 days or forfeit the right to review.
A. Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative approval of
a planned residential development pursuant to this chapter, a public
hearing pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by
the Planning Commission.
B. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in
such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Borough Council. In
addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said
hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at
least one week prior to the hearing.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Planning Commission, and any other person, including civic or
§ 375-70 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-71
1:458
§ 375-72. Approval or denial of plan.
community organizations, permitted to appear by the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission shall have power to require
that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances
in writing on forms provided by the Planning Commission for that
purpose.
D. The Chairman, or Acting Chairman in the absence of the Chairman, of
the Planning Commission shall have power to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and
documents requested by the parties.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Planning Commission shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Borough Council. The cost of the
original transcript shall be paid by the Borough Council if the transcript
is ordered by the Borough Council or shall be paid by the person
appealing from the decision of the Planning Commission if such appeal
is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid
by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
H. The Planning Commission shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice for all parties to participate, shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed, and shall not
inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are
given an opportunity to be present.
I. The Planning Commission may continue the hearing from time to time,
provided that, in any event, the public hearing or hearings shall be
concluded within 60 days after the date of the first public hearing.
A. The Planning Commission, within 60 days following the conclusion of
the public hearing, shall, by official written communication to the
landowner, either:
(1) Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted;
§ 375-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-72
1:459
(2) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
(3) Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
B. Failure to so act within said sixty-day period shall be deemed to be a
grant of tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the
event, however, that tentative approval is granted subject to conditions,
the landowner may, within 30 days after receiving a copy of the official
written communication of the Planning Commission, notify such
Planning Commission of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in
which case the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have denied
tentative approval of the development plan. In the event the landowner
does not, within said period, notify the Planning Commission of his
refusal to accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the
development plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
C. The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings of
fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for
the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial, and said
communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in the public interest,
including, but not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions on the
following:
(1) In those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
Borough;
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use, and the
reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest;
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
planned residential development, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space, and the
adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of
residential development;
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic, and
further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment;
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned
residential development to the neighborhood in which it is
proposed to be established; and
§ 375-72 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-72
1:460
§ 375-73. Status of plan after tentative approval.
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the planned residential development in the integrity of the
development plan.
D. In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval, with or
without conditions, the Planning Commission may set forth in the
official written communication the time within which application for
final approval of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a
development plan which provides for development over a period of
years, the periods of time within which applications for final approval of
each part thereof shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the
landowner, the time so established between grant of tentative approval
and an application for final approval shall not be less than three
months, and, in the case of development over a period of years, the time
between applications for final approval of each part of a plan shall be
not less than 12 months.
A. The official written communication shall be certified by the Borough
Administrator/Secretary and shall be filed in the Borough office, and a
certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner. Where tentative
approval has been granted, it shall be deemed an amendment to the
Zoning Map, effective upon final approval, and shall be noted on the
Zoning Map.
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the
planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A development
plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted, or which
has been given tentative approval with conditions which have been
accepted by the landowner (and provided that the landowner has not
defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of the tentative approval),
shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise impaired by the action of
the Borough pending an application or applications for final approval
without the consent of the landowner, provided an application or
applications for final approval are filed, or, in the case of development
over a period of years, provided applications are filed, within the
periods of time specified in the official written communication granting
tentative approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Borough Council
in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file application or
applications for final approval within the required period of time or
times, as the case may be, the tentative approval shall be deemed to be
revoked, and all that portion of the area included in the development
plan for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to
§ 375-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-73
1:461
§ 375-74. Application for final approval.
An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a
development plan or, to the extent designated in the tentative approval, for
a portion of the land.
those ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they may be amended
from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the Zoning Map and
in the records of the Borough Administrator/Secretary.
A. An application for final approval shall be submitted to the Secretary of
the Slippery Rock Borough Planning Commission at least 10 days prior
to the regular Planning Commission meeting at which the application is
to be considered.
B. The application shall contain, for the area for which final approval is
sought, all requirements of the proposed plan and the written reports
necessary to obtain tentative approval and, in addition:
(1) Construction documents for the building of streets, sidewalks,
parking areas, sanitary sewer lines, waterlines, storm drainage
systems, erosion and sedimentation control facilities and
recreation areas; and
(2) Certificate from either the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or the Butler County Conservation
District stating that the erosion and sedimentation control plan has
been approved and that a land disturbance permit has been issued
for an earthmoving activity by the Department or by the Butler
County Conservation District;
(3) A certified performance bond, improvement bond, or other
acceptable security, to the benefit of the Borough, the amount of
bond being equal to 100% of the estimated cost for installation of
all public improvements, such amount to be established by the
engineer designing the facilities, subject to the Borough Engineer's
approval;
(4) Any covenants and rights of easement, in the form in which they
will be filed as legal documents, affecting development; and
(5) A written description indicating changes made in the tentative plan
required to secure tentative approval.
C. Provided that all conditions of the tentative and final approvals have
been met to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission, Slippery Rock
Borough shall grant final approval within 45 days after the filing of the
final approval application.
D. If the Planning Commission finds variations in the application for final
approval when compared with the plan given tentative approval, the
Planning Commission may refuse to grant final approval and shall so
§ 375-73 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-74
1:462
§ 375-75. Maintenance of common open space.
notify the landowner in writing not later than 45 days after the filing
of the final approval application, setting forth the reasons why one or
more of said variations are not in the public interest.
E. The landowner may either:
(1) Refile his application for final approval within 60 days after the
date of the meeting at which his application was refused, without
the variations noted by the Planning Commission; or
(2) File a written request with the Slippery Rock Planning Commission
for a public hearing to consider the final approval application as
submitted, such hearing to be, pursuant to public notice, within the
time limit specified in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247, as amended; or
(3) Take no action, in which case the development plan shall be
deemed to have been abandoned.
F. If the landowner requests a public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall, within 30 days, hold such hearing, by official written
communication, in the manner required for tentative approval, and
either grant or deny final approval.
G. A development plan, or any part thereof, given final approval shall be
certified immediately by the Planning Commission and Borough Council
and shall be filed within 15 days after grant of final approval in the
office of the Butler County Recorder of Deeds, after which development
of the site area for which final approval has been granted may proceed.
Each structure in the development will require a separate building
permit.
H. Upon filing of the development plan with the Recorder of Deeds, all
zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the area
recorded shall cease to apply to that area.
I. If the landowner abandons his development plan after final approval
and so informs the Slippery Rock Planning Commission in writing, or
fails to carry out the development within the time period agreed upon in
the final approval, no further applications for final approval shall be
considered by the Planning Commission for subsequent portions of the
same site, and no further development of such subsequent portions of
the site shall be permitted until that area complies with Chapter 350,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Borough of
Slippery Rock.
J. When a sequence of development of a site takes place over a period of
years, the time between applications for final approval of each part of
the plan shall be not more than 30 months.
§ 375-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-75
1:463
A. The landowner shall satisfy the Planning Commission at the time of
application for final approval that all areas for which the final approval
is sought will be adequately maintained in perpetuity so as not to cause
a public nuisance.
B. If the landowner provides for establishment of an association of
residents of the planned residential development to own and maintain
common open spaces on the site, he shall indicate the organization of
such association, including bylaws, and the legal mechanism that will
bind such association to perpetual maintenance of the common open
space.
C. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, shall fail to
maintain the common open space in reasonable order and condition,
the Slippery Rock Borough Council may serve written notice upon the
organization or upon the residents of the planned residential
development setting forth the deficiencies in maintenance, demanding
that they be corrected within 30 days and stating the time and place of
a public hearing to be held, pursuant to public notice, to consider the
deficiencies, at which time the deficiencies noted may be modified or
the time period for correction extended.
D. If the deficiencies are not corrected within 30 days, Slippery Rock
Borough Council may enter the common open space containing the
deficiencies and maintain the area for a period of 12 months, at the
expiration of which the Borough Council shall call a second public
hearing, with notice to the organization and residents of the planned
residential development, at which the organization or the residents
shall show cause why Slippery Rock Borough Council should cease
maintenance based on the ability of the organization or the residents to
again discharge such maintenance responsibility. Public hearings shall
be called thereafter or less frequently than once per year to consider
termination of Borough maintenance until such termination occurs.
E. The decision to continue or cease maintenance shall lie with Slippery
Rock Borough Council.
F. The period during which Borough Council shall maintain common open
space shall not constitute a taking of land nor entitle the public to use of
such common open space unless as provided in the conditions
establishing the common open space.
G. The cost of maintenance of common open space by Borough Council
shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the planned
residential development that have rights to common open space and
shall become a lien on the properties, to be filed by Borough Council
with the Prothonotary of Butler County at time of entrance into the
common open space.
§ 375-75 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-76
1:464
§ 375-76. Appeals.
Any decision of the Borough Council in granting or denying tentative or
final approval of a planned residential development plan shall be subject
to appeal to court in the manner as provided for in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.140
140. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 375-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-76
1:465

ARTICLE XVI
Supplemental Regulations
§ 375-77. Lot, height, yard and building regulations.
A. Zone lot regulations.
(1) Existing lots of record. In any R District, a single-family dwelling
may be erected on a nonconforming lot of official record at the
effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto,
regardless of its area or width, the owner of which does not own
any adjoining property which would create a conforming lot if all or
part of said property were combined with subject zone lot;
provided, however, that no lot or lots in single ownership shall
hereafter be reduced so as to create one or more nonconforming
lots; and provided further that, on any nonconforming lot, no side
yard adjoining a side street shall be less than 10 feet; provided
further that the rear yard of any such lot shall in no case be less
than that required in the specific zoning district, and the side and
front yards shall also be as required in the specific zoning district.
(2) Corner lots. At all street intersections, no obstructions to vision
(other than an existing building, post, column or tree) exceeding 30
inches in height above the established grade of the street shall be
erected or maintained on any lot within the clear sight triangle.
(See the current Chapter 350, Subdivision and Land Development,
of the Code of the Borough of Slippery Rock.)
(3) Through lots. Where a single lot under individual ownership
extends from a street to an alley, the widest street shall be deemed
the street upon which the property fronts, and no principal
structures and no dwelling shall be erected on the rear of such lot.
(4) Required area or space cannot be reduced. The area or dimension
of any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to
less than the minimum required by this chapter, and if already less
than the minimum required by this chapter, said area or dimension
may be continued and shall not be further reduced.
B. Height regulations.
(1) General application. No building or structure shall have a greater
number of stories than are permitted by this section in the specific
zoning district in which the proposed building or structure is
situated, provided further that the aggregate height of such
buildings or structures shall not exceed the number of feet
permitted except as otherwise provided.
(2) Permitted exceptions. Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in
this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and
domes, silos, monuments, water towers, chimneys, smokestacks,
flagpoles, radio and television masts and aerials, parapet walls
§ 375-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-77
1:467
extending not more than four feet above the roof level of the
building, and other appurtenances extending above the roof level
and not intended for human occupancy.
C. Yard regulations.
(1) Side yards.
(a) Side yard width may be varied. Where the sidewall of a
building is not parallel with the side lot line or is broken or
irregular, the side yard may be varied. In such cases, the
average width of the side yard shall not be less than the
otherwise required minimum width; provided, however, that
such side yard shall not be narrower at any point than 1/2 the
otherwise required minimum width.
(b) Side yard of corner lot. The side street setback line of any
corner lot as it existed at the time of adoption of this chapter or
any corner lot shown on any subdivision plat which received
final approval prior to the adoption of this chapter shall not be
less than 1/2 of the depth of the minimum front yard required
on any adjoining lot fronting on a side street. However, any
corner lot delineated by subdivision after the adoption of this
chapter shall provide a side street setback line which shall not
be less than the minimum front yard required on any adjoining
lot front on a side street.
(c) Corner or double frontage lots. Lots which front on or abut
more than one street shall provide the required front yards
along every street.
(2) Front yard exception (single-family and two-family dwelling only).
When an unimproved lot is situated between two improved lots,
each having a principal building within 25 feet of any side lot line of
such unimproved lot, the front yard may be reduced to the greatest
depth of the front yard of the two adjoining improved lots, but shall
not be less than 15 feet; provided, however, that where any lot shall
front on a right-of-way which is proposed on the Official Map of the
Borough to be widened by the Borough or any lawful county, state
or federal highway agency, the front yard of such lot shall be as
required by the applicable provision of the subject zoning district
and shall be measured from such proposed future right-of-way.
(3) Projections into required yards. Certain architectural features may
project into required yards as follows:
(a) Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may
project into required yards a distance not exceeding two inches
per one foot of required yard depth but may not exceed a total
of three feet.
§ 375-77 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-77
1:468
(b) Fire escapes may project into required yards a distance not
exceeding four feet, six inches.
(c) Bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, uncovered stairways and
necessary landings and chimneys may project a distance not
exceeding four feet, provided that such features do not occupy,
in the aggregate, more than 1/3 of the length of the building
wall on which they are located.
(4) No required front or side yard in a residentially zoned district shall
be used for the temporary or permanent parking or storage of
vehicles except on a driveway constructed for access to a garage
which is conforming as to location and size.
D. More than one principal structure on a lot permitted. In any district,
more than one principal structure housing a permitted use, conditional
use or special exception may be erected on a single lot, provided that
yard and all other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each
structure as though it were on an individual lot. The individual lot so
described shall consist of a full-sized lot and shall not involve any
exceptions as to required yard widths.
E. Accessory structures.
(1) Maximum permitted height and number of structures.
(a) In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts, all accessory
structures shall be a maximum of 1 1/2 stories or 15 feet. No
more than two accessory structures, including a private
garage, shall be permitted on each residential lot.141
(b) In the R-A Residential District, all accessory structures shall be
a maximum of 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet. No more than five
accessory structures shall be permitted per lot.
(2) Minimum yard regulations.
(a) Unattached accessory structures in R Districts. Accessory
structures which are not attached to a principal structure may
be erected in accordance with the following requirements:
[1] Front yard: no closer to front property line than building
line.
[2] Side yard (interior lot): three feet from property line; R-A
District: 25 feet from property line.
[3] Side yard (corner lot): same as for principal structure.
[4] Rear yard: three feet; if fronting on an alley: 10 feet from
property line; in R-A District: 25 feet from property line.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-77
1:469
[5] Not closer to a principal structure than 10 feet.
(b) Attached accessory structure in R Districts. When an accessory
structure is attached to the principal building, it shall comply
in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable
to the principal building.
(c) Nondwelling accessory structure in other districts.
Nondwelling accessory structures shall comply with front and
side yard requirements for the principal structure to which
they are accessory and shall not be closer to any rear property
line than 10 feet.
F. General landscaping regulations.
(1) Enclosed uses. Any enclosed use as may be required by this chapter
to be landscaped in accordance with this subsection shall provide a
planted screened area, as per the provisions of § 375-85.
(2) Unenclosed uses. Any use which is not conducted within a
completely enclosed building, except for nurseries, and the display
for sales purposes of new or used cars, trucks, or trailers, in
operative condition, shall be entirely enclosed by a fence
maintained in good condition or a 50%/50% mix of evergreen and
deciduous trees a minimum of three inches in diameter at breast
height, spaced at intervals of not more than 10 feet.
G. Miscellaneous building regulations.
(1) Unenclosed M-1 uses. All M-1 uses which are not conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building shall not be less than 100
feet from any R District zoning boundary line.
(2) Used to be enclosed. All C and M uses shall be conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building, except for off-street parking
and loading facilities, new and used car lots, service stations
(repairs shall be conducted inside), terminals, storage yards,
nurseries, and similar uses.
(3) Air-conditioning system. In residential districts, any outdoor
installation constructed or placed on a lot in connection with an airconditioning
system designed to air condition all or part of a
residence shall be located in either the rear yard or side yard of the
lot and shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any property line;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to apply to the use and/or location of a window-mounted
air conditioner designed to air condition a single room of a
residence.
H. Parking and storage of certain vehicles. Automotive vehicles or trailers
of any kind or type without current license plates or a valid state
§ 375-77 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-77
1:470
§ 375-78. Agriculture.142
Agriculture uses permitted in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts:
§ 375-79. Essential services.
Permitted use in all districts.
inspection sticker shall not be parked or stored on any residentially
zoned property other than in a completely enclosed building(s).
I. Temporary storage of furniture. The temporary relocation or storage of
furniture designed and constructed for indoor use, including but not
limited to upholstered couches, stuffed chairs, sectional sofas,
davenports or recliners, on the exterior of any lot or parcel is hereby
prohibited in all zoning districts.
A. Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products shall be permitted,
providing:
(1) They are erected no less than 30 feet from the nearest street rightof-
way line;
(2) A minimum of four off-street parking spaces shall be provided on
the lot or property accommodating the roadside stand. Said offstreet
parking spaces shall not be closer than 10 feet to the nearest
street right-of-way line; and
(3) They shall be used exclusively for the sale of agricultural products
grown or raised by the occupant/owner of the agricultural
operation.
A. Essential services, enclosed or permanent structures. Such uses shall
include public utility services such as electric substations,
transformers, switches and auxiliary apparatus serving a distribution
area, meter pits, telephone exchanges and pumping stations and shall
be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such facility shall be so located as to draw a minimum of vehicular
traffic to and through local residential streets.
(2) The location, design and operation of such facility shall not
adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area.
(3) Adequate fences, barriers, and other safety devices shall be
provided and shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions
of § 375-85.
(4) Noise emitted from electric substations shall not be greater than
permitted in accordance with the performance standards set forth
in Article XXI.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-79
1:471
§ 375-80. Fences.
Fences constructed for the purpose of enclosing any portion of the area of
any zoned lot or tract of land shall be a maximum height of eight feet and
shall meet the following requirements for location with respect to existing
B. Essential services, open.
(1) Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction, alteration,
or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas,
electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other
similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not
including buildings. Where applicable, the landscaping regulations
of § 375-85 shall apply.
(2) In the event that any public utility shall desire to replace or
relocate any existing poles, frames or structures in the public
streets upon which are located any electric light, electric power,
telephone or telegraph wires, the said public utility involved shall
notify the Borough Council of such intention to replace or relocate
poles, frames or structures.
(3) When any lot or tract of ground in the Borough of Slippery Rock is
serviced by a public utility whose facilities have been placed
underground, all electric light, electric power, telephone and
telegraph wires thereafter installed to service any buildings on
such lot or tract of ground shall be placed underground in such
manner as may be directed by the public utility involved.
C. Essential services, police stations, emergency service and fire stations.
Such facilities shall be permitted in all R Districts, provided that:
(1) Such facility is necessary to serve the surrounding residential area
where it is not possible nor practical to serve such area from a
facility located in less restrictive districts;
(2) Such facility shall not be located on a local residential street
(unless no other site is available) and shall be so located as to draw
a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through such streets;
(3) Where applicable, the landscaping regulations of § 375-85 shall
apply; and
(4) Such facility shall be designed and constructed consistent with the
general character of the neighborhood.
§ 375-79 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-80
1:472
or established lot or boundary lines. Any fence over four feet in height shall
require a building permit.
§ 375-81. Recreation uses.
A. Front: no closer to the front property line than the building setback line
established by either: [Amended 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 613]
(1) The setback line of an existing building.
(2) The building setback line established by the provisions of this
article.
(3) Nonopaque decorative fences a maximum of three feet in height
may be located in a required front yard, no closer than 10 feet to
the abutting right-of-way line, or within five feet of the abutting
right-of-way line in the MSCO District.143
B. Rear: not less than one foot from the rear property line, unless the
property line can be located accurately, in which case the fence may be
erected on the property line.
C. Side: not less than one foot from each property line, unless the property
line can be located accurately, in which case the fence may be erected
on the property line.
D. Side (corner lot): no closer to the exterior side lot line than the building
setback line established by either:
(1) The setback line of an existing building; or
(2) The building setback line established by the provisions of this
article.
E. In the R-A District, fences may be located in the front yard, but no
closer to the road right-of-way than 10 feet.
F. Fences, barriers and gates for swimming pools shall comply with the
applicable requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.144
A. Commercial indoor recreation, including but not limited to bowling
alleys, ice- and roller-skating rinks, video arcades, theaters and similar
places of amusement and recreation: permitted in the C-1 and C-2
Districts.
(1) Such uses shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure,
except as otherwise required.
(2) Parking areas shall be screened from adjoining residential
properties in accordance with § 375-85.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-81
1:473
§ 375-82. Residential conversions.
Residential conversion to provide two-family and multifamily occupancy
shall be permitted, provided that:
(3) Any principal structure shall not be less than 20 feet from any
property boundary line.
(4) There shall be no offensive noise or vibration; such elements may
be emitted only in accordance with the performance standards set
forth herein.
B. Outdoor recreation facilities: permitted in the C-2 District as
commercial uses; R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts as public recreation
facilities.145
(1) Such uses shall include miniature golf courses, ice-skating rinks,
swimming pools, tennis courts and amusement buildings or parks.
(2) Unenclosed recreation facilities shall be located not less than 25
feet from any property line, except where greater distances are
otherwise required herein, and shall be effectively screened from
adjoining residential uses in accordance with the provisions of
§ 375-85.
(3) Illuminated signs and other lights shall be directed away or
shielded from adjoining residential properties, in such a way as not
to disturb the occupants thereof.
(4) No public address system shall be permitted, except where such a
system will not be audible at any adjoining residential property
line.
C. Noncommercial private recreation. Clubs, social halls, lodges, fraternal
organizations and similar uses, excluding college fraternity and sorority
houses: special exception in the R-3 District.146
(1) All buildings shall be a minimum of 20 feet from any property line,
except where greater distances are otherwise required herein.
(2) All applications for such uses in the R-3 District shall demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed
use will serve primarily the residents of the surrounding
neighborhood and that said use cannot satisfactorily be located
elsewhere to serve said neighborhood.
A. The lot, yard and height requirements and all other requirements of this
chapter for the applicable zoning district shall apply.
B. Studio dwellings shall comply after conversion.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-81 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-82
1:474
§ 375-83. Automotive fueling and service and repair stations;
parking garages. [Amended 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 664]
§ 375-84. Miscellaneous uses.
C. Such structure shall contain no less square feet of living space per
habitable unit than provided in the following:
(1) Apartment (one bedroom/living room, kitchenette and bath): 340
square feet.
(2) One-bedroom apartment (one living room/dining, kitchen and bath,
or one living room, kitchenette and bath): 450 square feet.
(3) Two-bedroom apartment (same facilities as one-bedroom
apartment): add 130 square feet for each bedroom over two.
D. All alterations shall be done in accordance with local housing, building,
plumbing, heating and electrical codes. Where a structure has
deficiencies with respect to these codes, said deficiencies shall be
corrected at the time of conversion.
A. Location of exits and entrances.
(1) No automotive fueling and automotive service and repair stations
or parking garage for five or more motor vehicles and any access
thereto shall be located along the same street and the same block
as schools, playgrounds, churches, hospitals, public libraries, and
institutions for dependents or for children.
(2) Vehicular access to the above automotive uses shall not be closer to
the intersection of any two street right-of-way lines than 25 feet,
nor shall any such access be located within 25 feet of any boundary
line of any R District.
B. Location of appliances or pits. No automotive fueling and automotive
service and repair stations or parking garages shall be permitted where
any gasoline or oil pump, oil drainage pit or visible appliance for any
such purpose is located within 10 feet of any street right-of-way line,
except where such appliance or pit is within a building.
A. Nondwelling structure conversion. No commercial or manufacturing
structure, originally designed for other than residential use, shall be
converted to a dwelling structure, nor shall any structure which was so
converted prior to the adoption of this chapter be further converted to
provide for additional dwellings.
B. Outdoor storage areas. Such uses shall be governed by the following
provisions and any other conditions as may be required by the Zoning
Hearing Board to protect the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, and properties and the occupants thereof.
§ 375-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-84
1:475
(1) Inflammable and explosive liquids. No highly inflammable or
explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above
ground. Tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with heating
devices or appliances located on the same premises as the tanks or
drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.
(2) Fencing and setbacks. All outdoor storage facilities shall be
enclosed by a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities and
the contents thereof from adjacent property. Such walls and fences
shall be distant not less than 25 feet from all property lines which
abut an R District or existing residential development, but in any
other case shall be distant not less than 10 feet from any property
line.
(3) Deposit of wastes. No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any
premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred off
such premises by natural causes or forces.
(4) Other hazardous materials. All materials or wastes which might
cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may
be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be
stored outdoors only in closed containers.
C. Temporary tract office. Temporary tract offices, including construction
offices, development and/or real estate sales offices, equipment storage
sheds or related uses, housed in detached structures, shall be located
on the property for which the activity or development is being
conducted. Such uses and/or detached structures shall be removed
upon the completion of construction or development of an individual or
group building project. The completion date referred to herein shall be
that date governed under the issuance of an original building/zoning
permit as prescribed in § 375-155.
D. Sale of individual units of multiunit residential structures. Upon
application, the Zoning Hearing Board may modify or waive individual
lot area and building coverage requirements in the case of the sale of
individual units of townhouse, row house, garden apartment or other
multiple-unit residential structures, consistent with the Pennsylvania
Condominium Act,147 whether said sale occurs prior to or after actual
construction, provided that, if the sale be prior to construction, the
design and construction of the proposed residential structures shall be
of a harmonious and unified nature, and that the development shall be a
single, joint undertaking of all said owners, and provided further that
the residential unit(s) to be sold shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Such modification, reduction, or waiver will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
147. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 375-84 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-84
1:476
use or development of adjacent property, nor be otherwise
detrimental to the public interest and welfare.
(2) If the individual lots in question have been part of a project
previously approved as a planned residential building group, or are
a part of a project not so approved but advertised, designed, or
arranged as being of such nature, the owners of said lots shall not
be prevented from having adequate access to such common areas
or facilities as may have been included in the project, nor shall any
individual lots so created include within their boundaries any
portion of such common areas or facilities.
(3) If a property owner's organization for that purpose does not exist,
the Borough may, in its discretion, maintain such common open
space as existed in such a project and may ratably assess the cost
of such maintenance against the property owners within the
project.
(4) No new dwelling units shall be created from any individual
dwelling unit in or proposed to be in existence at the time of
approval of the project, nor shall the number of facilities housed
therein exceed the number of dwelling units provided at that same
time.
(5) No additional structures of any type, other than minor structures
such as play equipment, individual animal shelters, refuse
receptacle shelters, or small storage sheds, shall be constructed or
erected on any individual lot(s) so created, unless adequate
provision for such structure was made in the application approved
under this section.
(6) The project complies in every other way with the applicable
regulations as to total minimum lot size, setbacks or any
requirements for the original project as a whole at the start of
construction.
(7) Approval by the Board. Approval by the Zoning Hearing Board for
the creation of such nonstandard lots shall be strictly dependent
upon their utilization for the development of one or more units of a
multiunit residential structure. Any attempt to utilize lots so
approved for any other purpose shall be cause for the mandatory
denial of any building permit and/or certificates of occupancy.
E. Installation of single mobile or manufactured homes. If a mobile or
manufactured home is erected and maintained as a single-family
dwelling outside a mobile or manufactured home park, the following
requirements shall be met:
(1) The tract upon which the mobile or manufactured home is installed
shall conform with the minimum lot size requirements of the
district or zone where located and shall be located only in those
districts or zones so specified in this chapter.
§ 375-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-84
1:477
§ 375-85. Screening and landscaping.
(2) The mobile or manufactured home shall be installed so as to
conform with all front yard, side yard, and rear yard setback lines
applicable to a single-family dwelling in that district or zone.
(3) The mobile or manufactured home shall be installed upon, and
securely fastened to, a frost-free foundation or footer, and in no
event shall it be erected on jacks, loose blocks, or other temporary
materials.
(4) An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected
around the entire base of the mobile or manufactured home. Such
enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and
deterioration of the structure.
(5) The mobile or manufactured home shall be connected to the
Borough public water and sewer systems.
(6) The tract shall be seeded, landscaped and shrubbed.
(7) Any single on-lot mobile or manufactured home shall meet the
specifications for manufacture of mobile or manufactured homes as
set forth in United States Institute Standards for Mobile Homes,
USA Standard A 119.11969, NFPA No. 501B1968, and any
subsequent modification or amendment of such standards.
(8) Building permit required. No mobile or manufactured home shall
be erected on a single lot unless a building permit is first obtained.
(9) Travel unit vehicle. No travel unit vehicle shall be erected and
maintained for living purposes in the Borough. Unoccupied
recreational vehicles may be parked or stored in a private garage,
carport, or rear or side yard, but same shall not be stored or parked
for a period not exceeding 24 hours on a public street or in the
front yard of a residential dwelling.
F. Removal of mobile or manufactured homes from Borough. No mobile or
manufactured home, whether installed in a single lot or in a mobile or
manufactured home park, shall be removed from the Borough without
first obtaining a permit from the Borough Tax Collector charged with
the collection of municipal real estate taxes. Such a permit for removal
will be issued upon payment of a fee established by resolution of the
Borough Council and payment of all real estate taxes.
A. A planted visual barrier or landscape screen shall be provided and
maintained on any lot proposed for development which abuts a
previously developed lot, except where natural, physical or man-made
barriers exist which are deemed adequate by the Planning Commission
and Borough Council and except where such contiguity has resulted
from an amendment to the zoning district boundaries after the passage
of this provision.
§ 375-84 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-85
1:478
B. There are hereby established three types of screening applicable
throughout the Borough. The screening requirements chart included in
Subsection C of this section shall be used to determine which type of
screen the developing use must provide along the perimeter boundary
abutting a developed lot.
(1) Opaque screen, Type A: a screen that is opaque from the ground to
a height of at least six feet, with intermittent visual obstructions
from the opaque portion to a height of at least 20 feet. An opaque
screen is intended to exclude all visual contact between uses and to
create a strong impression of spatial separation. The opaque
screen may include a wall or fence, but a minimum of 70% of the
screen shall consist of densely planted vegetation. Compliance of
planted vegetative screens will be judged on the basis of the
average mature height and density of foliage of the subject species
or field observation of existing vegetation. The opaque portion of
the screen must be opaque in all seasons of the year. At maturity,
the portion of intermittent visual obstruction should not contain
any completely unobstructed openings more than 10 feet wide.
Suggested planting patterns follow:
§ 375-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-85
1:479
(2) Semi-opaque screen, Type B: a screen that is opaque from the
ground to a height of three feet, with intermittent visual
obstruction from above the opaque portion to a height of at least 20
feet. The semi-opaque screen may include a wall, fence or
landscaped earth berm, but a minimum of 70% of the screen shall
consist of densely planted vegetation. Compliance of planted
vegetative screens will be judged on the basis of the average
mature height and density of foliage of the subject species or field
observation of existing vegetation. At maturity, the portion of
intermittent visual obstructions should not contain any completely
unobstructed openings more than 15 feet wide. Suggested planting
patterns follow:
§ 375-85 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-85
1:480
(3) Broken screen, Type C: a screen composed of intermittent visual
obstructions from the ground to a height of at least 20 feet. The
broken screen is intended to create the impression of a separation
of spaces without necessarily eliminating visual contact between
the spaces. The broken screen may include a wall, fence or
landscaped earth berm, but a minimum of 70% of the screen shall
consist of densely planted vegetation or existing vegetation.
Compliance of planted vegetative screens or natural vegetation will
be judged on the basis of the average mature height and density of
foliage of the subject species or field observation of existing
§ 375-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-85
1:481
§ 375-86. Home occupations.
In all districts where home occupations are permitted accessory uses, the
following shall apply:
vegetation. The screen may contain deciduous plants. Suggested
planting patterns follow:
C. The following tabular chart shall dictate the land use and appropriate
screen type.148
148. Editor's Note: Said chart is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 375-85 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-86
1:482
§ 375-86.1. Mobile food vendors. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 708]
A. Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be
so used.
B. No display or visible evidence of such occupation shall be permitted on
the premises.
C. No home occupation shall be conducted in an accessory building, nor
shall there be sales of the product of that occupation on the premises.
D. No traffic shall be generated by such occupation in greater volumes
than would be normally expected in a residential neighborhood, and
any need for parking generated by such occupation shall be met other
than in a required yard.
E. No equipment or process shall be used in such occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to normal senses off the lot.
A. Temporary business license required.
(1) An applicant shall apply for a temporary business license (which
will also serve as the required zoning permit), including payment of
the temporary business license fee as set by resolution of Borough
Council, no less than two weeks prior to the vendor's anticipated
date to begin operating in the Borough by filing the proper forms,
which are available from the Borough.
(2) Any license issued under this section is not transferable.
(3) The applicant must possess and provide a copy of a valid state
vehicle operating license. Additionally, the operator of a motor
vehicle used for mobile food vending must have a valid operating
license.
(4) Motor vehicles used for mobile food vending must have valid
plates, inspection, registration and insurance.
B. Liability and insurance obligation. Every mobile food vendor must
furnish evidence of comprehensive public liability insurance coverage
for not less than $500,000 in the event of bodily injury, including death,
and, if applicable, worker's compensation insurance. Such evidence
shall be in the form of a certificate with 10 days' cancellation notice,
which shall be furnished to the Borough. Failure to maintain the
required insurance will be considered reason for the Borough to
suspend the mobile food vendor's business license and shall be subject
to fines and/or penalties as defined herein.
C. Display of license and permits.
(1) An approved license, as well as any required Department of
Agriculture permits, shall be displayed at all times in a prominent
§ 375-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-86.1
1:483
place on the mobile food vendor truck, concession cart, or
concession trailer, where they can be viewed and read by the
general public.
(2) It shall be unlawful for an individual to sell edible goods while
displaying a valid license or permit in the name of another
individual organization or entity.
D. License revocations or suspension.
(1) A license may be revoked upon conviction of any offense committed
by an individual operating as a mobile food vendor in the Borough
of Slippery Rock while engaged in the permitted business. A license
may be suspended in the event of pending charges of a crime, as
set forth above, upon a magistrate's determination of probable
cause in connection with such charges.
(2) A license may be suspended immediately, without notice, by the
Borough Police Department if the mobile food vending is causing,
contributing to, or part of a public safety concern or disturbance, or
for excessive trash.
(3) A license may be revoked for nonconformity to the application
location specifications or requirements, as well as to nonconformity
to an approved location plan or diagram.
(4) A license may be suspended or revoked for not complying with the
requirements of this section or any other ordinances or laws.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any individual directly or through an agent
or employee to sell goods after the expiration of the license issued
under this section.
(6) A license application may be denied by the Borough based upon an
applicant's prior violations of this section and the regulations
therein.
E. Location.
(1) A mobile food vendor shall not be located at a stationary location
for a duration exceeding eight consecutive hours and cannot
exceed more than eight hours during any twenty-four-hour period.
The mobile food vendor shall be open and operating during the
entire period that the mobile food vendor is located at a stationary
location within the Borough.
(2) A mobile food vendor shall not conduct sales in congested areas
where the operation impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(3) A mobile food vendor shall not cause any congestion of traffic flow,
and, if vehicular traffic or pedestrian flow becomes impeded, the
vendor shall immediately and without delay vacate the area so as to
allow for the free flow of traffic and relief of the congestion.
§ 375-86.1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-86.1
1:484
(4) No mobile food vendor shall locate on any private property without
written permission from the property owner to do so, and must
comply if asked to leave by the property owner.
(a) A copy of the written permission to operate in a specific
location signed by the private property owner, including a
contact phone number for verification, shall be included with
the license application.
(b) A copy of such written permission shall be kept in the mobile
vending unit and produced upon request.
(5) A five-foot clear space shall be maintained around the mobile food
vending unit at all times.
(6) No mobile food vendor shall be allowed to conduct food sales in the
public road right-of-way.
F. Time.
(1) A mobile food vendor shall be permitted to conduct sales only from
April 15 through November 1 of each year, and only on Thursdays,
Fridays and Saturdays.
(2) A mobile food vendor shall be permitted to conduct sales between
the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m. only.
G. Signs. A "no smoking" sign must be posted next to the order window
area.
H. Waste.
(1) Vendors must provide a portable trash receptacle for collection of
waste from their customers and waste must be removed from the
location of the mobile vending unit daily without using public waste
containers or receptacles.
(a) Each vendor shall be responsible for proper disposal of solid
waste and wastewater in a sanitation facility legally accessed
by the vendor.
(2) Vendors shall not dispose of grease or other liquid waste by
depositing or draining the same into the storm drains, sewer drain
outlets, tree pits or sidewalk areas, or any public space, including
the ground or public roadways.
(3) All areas must be cleaned following each sales period within a
minimum of 20 feet of the sales location.
I. Noise.
(1) Continuous loud music or repetitive sounds shall not project from
the mobile unit while parked or stopped, except those created by
§ 375-86.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-86.1
1:485
the normal operation of equipment typically associated with mobile
food vending during the hours of operation.
(2) The provisions of the Borough Noise Ordinance149 must be met
during all periods of operation.
J. Firesafety.
(1) A tagged fire extinguisher with a 10 BC rating and a Class K fire
extinguisher shall be located in the unit and kept accessible at all
times.
(2) All compressed gas fuel cylinders shall be shielded and secured as
required by the International Fire Code.
(3) Proper electrical power shall be maintained and installed as per the
International Electrical Code. Extension cords running from any
residential living space for power will not be allowed. Boroughowned
power sources may not be used without the express written
consent of the Borough.
K. Exemptions.
(1) Individuals selling primarily nonrefrigerated farm products in an
unrefined state (vendor at a farmer's market) shall be considered
as a mobile food vendor as defined by this section but shall be
exempt from the requirements of this section during participation
in the Slippery Rock Community Farmers and Makers Market,
operated by Slippery Rock Development.
(2) Mobile food vendors operating or participating in any Boroughsanctioned
event taking place on Borough property are exempt
from the requirements of this section, with the exception of those
requirements as may be imposed by Borough Council related to the
specific event. The mobile food vendor shall provide a certificate of
insurance with the Borough named as an additional insured for
participation in any such event.
(3) Private, not-for-profit mobile food vending is exempt from the
requirements of this section.
L. Enforcement. This section, § 375-86.1, shall be enforced by the Zoning
Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer or an officer of the Slippery Rock
Borough Police Department.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 193, Noise.
§ 375-86.1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-86.1
1:486
ARTICLE XVII
Conditional Uses; Special Exception Uses
§ 375-87. Uses not deemed nonconforming.
Any use which is permitted as a conditional use or a use by special exception
in a district under the terms of this chapter (other than a change through
Zoning Hearing Board action from a nonconforming use to another use not
generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming
use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a
conforming use.
§ 375-88. Granting of conditional uses.
Where the Borough Council, in this chapter, has stated conditional uses to
be granted or denied by the Borough Council pursuant to express standards
and criteria, and pursuant to recommendation by the Planning Commission,
the Borough Council shall hold hearings on and decide requests for such
conditional uses in accordance with such standards and criteria. In granting
a conditional use, the Borough Council may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as
it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
A. Submission of application. The granting of a conditional use by the
Borough Council shall be predicated upon the developer's submission
of a written application demonstrating that the development for which
the conditional use is sought:
(1) Will not endanger the public health and safety if located where
proposed, and that the use will not deteriorate the environment or
generate nuisance conditions such as traffic congestion, noise,
dust, smoke, glare or vibration;
(2) Meets all other requirements of this chapter in the zoning district
where the use is proposed;
(3) Is in general conformity with the Comprehensive Plan for the
Borough of Slippery Rock and in harmony with the area in which it
is proposed; and
(4) Is an appropriate use on the proposed site. The applicant/developer
shall submit single deed and drawings to scale. The drawings shall
indicate the boundaries of his property, location of adjacent streets,
the location and height of proposed buildings on the property,
proposed grading and storm drainage, and location and number of
proposed parking spaces and proposed curb cuts.
B. Action by the Planning Commission. Upon the filing of an application for
a conditional use, the Borough Council shall submit each such
conditional use application to the Planning Commission at least 30 days
prior to the hearing on such conditional use to provide the Planning
§ 375-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-88
1:487
§ 375-89. Accessory residential structure to house caretakers or
health care staff.151
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations. Such
recommendations shall be in writing, with copies transmitted to the
applicant and to the Borough Council.
C. Public hearing. The Borough Council shall call and hold a public
hearing with proper notice as described in § 375-145 of this chapter. An
applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100
days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board
or hearing officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven
hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing.
Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of
their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing
held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant
may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his casein-
chief, provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an
equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the
application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record by
the applicant and municipality, be granted additional hearings to
complete their opposition to the application, provided the applicant is
granted an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.150
D. Action by Borough Council. The Borough Council shall, upon review of
the Planning Commission's report, determine whether or not the
conditional use is to be granted. If Council grants the conditional use,
they shall instruct the Zoning Officer to issue a building permit for its
construction. If the Council denies the conditional use, the owner/
developer may reapply for the same use no sooner than one year after
the date of denial or denial of appeal to the Butler County Court of
Common Pleas if filed within 30 days after notice of the decision is
issued.
A. The occupant of the accessory residential structure shall be responsible
for the care of the occupant or occupants of the principal residential
use on the lot, or, where members of the immediate family are
concerned, the occupant or occupants of the principal residential use
may provide care to the occupant or occupants of the accessory
residential structure.
B. The accessory residential structure shall be a temporary use and
removed when care is no longer needed.
C. The accessory residential structure shall be located no closer than 50
feet to the principal structure.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-88 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-89
1:488
§ 375-90. Adult businesses.152
D. The accessory residential structure shall be served by public sanitary
and water/sewer service.
A. Adult businesses shall not be located within 1,000 linear feet of any
property which is zoned residential.
B. Adult businesses shall not be located within 500 feet of the property
boundary line of the following uses:
(1) Public or private school (existing).
(2) Day-care center.
(3) Hospital.
(4) Group care facility.
(5) Nursery school.
(6) Personal care home.
(7) Public park or playground.
(8) Church (place of worship).
(9) Establishment licensed to serve or sell alcoholic beverages.
C. No adult business shall be located within 1,000 linear feet of any other
existing or proposed adult business.
D. Any adult business which exhibits on the premises film, videocassette
or other method of image production which depicts nudity or sexual
conduct shall comply with the following:
(1) At least one employee shall be on duty at all times that any patron
is on the premises.
(2) Where viewing rooms are located on the premises, an unobstructed
view of access to all such rooms shall be available to the employee
on duty.
(3) No viewing room shall be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
(4) No connections or openings to adjoining viewing rooms shall be
permitted.
(5) A minimum of one footcandle of illumination, measured at floor
level, shall be provided in every area where patrons are permitted
access.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-90
1:489
§ 375-91. Cellular transmission towers.153
The following regulations shall apply to all transmission facilities proposed
for placement in the M-1 Light Manufacturing District:
(6) Where live performances are given, separate stage and viewing
areas shall be provided with separate access to each and no
connecting access between the areas.
E. Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold on the premises of an adult
business.
F. An annual occupancy permit issued by the Zoning Officer shall be
secured prior to the operation of any adult business.
A. Lot size. The lot size dimensions (depth and width) shall be dictated by
the fall radius of the tower. The minimum dimensions shall be the radius
of the height of the tower in each direction. (Example: A two-hundredfoot-
high tower would be required to have a four-hundred-foot-diameter
parcel.)
B. The communications company is required to demonstrate, using
technological evidence, that the antenna must go where it is proposed,
in order to satisfy its function in the company's grid system.
C. If the communications company proposes to build a tower (as opposed
to mounting the antenna on an existing structure), it is required to
demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures within a onequarter-
mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to install
the antenna on those structures, and was denied for reasons other than
economic ones. This would include smokestacks, water towers, tall
buildings, antenna support structures of other communications
companies, other communications towers (fire, police, etc.), and other
tall structures. Slippery Rock Borough may deny the application to
construct a new tower if the applicant has not made a good faith effort
to mount the antenna on an existing structure.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna is the minimum
height required to function satisfactorily. No antenna that is taller than
this minimum height shall be approved. In addition, no antenna shall
exceed 200 feet in height.
E. All communications towers must be stealth towers, where possible. A
"stealth tower" is a communications tower which is not recognizable as
a conventional communications tower (e.g., a metal lattice structure),
but instead is disguised or concealed in such a fashion as to conform to
its surroundings. Examples of such stealth towers include a tower
which looks like a tree or a clock tower, or one which is concealed in a
church steeple or concrete silo.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-90 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-91
1:490
F. The Borough Council may waive the stealth tower requirement where
the applicant can demonstrate that the requirement is not necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare, considering items such as impact
on surrounding and abutting property values; height; screening;
number of uses per tower, including public uses; location; and actual
setbacks.
G. Setbacks from base of antenna support structure. If a new antenna
support structure is constructed (as opposed to mounting the antenna
on an existing structure), the minimum distance between the base of
the support structure or any guy wire anchors and any property line
shall be the largest of the following:
(1) One hundred percent of antenna height.
(2) The minimum setback in the underlying zoning district.
(3) Fifty feet minimum.
H. Fencing. A fence shall be required around the antenna support
structure and other equipment, unless the antenna is mounted on an
existing structure. The fence shall be a minimum of eight feet in height.
I. Landscaping. The following landscaping shall be required to screen as
much of the support structure as possible, the fence surrounding the
support structure, and any other ground-level features (such as a
building), and in general soften the appearance of the cell site. The
Borough may permit any combination of existing vegetation,
topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of
landscaping, if they achieve the same degree of screening as the
required landscaping. If the antenna is mounted on an existing
structure, and other equipment is housed inside an existing structure,
landscaping shall not be required.
(1) An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The
screen can be either a hedge (planted three feet on center
maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted 10 feet on center
maximum). The evergreen screen shall be a minimum height of six
feet at planting and shall grow to a minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
(2) In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
J. In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in
the community in the future, the proposed support structure shall be
required to accommodate other users, including other communications
companies, and local police, fire, ambulance services and municipal
authority and road departments. In addition, a linear two-mile
separation shall be maintained between communications towers,
measured from the base of the support structure.
§ 375-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-91
1:491
§ 375-92. Two-family dwelling, duplex.154
§ 375-93. Mobile or manufactured home parks.155
See also Chapter 350, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of
the Borough of Slippery Rock.
K. The communications company must demonstrate that it is licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission.
L. Antenna support structures under 200 feet in height should be painted
silver or have a galvanized finish retained, in order to reduce the visual
impact. Support structures may be painted green up to the height of
nearby trees. Support structures near airports shall meet all
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation and
Federal Aviation Administration regulations. No antenna support
structure may be artificially lighted except as provided for and required
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation
and FAA.
M. A land development plan shall be required for all cell sites, showing the
antenna, antenna support structure, building, fencing, buffering, access
to public rights-of-way, and all other items required in Chapter 350,
Subdivision and Land Development. The site plan shall not be required
if the antenna is to be mounted on an existing structure.
N. In granting the use, the Council may attach reasonable conditions
warranted to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including,
but not limited to, location, fencing, screening, increased setbacks and
the right to use said facilities for public purposes.
O. All approvals will be only for specific facilities set forth in the
application. No additions or alterations thereto will be permitted
without a new application.
A. Minimum lot size shall be 10,800 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width shall be 75 feet.
C. Each dwelling unit shall contain private bathrooms, cooking and food
storage areas.
D. Each dwelling unit shall have at least two off-street parking spaces.
E. Each dwelling unit shall have at least two means of egress, with at least
one of them being directly outside, at grade or via an exterior stairway
to grade.
A. The site of a mobile or manufactured home park shall be serviced by a
public water supply.
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-91 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-93
1:492
§ 375-94. Rooming houses, boardinghouses and lodging houses.156
§ 375-95. Motels and hotels.157
§ 375-96. Private dormitories (college or university).158
B. The minimum site required shall be 10 acres.
C. The portion of the site to receive the mobile, manufactured homes shall
be outside the one-hundred-year floodplain, shall be free of perpetually
wet areas, and shall not be sloped greater than 10% at any point.
D. Design and construction standards and review and approval procedures
for mobile or manufactured home parks shall conform to the provisions
of Chapter 350, Subdivision and Land Development.
A. Off-street parking shall be provided for each room available for
boarders or lodgers in accordance with Article XIX.
B. Parking spaces shall not be located in the required front yard and shall
be located a minimum of five feet from a side or rear property line.
C. Parking spaces shall be screened by a six-foot compact hedge or opaque
fence along any property line which adjoins an existing single-family
use or residential zoning boundary line.
A. Motels shall utilize public sanitary sewers.
B. Front, side and rear yards of the motel shall be permanently landscaped
and maintained in good condition.
C. Cabins or parts thereof shall not be permitted.
D. At least one parking space shall be provided on the premises for each
accommodation. Off-street parking and loading spaces for other
facilities developed on the motel premises shall be provided as required
by Article XIX.
E. Every unit shall be provided with running hot and cold water and
separate toilet facilities.
A. Such use shall be permitted only where evidence is shown that said use
is sanctioned by a college or university to supplement the institution's
dormitories or living accommodations.
B. Such use shall not be situated on a lot of less than 15,000 square feet.
C. The minimum width of the lot shall be 100 feet.
D. The maximum building height shall be four stories, or 50 feet.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-96
1:493
§ 375-97. Drive-through eating and drinking establishments.159
§ 375-98. Automotive service and repair stations. [Amended
4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 664]
E. All buildings shall be a minimum of 20 feet from any property line,
except where greater distances are otherwise required herein.
F. Wherever possible, parking facilities shall be situated to the rear of the
lot.
G. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with § 375-85.
A. Access lanes on the property shall allow not less than eight cars to stack
approaching the takeout window.
B. The Borough may limit hours of operation and restrict turning
movements at one or more entrances.
C. Adequate waste containers shall be provided and screened on the
premises, and the operator shall be responsible for timely removal of
paper and other debris on the grounds.
A. All minor repair work, vehicle washing, waxing, detailing, lubrication
and installation of parts and accessories shall be performed within an
enclosed building.
B. All car washing areas shall discharge into public storm sewers in
compliance with state and federal laws.
C. All vehicle parts, dismantled vehicles and similar materials shall be
stored within an enclosed building or totally screened from view by a
solid or privacy fence.
D. All vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored on the lot in an approved
storage area, and in no case shall said vehicles be stored on or obstruct
access to a public right-of-way.
E. All fuel, oil and similar substances shall be stored at least 15 feet from
any property line, whether above ground or below ground, except as
may be mandated by any applicable state or federal law or regulation.
F. The handling and disposal of motor oil, battery acid and any other
substance regulated by federal statute and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PaDEP) shall be in
accordance with all permits and requirements of that agency or its
successor agency. Any suspension, revocation or violation of the PaDEP
permits shall be a violation of this section and shall be subject to the
enforcement provisions of this chapter.
G. The perimeter of the property shall be screened, as per § 375-85.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-96 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-98
1:494
§ 375-99. Automotive fueling stations. [Added 4-3-2012 by Ord. No.
664]
H. The lot shall have frontage on and direct access to a collector or arterial
street.
I. A master signage plan shall be submitted with any application for land
development approval which identifies the size, type and location of all
proposed permanent signage.
J. All exterior lighting shall be sharp cutoff fixtures and shielded or
directed away from abutting rights-of-way and occupied structures on
adjoining properties.
A. Loading and delivery areas of the building shall be placed to the side or
rear of a building, and delivery vehicle circulation routes shall be
provided so as to minimize conflicts with other vehicles and
pedestrians.
B. Outdoor dumpsters shall be enclosed on four sides, with three sides
constructed of architectural materials similar to the adjacent building,
shall be located to the side or rear of a building, and shall be oriented
such that visibility of the open side of the dumpster area shall be
minimized.
C. Outdoor seating areas are encouraged. The areas shall not conflict with
pedestrian or vehicular movement throughout the development.
D. Building canopies, overhangs, and similar structures shall not be
internally or externally illuminated.
E. Where lighting is provided in a manner such that lighting fixtures are
mounted on the underside of a canopy or like architectural structure,
the entirety of the light fixture, including the light bulb, shall be
completely recessed into the canopy and shall not extend past the
bottom surface of the canopy.
F. All exterior lighting shall be provided using sharp cutoff fixtures such
that there is minimal overflow lighting to adjacent properties and the
fixtures direct the light to the development site. Lighting shall not
exceed one footcandle at the site boundaries. A photometric plan
submission is required to verify compliance with this section.
G. All vehicle access points from adjacent public or private roads to the
development site shall be clearly defined and controlled, with the
provision of pedestrian crosswalks where pedestrian circulation is
possible or present, and the appropriate traffic control signage as may
be required by the Borough or PennDOT.
H. Separate pedestrian circulation to and within the site shall be provided
such that there are no unsafe and/or uncontrolled points of conflict with
vehicular movements.
§ 375-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-99
1:495
§ 375-100. Combination commercial/residential uses.162
I. Parking for any ancillary retail sales area shall be calculated separately,
but shared parking calculations may be allowed, based upon recognized
national standards or current parking studies of sites of similar
location, size and design.
J. Drive-through windows shall be located on the side or rear of a
building. Adequate vehicle stacking shall be provided for the proposed
drive-through use, and the vehicle stacking area shall be screened from
view using architectural or landscape features consistent with the
architectural and site design for the overall development. There shall
be no pedestrian or vehicular conflicts with the vehicle stacking area. A
separate circulation drive shall be provided for passage around and
escape from the outermost drive-through service lane. No more than
two drive-through lanes shall be permitted. A circulation plan shall be
provided to illustrate compliance with these requirements. Drivethrough
windows shall not be permitted within the Main Street
Corridor Overlay District.160
K. A general circulation plan shall be provided to ensure safe and efficient
vehicular and pedestrian flow.
L. Exterior vending machines shall not be permitted within the Main
Street Corridor Overlay District.161
M. All fuel, oil and similar substances shall be stored at least 15 feet from
any property line, whether above ground or below ground, except as
may be mandated by any applicable state or federal law or regulation.
A. Residential apartments may be located above any permitted conditional
use.
B. Minimum floor space per dwelling unit shall be 600 square feet.
C. Parking spaces shall be separated for the residential and nonresidential
uses.
D. The residential use shall not exceed 50% of the total floor area for the
entire structure.
E. Each dwelling unit shall have at least two means of egress, with at least
one of them being directly outside, at grade or via an exterior stairway
to grade.
F. There shall be two means of egress directly to the outside from the hall
common to the residential units.
G. There shall be a minimum of two parking spaces per each dwelling unit.
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-99 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-101
1:496
§ 375-101. Boarding and breeding of domestic animals.163
§ 375-102. Public, private and parochial schools.164
§ 375-103. Group residence facilities.165
A. Not more than six animals over the age of eight weeks, including
personal house pets, shall be boarded at any given time.
B. Where the breeding of said animals is involved, a maximum of six
newborn animals may be boarded in addition to those over the age of
eight weeks.
C. All exterior exercise areas shall be fenced, and animal enclosures shall
be constructed with the addition of soundproofing materials.
A. Access to this category of use shall be from an arterial or collector
roadway or street.
B. Exterior recreation areas shall be screened from abutting developed
properties along the perimeter with Buffer Yard B, as per the provisions
of § 375-85.
C. High schools and university classroom facilities shall provide on-site
parking at a ratio of two spaces for each classroom in addition to the
required number of spaces in § 375-125E, Table I, Minimum Off-Street
Parking Standards.
A. The minimum area and bulk regulations for a group residence facility
shall be the same as those required for a principal use in the district in
which the facility is located.
B. No group residence facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of another
existing or proposed group residence facility.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made for access for emergency medical
and firefighting vehicles.
D. A maximum of six clients shall be accommodated, and twenty-four-hour
supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by the sponsoring
agency.
E. Adequate open space opportunities for recreation shall be provided on
the lot for the residents consistent with their needs, and the area shall
be secured by a fence with self-latching gate.
F. Where applicable, licensing or certification by the sponsoring agency
shall be prerequisite to obtaining a certificate of occupancy, and a copy
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-103
1:497
§ 375-104. Bed-and-breakfasts.166
§ 375-105. Personal care homes.167
of the annual report with evidence of continuing certification shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer in January of each year.
A. The minimum lot area required shall be 6,000 square feet.
B. The maximum number of sleeping rooms offered shall be four.
C. The owner/operator shall be a full-time resident of the dwelling.
D. No meals other than breakfast shall be served on the premises. Meals
shall not be served to customers who are not overnight guests.
E. The maximum length of stay for any guest shall be seven consecutive
overnight stays in any thirty-day period.
F. No sign shall be permitted, other than a placard mounted on the wall of
the dwelling, which shall not exceed six square feet in area and which
shall contain only the name and address of the bed-and-breakfast and
the name of the proprietor.
G. One off-street parking space shall be provided on the lot for each
sleeping room. Off-street parking shall be screened from adjoining
residential properties by a six-foot hedge or opaque fence.
A. The minimum lot area required shall be 20,000 square feet.
B. The site shall have direct access to a street classified as an arterial or
collector.
C. The maximum number of occupants, excluding supervisory staff, in a
personal care home shall be as follows:
(1) R-2 District: eight persons.
(2) R-3 District: 10 persons.
D. The facility shall be licensed by the commonwealth, and twenty-fourhour
supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by the sponsoring
agency.
E. Adequate provisions shall be made for access by emergency medical
and fire vehicles.
F. Adequate open space opportunities shall be provided for recreation
consistent with the needs of the residents, and the area shall be secured
by a fence with a self-latching gate.
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-103 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-105
1:498
§ 375-106. Granting of uses by special exception.
Where the Borough Council, in this chapter, has stated special exceptions
to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to express
standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and decide requests for such
special exceptions in accordance with such standards and criteria. In
granting a special exception, the Board may attached such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter
and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S., § 10101 et seq.
A special exception shall not be granted by the Board unless and until:
G. Residents of the Borough and contiguous communities shall be
assigned the highest priority in selecting residents for a personal care
boarding home located in the Borough.
H. Where applicable, licensing or certification by the sponsoring agency
shall be prerequisite to obtaining a certificate of occupancy, and a copy
of the annual report with evidence of continuing certification shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer in January of each year.
I. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
Article XIX of this chapter.
A. A written application for a special exception is submitted
demonstrating that the development:
(1) Will not endanger the public health or safety if located where
proposed and that the use will not generate nuisance conditions
such as traffic congestion, noise, dust, glare or vibration;
(2) Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in
the neighborhood where it is to be located;
(3) Meets all requirements of this chapter in the zoning district where
the use is proposed;
(4) Is in general conformity with the Comprehensive Plan for the
Borough of Slippery Rock and in harmony with the area in which it
is proposed.
B. The developer shall submit drawings to the Board indicating the
boundaries of the property, location of adjacent streets, the location and
height of proposed buildings on the property with dimensions from
property lines, access to the property and the location and number of
proposed parking spaces.
C. The public hearing shall be held in accordance with § 375-145.
D. The Board, before it grants a special exception, shall make findings of
fact and state its reasons for granting the special exception. The Board
shall have the authority to require and approve specific plans, to
increase the requirements set forth in this chapter, but in no case shall
the Board have the authority to decrease the requirements of this
§ 375-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-106
1:499
§ 375-107. Nursing, retirement and convalescent homes.168
chapter for any use in the district it proposes to locate. Any such
decrease in the requirements of this chapter shall only be granted upon
the issuance of a variance.
E. All conditions required by the Board shall be entered in the minutes of
the meeting at which the permit is granted and also on the certificate of
special exception.
A. A nursing home shall be considered a building for the long-term care of
elderly, disabled, or terminally ill persons requiring constant attention
by skilled staff. A convalescent home shall be considered a building
housing persons recovering from serious illness or injury requiring
temporary care.
B. Such homes may be converted existing dwellings or new buildings with
a maximum of six beds in the converted dwelling.
C. The total number of individuals that may be cared for or housed in a
new home shall not exceed the total acreage of the site multiplied by
11.
D. Nursing and convalescent homes shall have a bed capacity of at least 11
beds, except as provided herein, but no more than 200 beds. The
operator of a nursing or convalescent home shall be licensed or
certified by the appropriate state agency or agencies. The license or
certification shall be obtained prior to issuance of an occupancy permit
by the Borough. A copy of an annual report with evidence of continuing
certification shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer in January of each
year.
E. Additions to any existing dwelling shall be compatible with the original
building's appearance and scale, and new development should be
consistent with the district in which it is to be located and with
applicable residential lot and block standards.
F. Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be provided at a nursing or
convalescent home by staff qualified by the licensing or certification
agency.
G. Adequate provisions shall be made for access by emergency medical
and fire vehicles.
H. The minimum area of the property shall be two acres.
I. Outdoor lighting shall be of the cutoff luminaire type, permitting no
light escape upwards, no view of the light source from off the property,
and no light trespass on adjacent properties.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-106 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-108
1:500
§ 375-108. Nursery schools and day-care centers.169
§ 375-109. Hospitals, clinics and philanthropic institutions.170
§ 375-110. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.171
A. The facility shall be registered with or licensed by the commonwealth, if
applicable.
B. Outdoor play areas shall be provided which shall have a minimum area
of 65 square feet per child and which shall be secured by a fence with
self-latching gate.
C. Outdoor play areas which adjoin residential lots shall be screened.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX of this chapter.
A. The minimum site size for a hospital shall be five acres.
B. The site shall be served by public water and sewer services.
C. All hospitals shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection as
determined by the Slippery Rock Municipal Authority.
E. A traffic study, including a parking and circulation study, shall be
submitted with this application.
F. Ingress, egress, and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure access by emergency vehicles.
G. All property lines adjoining a residential use shall be screened by Buffer
Yard B, as defined in § 375-85 of this chapter.
H. Helipads shall be for hospital use only.
A. The development shall include the least possible removal of trees and
earthmoving to accommodate the proposed use.
B. Access to the property shall be controlled through one or, at most, two
locations.
C. The residence of a custodian or manager shall be the only housing on
the property.
D. Development may include a clubhouse, outdoor recreational facilities
and maintenance buildings, intended for the use of bona fide members
and their guests only.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-110
1:501
§ 375-111. Professional offices.172
§ 375-112. Bus and motor freight terminals.173
Bus and motor freight terminals, for freight trucking companies and
operators, including interchange and storage facilities, provided:
§ 375-113. Contractor's equipment storage.174
§ 375-114. Research laboratories.175
E. The organization shall be a registered nonprofit or corporate entity with
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. If more than one structure, the minimum distance between structures
shall be 50 feet.
B. All parking, loading and access areas shall be screened as per the
provisions of § 375-85.
C. All required parking shall be in the rear of the structures, where
feasible, as per Article XIX.
D. All property not covered by structures or paving shall be landscaped
and maintained.
A. Every portion of the property used for terminal purposes shall be
located not closer than 100 feet to any property in an R or I District.
B. The site shall be fully surrounded with a barrier adequate to insure that
no portion of a vehicle shall extend beyond the lot line.
C. In addition to adequate area within the site for docking, manipulation,
and maneuver of motor freight vehicles, a reservoir of parking area for
motor freight vehicles waiting to be loaded or unloaded shall be
provided at the rate of one parking space sufficient to park a motor
freight vehicle for every four loading or unloading docks.
D. The site shall be designed in such a manner as to permit forward
movement of all vehicles both upon entering and upon leaving the site.
E. The number, location, and width of entrances to and exits from the site
shall be determined by Council.
A. All materials stored on the exterior of the site shall be arranged in openfaced
bins.
B. Screening, as required by § 375-85, shall be provided along
residentially zoned property boundary lines.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-110 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-114
1:502
§ 375-115. Supply yards.176
§ 375-116. Wholesale businesses.177
A. The applicant shall provide a written report prepared by a registered
professional engineer certifying compliance with the performance
standards specified in Article XXI of this chapter.
B. Research and development activities shall not involve the full-scale
manufacturing of any product being tested or engineered.
C. All research and development activities shall be conducted entirely
within a completely enclosed building.
D. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building.
E. The storage or use of any hazardous or potentially hazardous materials
shall be limited to those materials required to be used by or produced in
connection with the research and development activity. The
transportation, handling, use and disposal of such materials shall
conform to all applicable Federal Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PaDEP) regulations and permit requirements and the edition of the
BOCA Fire and Building Codes currently in effect in the Borough.
A. All storage of materials shall be within a structure.
B. All storage yards shall be screened from adjacent properties, as per
§ 375-85.
C. All off-street parking shall be separate from loading areas.
D. All property not occupied by structures or parking/loading areas shall
be landscaped and maintained.
A. Any site which involves wholesale distribution shall have direct access
to an arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
B. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed structure or shall be limited to storage in the rear or side yard
if screened from view from the street or adjacent residential properties
by a six-foot hedge or opaque fence.
C. No shipping or receiving shall be permitted within 300 feet of property
in a residential zoning district between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-116
1:503
§ 375-117. Retail and light manufacturing uses.178
§ 375-118. Industrial services.179
D. All shipping and receiving facilities adjoining residential use or zoning
classification shall be screened by Buffer Yard B, as defined by § 375-85
of this chapter.
E. Wholesale sales shall not exceed 25% of the gross sales of the retail
business.
F. The gross floor area devoted to wholesale warehousing shall not exceed
the gross floor area devoted to the retail business.
A. Retail uses in Manufacturing District. Such uses shall be permitted only
where the applicant proves that such use is or will be directly
associated with the manufacturing uses and will not adversely affect
the industrial development of adjoining land. Where such uses are
permitted, the minimum lot size requirement shall be 10,000 square
feet.
B. Light manufacturing uses. Light manufacturing uses in any M District
shall, when abutting a residential use in an R District, be screened from
such use in accordance with the provisions of § 375-85.
A. All repair activities shall be conducted in a completely enclosed
building.
B. Adequate parking for delivery and service vehicles shall be provided.
C. No use or operation shall exceed the performance standards outlined in
Article XXI.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-116 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-118
1:504
ARTICLE XVIII
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 375-119. General provisions.
§ 375-120. Continuation of use.
A use, building or structure, lawfully in existence at the effective date of
this chapter, which shall be made nonconforming at the passage of this
chapter, or any applicable amendment thereto, may be continued except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 375-121. Nonconforming uses of land.
Where at the time of passage of this chapter lawful use of land exists which
would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and
where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost
exceeding the current assessed valuation, the use may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
A. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that
may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and
structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful at the time this
chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited,
regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future
amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to
encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that
nonconformities shall only be enlarged upon, expanded or extended to a
certain degree, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
B. Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a
structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of
structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged
after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises or
by the addition of other, in excess of 50% of the gross floor area,
existing structure or structure and premises in combination.
C. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any
building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which
actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual
construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction
materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner.
Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has
been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction,
provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
§ 375-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-121
1:505
§ 375-122. Nonconforming structures.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its
location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject
to the following provisions:
§ 375-123. Additional restrictions.
If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost not
exceeding the current assessed valuation or more, or of structure and
premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that would not be allowed in the district under
the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land in excess of 50% of the gross
floor area occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter;
B. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
C. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than one year, and there has been a clear intention to
abandon such use, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
is located; and
D. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of
land.
A. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof
may be altered to decrease its nonconformity;
B. Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of up to 100% of its
replacement cost at time of destruction, it may be reconstructed in its
original location and within the original footprint; and
C. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district
in which it is located after it is moved.
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in
the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
§ 375-121 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-123
1:506
§ 375-124. Repairs and maintenance.
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except as
specified herein and except in changing the use of the structure to a
use permitted in the district in which it is located;
B. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the
time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building in excess of 50% of
the gross floor area of the existing nonconforming building unless the
Borough Zoning Hearing Board approves such extension of lot coverage
as a special exception in compliance with the provisions of § 375-106;
C. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be
changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the Zoning
Hearing Board, either by general rule or by making findings in the
specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or
more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In
permitting such change, the Zoning Hearing Board may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
D. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use
may not thereafter be resumed;
E. When a nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued or abandoned
for a period of one year and there has been a clear intent to abandon
such use, the structure shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; and
F. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
A. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair
or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing,
provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming
shall not be increased except by decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
and following the issuance of all required permits.
B. If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack
of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized
official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall
not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
§ 375-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-124
1:507

ARTICLE XIX
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
§ 375-125. Off-street parking.
Required in all districts (except C-1 Districts). In all districts, in connection
with every industry, business, institutional, recreational, residential or any
other use, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure
is erected or is enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking space
open to the public at no charge for automobiles in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein.
A. Size and access. Each off-street parking space shall have minimum
dimensions of nine feet by 18 feet and an area of not less than 162
square feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be of usable
shape and condition. Except in the case of dwellings, no parking area
provided hereunder shall be established for less than three spaces.
There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and egress to all parking
spaces. Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to at least one
well-defined location, and in no case shall there be permitted
unrestricted access along the length of the street or alley upon which
the parking area abuts. The temporary parking of vehicles in required
yards, except on driveways or specifically designated parking areas, is
strictly prohibited and constitutes a public health and safety hazard
requiring immediate abatement upon verbal or written notice from the
Zoning Officer or designated Borough personnel.
B. Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be as set forth in Table I, following, in accordance
with the definition of "floor area" as set forth in Article II herein,
provided further that in any R District, on any lot having an area of one
acre or less, private garage space may be provided for not more than
four motor vehicles. Space for one additional motor vehicle may be
provided for each 1/5 acre by which the area of the lot exceeds one
acre, and in any R District, not more than one of the garage spaces
provided on any lot may be used for the housing of a commercial vehicle
used in conjunction with the occupation of the property owner. Such
commercial vehicle shall not exceed one ton capacity.
C. In any case of a building, structure or premises, the use of which is not
specifically provided for herein, the provisions for a use which is so
mentioned and to which said use is similar, in the opinion of the Zoning
Hearing Board, shall apply.
D. Off-site facilities. All permitted and required accessory off-street
parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be located on the same lot as
the use to which such spaces are accessory, except that such space may
be provided elsewhere but shall be provided within a radius of no
greater distance than 250 feet from that lot, and provided further that
required spaces are provided off the site in accordance with the
provisions set forth herein, and that such space shall be in the same
§ 375-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-125
1:509
ownership as the use to which they are accessory and shall be subject
to deed restrictions filed in an office of record, binding the owner and
his heirs and/or assigns to maintain the required number of spaces
available throughout the life of such use, and such spaces shall conform
to all regulations of the district in which they are located.
E. Minimum off-street parking standards. [Amended 11-7-2006 by Ord.
No. 632; 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 664180]
Table I
Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards
Excepting the C-1 Central Business District
Use Spaces Required
Residential
Residential District A (R-A):
Single-family dwelling unit 2 per dwelling unit
Residential District 1 (R-1):
Single-family dwelling unit 2 per dwelling unit
Residential District 2 (R-2):
Single-family dwelling unit 3 per dwelling unit
Duplex or double house 3 per dwelling unit
Residential District 3 (R-3):
Single-family dwelling unit 4 per dwelling unit
Duplex or double house 4 per dwelling unit
Townhouse 4 per dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwelling 4 per dwelling unit
Public and Semipublic
Hospitals and similar institutions 1 per 3 beds, plus 1 for each 2
staff on duty on largest shift
Theaters 1 per 3 seats
Churches, auditoriums and similar
places of enclosed public
assembly, such as dance halls
1 per 3 persons who can be seated
simultaneously or 1 per 40 square
feet of floor area used for
assembly purposes
Places of open assembly 1 per 4 persons who can be seated
simultaneously and/or 1 per 100
square feet of assembly space
without fixed seats
Bowling alleys 6 per bowling lane, plus 1 per
each employee
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-125 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-125
1:510
Table I
Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards
Excepting the C-1 Central Business District
Use Spaces Required
Medical and dental clinics 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor
area
Schools, public, private and
parochial
1 per classroom, plus 1 per faculty
member
Libraries and museums 1 per 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Funeral homes 15 per viewing area or parlor
Commercial
Motels, motor courts and hotels 1 per sleeping room, plus 1 per
each employee
Retail commercial and personal
service stores without drivethrough
services
1 per 200 square feet of gross
floor area open to the public, plus
1 per each employee on the
largest shift
Retail commercial and personal
service stores with drive-through
services
1 per 100 square feet of enclosed
floor area open to the public, plus
1 per each employee on the
largest shift
Restaurants 1 per every 2 persons that can be
seated in facilities simultaneously,
plus 1 per each employee
Offices with customer service 1 per 300 square feet of total floor
area
Offices not providing customer
service
1 per 600 square feet of total floor
area
Automotive fueling and
automotive service and repair
stations
3 waiting spaces at each side of
each pump island; parking spaces
for retail must be calculated
separately; shared parking may
apply
Clubs, taverns, etc. 1 per each 100 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per each employee
Industrial
Warehouse, storage, wholesale
business and freight terminals
2 per each 3 employees, plus 1
per each company vehicle
ordinarily parked on the site
§ 375-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-125
1:511
§ 375-126. Off-street loading.
Table I
Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards
Excepting the C-1 Central Business District
Use Spaces Required
Manufacturing 1 per each employee on the
largest shift, plus 2 per each
employees for visitor parking, plus
1 per each company vehicle
ordinarily parked on the site
A. In any district in connection with every building or building group or
part thereof hereafter erected and having a gross floor area of 5,000
square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing or
commercial uses, or distribution of material or merchandise by
vehicles, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with
such building, off-street loading berths in accordance with the
requirements of Table II, following.
B. Size and location. Each loading space shall be not less than 12 feet in
width, 35 feet in length, and 14 feet six inches in height, and may
occupy all or any part of any required yard except where located
adjacent to any R District, where they shall be set back a minimum of
six feet from any such property line.
C. Minimum off-street loading standards.
Table II
Minimum Off-Street Loading Standards
Uses Square Feet of Floor
Area
Required Berths
Schools 15,000 square feet or
more
1
Hospitals (in addition
to space for
ambulance)
From 10,000 to 30,000
square feet
1
For each additional
30,000 or major fraction
thereof
1 additional
Undertakers and
funeral homes
5,000 square feet 1
For each additional 5,000
square feet or major
fraction thereof
1 additional
§ 375-125 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-126
1:512
§ 375-127. Joint facilities for parking or loading.
Off-street parking and loading facilities for separate uses may be provided
jointly if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of
the separate requirements for each use, and provided that all regulations
governing the location of accessory spaces in relation to the use served are
adhered to. Further, no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve as
a required space for more than one use unless otherwise approved by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the purpose and procedures set
forth herein.
§ 375-128. Development and maintenance of parking and loading
area.
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area or
loading area, including a commercial parking lot, shall be developed and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
Table II
Minimum Off-Street Loading Standards
Uses Square Feet of Floor
Area
Required Berths
Hotels and offices 10,000 square feet or
more
1
Retail, commercial,
wholesale,
manufacturing,
storage and
miscellaneous
From 10,000 to 25,000
square feet
1
From 25,000 to 40,000
square feet
2
From 40,000 to 60,000
square feet
3
From 60,000 to 100,000
square feet
4
For each additional
50,000 square feet or
major fraction thereof
1 additional
A. Minimum distances and setbacks. No off-street parking or loading area
or part thereof for more than five vehicles shall be closer than 10 feet to
any dwelling, school, hospital or other institution for human care
located on an adjoining lot. If the off-street parking and loading area is
not located in an R District but adjoining such district, the parking area
shall be located a minimum of five feet from any established street
right-of-way line or R District zoning boundary line.
§ 375-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-128
1:513
B. Surfacing. Any off-street parking or loading area, except in connection
with a single-family dwelling, shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or
cement binder pavement or similar durable and dustless surface within
one year of completion of the project for which the building permit was
issued, and said area shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all
surface water accumulated within the area and shall be so arranged
and marked as to provide for the orderly and safe loading, parking and
storage of vehicles.
C. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or
loading areas shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the
adjoining premises in any district and to comply with related standards
enumerated herein.
D. Aisle widths. The minimum aisle widths for access to parking spaces
shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum width of aisles providing two-way travel shall be 24 feet.
(2) Minimum width of aisles providing one-way travel shall vary with
the angle of parking, as follows:
Parallel 12 feet
30° 14 feet
45° 16 feet
60° 20 feet
90° 24 feet
(3) The minimum width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(a) Twelve feet for one-way travel.
(b) Twenty-four feet for two-way travel.
(c) A maximum of 35 feet at the street right-of-way line and 54 feet
at the cartway.
(d) Adequate sight distance shall be provided, subject to review
and approval by the Borough Engineer. Driveways shall not
exceed a slope of 10% within 12 feet of the street right-of-way.
E. Handicapped spaces. Commercial and public access land uses shall
provide for handicapped parking on site, designed and located as
required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).181
181. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 375-128 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-128
1:514
ARTICLE XX
Signs
[Amended 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 613; 12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 282-A;
10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 649; 6-2-2015 by Ord. No. 685]
§ 375-129. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit such signs that will not, by their size,
location, construction or manner of display, obstruct the vision necessary
for traffic safety or otherwise endanger public health, safety and morals
and to permit and regulate signs in such a way to support and complement
Slippery Rock Borough's community character and advance the community
objectives set forth in the Borough Comprehensive Plan. Additionally, the
purposes of the Borough's sign regulations are to:
A. Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of identification and
communication.
B. Maintain and enhance the Borough's unique community aesthetic and
character.
C. Promote pedestrian and vehicular safety and prohibit the erection of
signs in such numbers, sizes and designs and locations that may create
a hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Minimize adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property.
E. Promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the Borough.
F. Promote the installation of signs that are complementary to the
buildings they serve and consistent with the general character of the
surrounding development.
G. Provide adequate identification for locations within the Borough while
minimizing sign clutter and confusion.
H. Avoid the uncontrolled proliferation of signs.
I. Promote legibility, reduce the time needed to read signs, and reduce
vehicular driver distraction.
J. Restrict signs that overload the public's capacity to receive information
or that increase the probability of traffic congestion and accidents by
distracting attention or obstructing vision.
K. Avoid potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians using the public
streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way.
L. Control public nuisances created by signs.
§ 375-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-130
1:515
§ 375-130. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be used for the purpose of this article and for
all articles of this chapter:
ADDRESS MARKER — A marker, not more than two square feet in size,
indicating the address and/or name of a residential property or indicating
the address of a commercial property.
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted or incorporated into a roof-like cover, often
made of fabric, metal or glass, designed and intended for protection from
the weather or as a decorative embellishment, which projects from a wall or
roof over a window, walk or door.
BILLBOARD — An off-premises sign that conveys information regarding an
establishment, an activity, a person, a product, or a service that is unrelated
to or unavailable on the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN — A sign is a name, identification, description, display (including
electronic) or illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or represented
directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which
directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, persons, institution,
organization, or business. The definition of "sign" does not include the
display of any official court or public office notices, nor any official or
municipal traffic control or parking sign or device, nor shall it include the
flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school, or a
religious group. A sign shall not include a name, identification, description,
display or illustration that is located completely within an enclosed building.
SIGN, ANIMATED — Any sign or part of a sign or sign face that changes
physical position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives
the visual impression of such movement or rotation of the sign or sign face.
SIGN AREA — The entire sign face (one side only), or, where the sign
consists of raised letters or symbols, or a sign face of irregular shape, the
sign area shall include the area of the smallest rectangle, circle or oval that
can encompass the letters, symbols, or irregularly shaped sign face.
SIGN, BANNER — Any sign intended to be hung, either with or without
frames, of lightweight material such as paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind.
National flags, state or municipal flags or the official flag of any institution
or business shall not be considered banners.
SIGN, BUILDING — A sign attached to any part of a building, including a
sign projecting from a part of a building.
SIGN, CANOPY — A sign attached to a roof extension of a building, with or
without support, but not walls.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY OR LETTERING — A sign or portion thereof
with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged,
mechanically or electronically, without altering the face or the surface of
the sign.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign, no greater than five square feet in size,
that provides on-site directional assistance or instruction to vehicular or
§ 375-130 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-130
1:516
pedestrian traffic relative to parking area, entrances and exits. Such sign
shall contain no advertising other than the business name or logo and
shall provide directional information, such as "No Parking," "Entrance,"
"Exit," "One Way," "Loading Only," "Telephone," and other similar directives.
Directional incidental signs shall be located only in conjunction with site
drive entrances and/or internal traffic drive aisles.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign that is supported from the ground and not
attached to a building. The sign may be attached to a pole, mast, frame
or other structure that is not itself an integral part of, or attached to, a
building.
SIGN, LED — Any sign or portion thereof that displays electronic images,
graphics, or pictures, with or without textual information, using LEDs (lightemitting
diodes), fiber optics, light bulbs, or other illumination devices or
combination thereof within the display area and where a static message
change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade,
repixilation, dissolve or other such modes, devices, processes, products,
applications or technologies from a proximate or remote location. Such
signs include computer-programmable and microprocessor-controlled
electronic displays.
SIGN, MARQUEE — A sign attached to a permanent structure, other than
a roof, attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building, and
providing protection from natural elements.
SIGN, MONUMENT — A freestanding sign in which a solid structure, the
width of which is equal to or greater than the width of the sign face, is used
to mount the sign area on, in or as an integral part of such structure.
SIGN, PENNANT — A sign mounted to Borough-owned streetlights.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign directly associated with any national,
state, or local government election.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure or designed to be transported.
SIGN, WALL — Any sign painted on or adhered directly to a wall of a
building.
§ 375-131. Permits; inspections; removal.
A. No sign or sign structure shall be erected, displayed, altered, or
relocated, except as provided for herein, until a sign permit has been
issued by the Zoning Officer. A separate permit shall be required for
each sign requiring a permit.
(1) Regular, routine, and customary maintenance, including the
repainting of an existing sign, where no change in lettering size, no
new graphic elements or new content of any kind is contemplated,
shall not require a sign permit.
(2) Repairs to damaged sign faces or sign structures shall not require a
sign permit.
§ 375-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-131
1:517
§ 375-132. Exempt signs.
The following types of signs shall not require the issuance of a sign permit:
§ 375-133. Temporary signs.
(3) Replacement of a sign face with an identical sign face utilizing
identical materials shall not require a sign permit.
B. Applications for a permit shall be submitted on a form provided by the
Borough and a fee paid as set forth by the Borough fee schedule, as
amended from time to time.
C. Provided the application is in order, applicable fees are paid, and the
requirements of this article are met, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
building permit for the erection of the sign. Such permit shall expire 12
months from the date of issuance. If construction or erection of the sign
is not completed within this time frame, the permit shall be deemed null
and void.
D. Inspections by the Zoning Officer shall be made to determine
compliance with these regulations and specifications. Any
discrepancies shall be identified, in writing, citing the irregularities and
the action(s) required to address the requirements. If no action has
been taken by the sign owner within 30 days, the sign shall be deemed
in violation, and the permit shall be revoked, the sign may be requested
to be removed, and legal actions may be undertaken.
E. The Zoning Officer may remove, or order the removal of, any sign
erected or placed in violation of this article, at the expense of the sign
owner.
F. Signs that are found to present an immediate hazard to the public may
be ordered removed immediately by the Zoning Officer, without notice,
and the cost assessed to the sign owner.
A. Address markers.
B. Signs erected by a public agency or utility providing warning or
information to the public, and any signs erected by the Borough or
under direction of the Borough.
C. Signs denoting the availability of property for lease or sale, a maximum
of 12 square feet in area and a maximum of one sign per property. Such
signs shall be permitted only if the property on which the sign is
located, or a building thereon, is for lease or sale. No such sign shall be
located within the public right-of-way.
D. Political signs. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after the
political event for which they were intended.
A. Banner signs may be erected, provided that such signs are permitted to
be hung across Main Street using existing light poles owned by the
§ 375-131 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-133
1:518
Borough and shall be permitted only by permission of the Borough
to utilize the Borough light poles. Such signs shall be installed and
maintained in a manner as defined by the Borough and permitted for
a period of no more than 14 consecutive days. No banner sign shall
be installed without the review and approval of a banner sign permit
and without payment of the required fee pursuant to the Borough fee
resolution.
B. Pennant signs may be erected, provided that such signs are permitted
to be installed on Borough-owned light poles along Main Street only as
approved by the Borough. Such signs shall be installed and maintained
by the sign permit applicant in a manner as defined by the Borough.
C. Temporary event signs and banners announcing a nonprofit event of a
civic organization for noncommercial purposes may be erected,
provided that there is only one sign per property and the sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet in area, and the sign shall be erected for a period
not to exceed 30 days prior to the start of the event and removed within
three days after the conclusion of the event.
D. Signs announcing special events, including but not limited to auctions,
grand openings, new management, going-out-of-business and similar
special, limited-time events of a defined duration, may be erected,
provided that such signs shall be displayed for a maximum of 14
consecutive days per special event and there shall be only one sign per
occupied tenant space. The sign permit application for such signs shall
define the special event duration and dates.
E. The following temporary signs may be erected without a sign permit:
(1) Portable sign (excluding changeable letter signs), including Aframe,
sandwich board or tent signs, provided that:
(a) The sign has a maximum of two sign faces.
(b) Such signs are permitted only on property within the Main
Street Corridor Overlay District.
(c) The sign shall be located within the sidewalk frontage of a
nonresidential or mixed-use building, provided that only one
temporary sign is permitted per building and the sign shall be
placed on the sidewalk immediately in front of the building
with which the sign content is associated.
(d) The sign face size shall be a maximum of five square feet per
sign face of the sign.
(e) Such signs shall be removed at the end of the business day and
during non-business-operating hours.
(f) Such signs shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic.
§ 375-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-133
1:519
§ 375-134. General regulations.
(2) Signs announcing new building or construction projects and
identification of the contractors associated with the projects,
provided the sign is erected after the beginning of the construction
activity and removed upon completion of the construction project
or issuance of an occupancy permit, if required.
A. Prohibited signs.
(1) Animated signs are not permitted.
(2) Signs illuminated by a flashing, pulsating or intermittent internal
or external light source are not permitted. Internal illumination
that changes intensity with a frequency of less than 15 seconds
shall be considered flashing.
(3) Signs that create glare on adjacent properties or any adjacent
street are not permitted.
B. Setbacks and location.
(1) Signs shall be placed no closer than 10 feet to any property line or
any right-of-way line, measured horizontally from the sign edge,
except in the Main Street Corridor Overlay District, and shall not
project within an existing street right-of-way.
(2) Monument signs shall be placed no closer than five feet to the
closest property line and 18 inches from an abutting street right-ofway
line.
(3) No sign shall be erected in such a manner or location that would
obstruct vision, ingress and/or egress or interfere with safe traffic
flow.
(4) No sign shall be located so as to block doors, operable windows or
fire escapes, or access to them, nor shall a sign be attached to a fire
escape.
(5) Such sign shall extend vertically past the roofline of the building
upon which the sign is located.
(6) No sign shall project over a street, alley, or driveway, nor be closer
than two feet from the closest perpendicular edge of the curb or
paved edge of any such vehicular way.
C. Lighting.
(1) All lighting of signs located within the Main Street Corridor
Overlay District shall be external illumination provided through
sharp cutoff, directed-light fixtures that are decorative in nature or
concealed from view, and the illumination shall be directed to the
§ 375-133 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-134
1:520
§ 375-135. Residential district signs.
The following signs are permitted in residential zoning districts:
sign face to minimize light spillover beyond the edges of the sign
face.
(2) Signs in residential zoning districts shall be illuminated externally
from concealed light fixtures, and the illumination shall be directed
to the sign face only to minimize light spillover beyond the edges of
the sign face.
(3) Signs in commercial and mixed-use zoning districts may be
illuminated internally, provided that only the name and official logo
of the business or entity are illuminated, except that automobile
service station signs may be fully internally illuminated.
(4) No sign lighting shall be installed in a manner or of such a
brightness as to create excessive glare on adjacent property or
uses such that such lighting inhibits the use and enjoyment of the
adjacent property or uses.
(5) Flashing signs and signs with flashing lights are not permitted.
A. Building signs for identification of home occupations or no-impact
home-based businesses shall be permitted, provided that such sign is a
maximum of five square feet and shall not be illuminated.
B. Monument signs identifying a residential development or
neighborhood, provided that the maximum sign area shall be 18 square
feet per sign face and the sign shall not exceed four feet in height.
C. Signs displaying name, activities and/or functions for public institutions
(churches, public schools, accredited private schools, and publicly
owned or operated buildings), provided that:
(1) One monument sign is permitted on a property.
(a) The maximum sign area shall not exceed 30 square feet per
sign face, and there shall be a maximum of two sign faces.
(b) Changeable copy/lettering and LED signs are permitted,
provided that they do not comprise more than 50% of the total
sign area. Except as to permitted location, all other
requirements of this chapter for LED signs shall be met.
(c) The maximum height shall be four feet.
(d) No monument sign shall be located in such a manner as to
obstruct traffic sight visibility.
(2) One building sign is permitted per building.
§ 375-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-135
1:521
§ 375-136. Nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts.
(3) The maximum sign area shall be 15 square feet, and the sign shall
meet all other building sign requirements of this chapter.
A. In nonresidential zoning districts, all of the following signs are
permitted:
(1) One freestanding sign for each building.
(2) One building, awning, canopy, wall or marquee sign for each
building.
(3) One building, awning, canopy, wall or marquee sign for each
building tenant, for which a Borough occupancy permit is issued or
otherwise required.
(4) Directional signs, a maximum of five square feet in size per sign
face, up to a maximum of four signs on a property.
B. All signs shall meet the following requirements, unless otherwise
specified:
(1) A sign shall have a maximum of two sign faces.
(2) Freestanding signs.
(a) Each sign face of a freestanding sign shall have a maximum of
40 square feet of sign area.
(b) The maximum height of any freestanding sign shall be 10 feet.
(c) Where two or more buildings are located on the same lot or
under common ownership, the maximum freestanding sign
area shall be 50 square feet of sign area per sign face, provided
that a total of only one freestanding sign is permitted for all
buildings under common ownership.
(d) All freestanding signs on parcels within the Main Street
Corridor Overlay Zoning District shall be monument signs.
(3) All freestanding monument signs shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) The maximum square feet of sign area per sign face shall be 40
square feet.
(b) No monument sign shall have more than two sign faces.
(c) The maximum sign height, measured from ground level to the
top of the sign, including sign face and structure, shall be six
feet.
(d) The sign face of a monument sign shall not be elevated from
the ground level more than two feet measured to the bottom of
§ 375-135 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-136
1:522
§ 375-137. Billboards.
the sign face, except where the sign sits on a foundation, the
width of which shall be equal to or greater than the width
of the sign face width, constructed of solid materials such as
stone, masonry, brick, or other like materials, and the bottom
of the sign face shall rest on the foundation.
(e) No monument sign shall be located in such a manner as to
obstruct traffic sight visibility.
(4) The maximum sign area of any building, wall, canopy, awning, or
marquee sign shall be 15 square feet and shall meet the following
criteria:
(a) The sign shall not project above the wall, roofline, or surface to
which it is mounted, nor obstruct building windows.
(b) The sign shall not encroach upon any road right-of-way, nor
shall it in any way interfere with normal pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
(c) No sign shall not extend below a point measured from grade to
a height of nine feet. In all instances, signs must comply with
the requirements of the Americans With Disabilities
Accessibility Guidelines on protruding objects and headroom.
(d) The sign shall not project more than five feet from the building
facade to which it is attached.
(5) LED signs are permitted in nonresidential and mixed-use zoning
districts, except that they are not permitted within the Main Street
Corridor Overlay Zoning District.
(a) All LED sign images, messages, and graphics displayed on the
sign face must be static. Animation and video displays are
prohibited.
(b) The transition from one static display on the LED sign face to
another must be instantaneous without any special effects,
including but not limited to flashing, spinning, revolving
transition methods, scrolling from left to right or top to bottom,
slot machine, splice, mesh, radar, kaleidoscope, spin, or any
other animated transition.
A. Billboards are permitted only on property that meets one of the
following criteria:
(1) Properties in a nonresidential zoning district abutting or within 100
feet of the State Route 108 right-of-way.
§ 375-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-137
1:523
§ 375-138. Nonconforming signs.
Any physical change or alteration to the structure of an existing,
nonconforming sign, excluding regular maintenance and in-kind
replacement of the sign face, requires compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
(2) Properties abutting the State Route 173 right-of-way, between the
center line of Kelly Boulevard and the Borough's municipal
boundary.
B. Billboards shall be set back a minimum of 250 feet from an existing
residential structure, such that no part of the billboard or support
structure is within 250 feet of an existing residential structure.
C. Billboards shall be set back a minimum of 500 feet from any existing
billboard or the location of a billboard for which a sign permit is
approved or pending.
D. All billboards shall be maintained in good repair, even when there is no
occupied sign area within or on the billboard structure.
E. The sign area of all billboards shall be a maximum of 300 square feet.
F. The maximum height of the structure and sign face of any billboard
shall be 15 feet.
G. The illumination of any billboard shall be from exterior light fixtures;
internal illumination of the sign area or any portion of the billboard,
including LED technology, is not permitted. The billboard lighting shall
be directed only to the sign face of the billboard and shall be provided
by sharp cutoff, shielded light fixtures to minimize illumination spillover
beyond the sign face.
H. All billboards shall be considered abandoned after a period of 12
months during which there is no occupied sign area within or on the
billboard structure, excluding announcement that the billboard is
available for rental. Abandoned billboards are prohibited.
§ 375-137 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-138
1:524
ARTICLE XXI
Performance Standards
§ 375-139. Applicability.
Permitted uses, special exceptions and conditional uses enumerated in all
nonresidential districts, and uses accessory thereto, are subject to the
following performance standards and procedures. If the Zoning Officer or
the Zoning Hearing Board has reasonable grounds for believing that any
other use will violate these performance standards, such use, existing or
proposed, shall also be subject to these performance standards.
§ 375-140. Continued compliance required; enforcement.
§ 375-141. Dangerous or objectionable elements.
A. Continued compliance. Continued compliance with performance
standards is required, and the enforcement of continued compliance
with these performance standards shall be enforced by the Zoning
Officer.
B. Determination of violation. The Zoning Officer shall investigate any
purported violation of performance standards and, if there is
reasonable ground for the same, shall notify the property owner of the
occurrence or existence of a probable violation thereof, as specified
herein.
C. Termination of violation. All violations as ascertained in accordance
with this section shall be terminated within 30 days of the receipt of
notice from the Zoning Officer or within the time specified in the
enforcement notice.
A. Definition of "elements." No land or building in any C-1, C-2, M-1 or
MSCO District which shall be used or occupied for commercial or
manufacturing purposes shall be operated in such a manner so as to
create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable
fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration, smoke, dust, dirt or
other form of air pollution; electrical or other disturbance; glare or
other substance, condition or element in such amount as to adversely
affect the surrounding area or premises (referred to herein as
"dangerous or objectionable elements"), provided that any use
permitted by this chapter may be undertaken and maintained in any
C-1, C-2, M-1 or MSCO District if it conforms to the regulations of this
subsection limiting dangerous and objectionable elements at the
specified point or points of the determination of their existence.182
B. Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of
performance standards. The determination of the existence of any
dangerous or objectionable elements shall be made at:
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-141
1:525
§ 375-142. Restrictions and standards.
(1) The point or points where such elements shall be most apparent for
fire and explosion hazards, for radioactivity and electrical
disturbances, for smoke and other forms of air pollution; and
(2) The property lines of the use creating such elements for noise, for
vibration, for glare and for odors.
A. Fire and explosion hazards. In all activities involving, and all storage of,
inflammable and explosive materials, the owner or operator of such use
shall provide adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and
explosion and adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment
and devices standard in this industry. Burning of waste materials in
open fires is prohibited. The relevant provisions of state and local laws
and regulations shall also apply.
B. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activities shall be permitted
which emit dangerous radioactivity or electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment other than that of the creator
of such disturbance.
C. Noise.
(1) At the points of measurement specified herein, the maximum
sound-pressure level radiated in each standard octave band by any
use or facility (other than transportation facilities or temporary
construction work) shall not exceed the values for octave bands
lying within the several frequency limits given in Table III after
applying the corrections shown in Table IV. The sound-pressure
level shall be measured with a sound-level meter and associated
octave band analyzer conforming to standards prescribed by the
American Standards Association. (American Standard Sound Level
Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.3-1944,
American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, and American
Standards Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the
Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.10-1953, or latest
approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc.,
New York, NY, shall be used.)
Table III
Frequency Ranges
Containing Standard Octave
Bands in Cycles Per Second
Octave Band Sound-Pressure
Level in Decibels re 0.0002
Dyne/cm2
20 to 300 60
300 to 2,400 40
Above 2,400 30
(2) If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., one or more of the
§ 375-141 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-142
1:526
corrections in Table IV shall be applied to the octave band levels
given in Table III.183
Table IV
Type or Location of Operation
or Character of Noise Correction in Decibels
Daytime operation only 5
Noise source operates less than: 5
20% of any one-hour period 5
5% of any one-hour period 10
Noise of impulsive character,
hammering, etc.
-5
Noise of periodic character, hum,
screech, etc.
-5
Property is located in any C, M or
MSCO District and is not within
500 feet, measured horizontally or
vertically, of any R District
5 (C and MSCO Districts); 10
(M District)
D. Vibrations. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions
detectable beyond its lot lines without the aid of instruments, with the
exception of vibration produced as a result of temporary construction
activity.
E. Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from
high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding or
otherwise, visible at the points of measurement specified herein is
permitted. This restriction shall not apply to signs otherwise permitted
by the provisions of this chapter.
F. Smoke. No emission of visible gray smoke of a shade equal to or darker
than No. 2 of the Power's Micro-Ringelmann Chart, published by
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Inc., and copyrighted in 1954 (being
a direct facsimile reduction of a standard Ringelmann Chart as issued
by the United States Bureau of Mines), shall be permitted from any
chimney, fume vent or similar device, except that visible gray smoke of
a shade equal to No. 3 on said chart may be emitted for four minutes in
any thirty-minute period.
G. Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the
property line of the lot from which they are emitted without
instruments.
H. Other forms of air pollution. No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors,
gases and other forms of air pollution shall be permitted which can
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-142
1:527
§ 375-143. Environmental performance standards.
cause any damage to health, to animals, vegetation or other forms
of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling to animals,
vegetation or other property.
A. Environmental performance standards. The developer shall determine
the presence of environmental or natural features on any site proposed
for land development and shall meet the following standards for
environmental protection. Site alterations, regrading, or filling prior to
approval of the plans for development shall be a violation of this article.
(1) Floodplain delineation. One-hundred-year floodplains shall be
delineated by accepted analytical procedures approved by the
Borough Engineer.
(2) Floodplain development. Development activities shall be regulated
as per the provisions of current floodplain regulations, as amended
from time to time, and applicable commonwealth regulations,
specifically Chapter 105, Title 25, of the Pennsylvania Code.
(3) Steep slopes. In areas of steep slopes, i.e., those above 15%, the
following standards shall apply:
(a) Sixteen percent to 25%. No more than 60% of such areas shall
be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.
(b) Twenty-six percent or more. Earth disturbance activities are
generally restricted except as authorized by the Borough
Engineer.
(4) Forest. No more than 50% of any forest as defined may be cleared
or developed.
(5) Ponds, watercourses or wetlands. No development, filling, piping
or diverting shall be permitted except for required roads and utility
line extensions, unless permitted by the appropriate state, county
or regulatory agency.
(6) Stormwater drainage and management. All plans shall comply with
the provisions of state and local regulations in effect at the time of
final approval.
(7) Soil erosion and sedimentation. With any earth disturbance there
shall be control of erosion and the protection of streams and ponds
from sedimentation in accordance with the "Clean Streams Law,
P.L. 1987,"184 Chapter 102 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, and
the "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual" of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. In addition,
a soil erosion and sediment control plan (ES & SC plan) shall be
184. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 375-142 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-143
1:528
required as part of the application for any Borough permit where
earth disturbance or excavation will occur. As a minimum where
sediment can be transported away from the disturbed area, a silt
fence or straw bale barrier shall be erected and maintained in
working order until vegetation is fully established or erosionresistant
ground cover has been installed. Additional sediment
pollution control measures may be required where land
development is more extensive than single-family construction.
B. Storage and waste disposal. No highly flammable, explosive or toxic
liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk (over 500 gallons) above
ground except tanks or drums of fuel connected directly with energy
devices or heating appliances located and operated on the same lot as
the tanks or drums of fuel.
(1) All permanent bulk outdoor storage facilities for fuel over 500
gallons, raw materials and products and all fuel, raw materials and
products stored outdoors, shall be enclosed by an approved safety
fence.
(2) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transported off the lot by natural causes
or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate wells,
watercourses, or potable water supplies otherwise render such
wells, watercourses, or potable water supplies undesirable as
sources of water supply or recreation, nor shall any substance
which will destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any wells,
watercourses, or potable water supplies. A Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection approved plan for spill
containment shall be submitted to the Borough for review by the
Borough Engineer prior to the issuance of any required permit.
(3) Any materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.
(4) Discharge. No discharge at any point into any private sewage
disposal system or stream or into the ground of any materials in
such a way or in such nature or temperature as can contaminate
any water supply or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or
objectionable elements or the accumulation of solid wastes
conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects is permitted.
(5) Maintenance of property. The owner or lessee of the property,
except land being actively farmed, whether occupied or vacant,
located within or adjacent to any developed area, shall maintain
such premises so that all portions of the property shall be kept free
of junk, debris, disabled motor vehicles, and dangerous,
objectionable or noxious matter.
(6) Vehicle and equipment maintenance.
§ 375-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-143
1:529
(a) In the M-1 Light Manufacturing, C-1 and C-2 Commercial
Zoning Districts, all movable equipment repair done on the
property shall be performed within an enclosed building,
except that minor maintenance activities may be completed on
the exterior of a lot where space has been provided for the
temporary parking or storage of vehicles and movable
equipment.
(b) In residentially zoned areas, minor vehicle maintenance
activities may be conducted in driveways, but in no case shall
repairs be made on vehicles and movable equipment which
would result in the permanent storage of said vehicles or
movable equipment on the exterior of the lot.
§ 375-143 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-143
1:530
ARTICLE XXII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 375-144. Creation; membership; procedures.
A. There is hereby created for the Borough a Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
B. The membership of the Board shall consist of five residents of the
Borough appointed by resolution by the Borough Council. The terms of
office shall be five years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of
one member shall expire each year. The Board shall promptly notify the
Borough Council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members
of the Board shall hold no other elected or appointed office in the
Borough, nor shall any member be an employee of the Borough.185
C. The Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one but no
more than three residents of the Borough to serve as alternate
members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall
be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of Section 906
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended,186 an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as
provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right to
cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have
all the powers and duties set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold
no other elected or appointed office in the Borough, including service as
a member of the Planning Commission or as the Zoning Officer, nor
shall any alternate be an employee of the Borough. Any alternate may
participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be
entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be compensated pursuant
to Section 907 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,187
unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to Section
906 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.188
D. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Borough Council taken after the member has received 15 days' advance
notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in
connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
E. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
186. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10906.
187. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10907.
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-144
1:531
§ 375-145. Hearings.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board
may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the
Board as provided in this chapter.
F. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Borough and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the Borough and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Borough Council as requested by the
Borough Council.
G. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough Council, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the
Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as
may be fixed by the Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed the
rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the
Borough Council.
A. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in
such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Board. In addition to
the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall
be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.
B. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
C. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is
called for, the findings, shall be made by the Board; however, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Borough, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final.
D. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person, including civic or community
organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
§ 375-144 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-145
1:532
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
E. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
F. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
G. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
H. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
I. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed, and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
J. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or of any law,
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings
are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days, and the parties shall be entitled
to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered
§ 375-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-145
1:533
§ 375-146. Jurisdiction.
no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Where the
Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
subsection, or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from
the date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because
of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove
provided, the Board shall give public notice of the said decision within
10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in
the same manner as provided in Subsection A of this section. If the
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing
in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
K. A copy of the final decision, or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings, shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which
the full decision or findings may be examined.
L. The Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Borough Council pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1, 10916.1.189
(2) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to
act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(3) Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
189. Editor's Note: Original § 2203.A.2., which listed procedural challenges to the validity of a
land use ordinance as under the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board and
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-145 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-146
1:534
(4) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to Section 910.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
(5) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain
or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to Section 912.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
(6) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(7) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10916.2.
(8) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving applications under Article V or VII of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et
seq., 10701 et seq.
B. The Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
pursuant to the provisions of Section 702 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10702.
(2) All applications pursuant to Section 508 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10508, for approval of subdivisions or land developments under
Article V of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
(3) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Applications for curative amendment to this chapter or pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1, 10916.1(a).
(5) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in Section 609 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.
(6) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Borough Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
applications for land development under Articles V and VII of the
§ 375-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-146
1:535
§ 375-147. Variances.
MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq., 10701 et seq. Where such
determination relates only to development not involving an Article
V or VII application, the appeal from such determination of the
Zoning Officer or the Borough Engineer shall be to the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to this section. Where the applicable land
use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of
subdivision and land development applications in the Planning
Commission, all appeals from determinations under this subsection
shall be to the Planning Commission, and all appeals from the
decision of the Planning Commission shall be to court.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographic or other physical conditions
peculiar to the property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due
to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attached such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 375-146 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-148
1:536
§ 375-148. Form of applications to Board.
All applications to the Board shall be in writing on forms prescribed by
the Board and provided by the Borough. Every application shall include the
following:
§ 375-149. Stay of proceedings.
A. The name and address of the applicant or the appellant;
B. The name and address of the owner of the lot to be affected by such
proposed change or appeal;
C. A brief description and location of the lot to be affected by such
proposed change or appeal;
D. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the application is
made, and reasons why it should be granted, or a statement of the
section of this chapter governing the situation in which the alleged
erroneous ruling is being appealed, and the reasons for this appeal; and
E. A reasonably accurate description of the present improvements and the
additions or changes intended to be made under this application,
indicating the size of such proposed improvements, materials, and
general construction thereof. In addition, there shall be attached a plot
plan of the real property to be affected, indicating the location and size
of the lot and size of improvements thereon and proposed to be erected
thereon.
A. Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
and during its pendency before the Board, all land development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning
Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall
be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or
body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction
of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed
to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
§ 375-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-149
1:537
§ 375-150. Parties appellant before Board.190
Appeals raising the substantive validity of any land use ordinance (except
those to be brought before the Borough Council pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code); or appeals from the determination of
the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting or denial
of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance
of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register
any nonconforming use, structure or lot; or from a determination by the
Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to the
administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference
to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management insofar
as the same relate to development not involving subdivision and land
development or planned residential development may be filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or
agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance
and for special exception may be filed with the Board by any landowner or
any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
§ 375-151. Expiration of decision.
Unless otherwise specified by the Board, a decision on any appeal or
request for a variance or special exception shall expire if the applicant fails
to obtain any necessary building permit or comply with the conditions of
said authorized permit within six months from the date of authorization
thereof.
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived
by the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond,
the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the petitioner
and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals,
shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney fees
incurred by the petitioner.
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-149 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-152
1:538
§ 375-152. Appeal from decision of Board.191
Appeals from a decision of the Board shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, Article X-A, and
amendments thereto.
§ 375-153. Time limitations.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by the Borough if such
proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any
manner, unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice,
knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had been given. If
such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall
be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. The failure of
anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on
a tentative plan or from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a
challenge to the validity of this chapter or an amendment hereto or map
or an amendment thereto shall preclude an appeal from a final approval
except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates
from the approved tentative approval.
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 375-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-153
1:539

ARTICLE XXIII
Administration
§ 375-154. Zoning Officer.
§ 375-155. Building and zoning permits.
A. For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who shall not
hold any elective office in the Borough, shall be appointed.
B. The Zoning Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the
Borough and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Borough a working knowledge of municipal zoning.
C. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any construction or
any use or change of use which does not conform to this chapter.
D. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
his employment.
A. Purpose. To determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
no person shall erect, alter, move or convert any structure or building,
or part thereof, nor alter the use of any land, subsequent to the
adoption of this chapter until a building/zoning permit has been issued
by the Zoning Officer.
B. Application for permits. All such applications shall be accompanied by
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and
dimensions of the lot or lots to be built upon, its block and lot number as
recorded, the date of official record of any lot or lots on which
construction is proposed, the exact size and location of any building,
sign, parking or loading area or other physical feature existing or
proposed on the lot, the existing and intended use of each building or
part of a building, the number of families, dwelling units, employees,
offices, or other appropriate units of occupancy which the building is
designed to accommodate, and such other information as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. One copy of such
plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall be
approved; one copy each of all applications with accompanying plans
and documents shall become a public record after a permit is issued or
denied.
C. Issuance of permits.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to issue a building/zoning
permit, provided he is satisfied that the structure, building, sign,
parking area or premises, and the proposed use thereof, conform
with all requirements of this chapter and that all other reviews and
actions, if any, called for in this chapter have been complied with
and all necessary approvals secured thereof.
§ 375-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-155
1:541
§ 375-156. Occupancy permits.
(2) All building/zoning permits for residential or commercial
construction shall be issued in duplicate, and one copy shall be kept
conspicuously on the premises affected and protected from the
weather whenever construction work is being performed thereon.
No owner, contractor, workman or any other person shall perform
any building operations of any kind unless a building/zoning permit
covering such operation has been displayed as required by this
chapter, nor shall they perform building operations of any kind
after notification of the revocation of said building/zoning permit.
D. Building completion.
(1) All structures, except commercial or industrial buildings, must be
completed within 365 days of the date on which a building/zoning
permit is issued. Any request for extension of time for construction
must be made in writing to the Zoning Officer. Any resulting
extension may only be for a period of 60 days. Not more than three
such extensions are permissible.
(2) All commercial or industrial buildings must be completed within 18
months of the date on which a building/zoning permit is issued.
Commercial and industrial buildings with more than 40,000 square
feet of floor area will have an additional six months for completion.
(3) Failure to comply with the above requirements shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and subject the owner or operator to
enforcement remedies.
E. Denial of permits. When the Zoning Officer is not satisfied that the
applicant's proposed development will meet the requirements of this
chapter, he shall refuse to issue a building/zoning permit, and the
applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for a reversal of the
Zoning Officer's decision.
F. Revocation of permits.
(1) If it shall appear at any time to the Zoning Officer that the
application or accompanying plan is in any material respect false or
misleading, or that work is being done upon the premises differing
materially from that called for in the applications filed with him
under existing laws or ordinances, he may forthwith revoke the
building/zoning permit, whereupon it shall be the duty of the
person holding the same to surrender it and all copies thereof to
the said Zoning Officer.
(2) After the building/zoning permit has been revoked, the Zoning
Officer may, before issuing a new building/zoning permit, require
the applicant to file an indemnity bond in favor of the Borough with
sufficient surety to cover the cost of removing the building if it does
not so comply.
§ 375-155 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-156
1:542
§ 375-157. Temporary uses.
A. For new uses.
(1) After completion of the whole building or structure, and upon the
sworn application by the owner or his duly authorized agent,
setting forth such facts as the Zoning Officer may require, and after
actual inspection of the premises by the Zoning Officer, he shall,
upon finding the facts to be as represented, issue in duplicate an
occupancy permit, certifying that the premises comply with the
provisions of this chapter and may be used for the purposes set
forth in the permit, which purposes shall conform with the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) No change of use shall be made in any building, structure, or
premises now or hereafter erected or altered that is not consistent
with the requirements of this chapter. Any person desiring to
change the use of his premises shall apply to the Zoning Officer for
an occupancy permit, setting forth such facts as may be required. A
copy of the occupancy permit shall be kept at all times upon the
premises affected and shall be displayed upon request made by any
Building Inspector or Borough police officer.
(3) A record shall be kept of all occupancy permits issued, and the
original applications therefor shall be kept on file in the same
manner as applications for building permits. No owner, tenant or
other person shall use or occupy any building or structure
thereafter erected or altered, the use of which shall be changed
after the passage of this chapter, without first procuring an
occupancy permit, provided that an occupancy permit, once
granted, shall continue in effect so long as there is not change of
use, regardless of change in the personnel or tenants or occupants.
B. For existing uses.
(1) Upon written request from the owner, tenant or occupant, the
Zoning Officer, after inspection, shall issue an occupancy permit for
an existing use legally existing at the time this chapter is made
effective, certifying the extent and kind of such use and whether
any such existing use conforms with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) No change or extension of use and no alterations shall be made in a
nonconforming use or premises without an occupancy permit
having first been issued by the Zoning Officer stating that such
change, extension or alteration is in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant, as a special exception as per the
provisions of § 375-106, after due notice and public hearing, the
temporary occupancy and use of a structure in any district for a
purpose that does not conform with the district requirements, provided
§ 375-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-157
1:543
§ 375-158. Causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council or, with the approval
of the Borough Council, an officer of the Borough, or any aggrieved owner
or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct, or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to
prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation. When such action is instituted by a landowner or
tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the Borough at least 30
days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint
on the Borough Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been given.
§ 375-159. Report of Planning Commission to Borough Council.
The Planning Commission shall keep a full record of its business and shall
annually make a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities
to the Borough Council. Interim reports may be made as often as may be
necessary, or as requested by the Borough Council.
§ 375-160. Fees.
Fees for applications for permits and hearings as required herein and
established by Borough Council, from time to time, shall be paid to the
Borough Administrator/Secretary upon the filing of such application.
that such occupancy and use is truly of a temporary nature and subject
to any reasonable conditions and safeguards which the Board may
impose to minimize any injurious effect upon the neighborhood or
to protect contiguous property. The approval by the Board and any
permit based thereon for such temporary occupancy and use shall not
be granted for a period of more than three months and shall not be
renewable more than once in any period of 12 months.
B. A temporary outdoor activity permit issued by the Zoning Officer shall
be required for the following:
(1) Seasonal sale of produce, including but not limited to farm crops
and Christmas trees.
(2) Multiday, multifamily yard sales.
(3) Circuses, carnivals or religious assemblies utilizing tents or other
temporary structures.
(4) Special events, including but not limited to car shows, flea markets
and sidewalk sales.
§ 375-157 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-160
1:544
ARTICLE XXIV
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 375-161. Enforcement.
§ 375-162. Violations and penalties.
A. If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a period of 10 days.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the
Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have
§ 375-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-162
1:545
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall
be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than Borough officials the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this section.
§ 375-162 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-162
1:546
ARTICLE XXV
Amendments
§ 375-163. Procedural requirements.
§ 375-164. Landowner curative amendments.
A. The Borough Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or
repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter. The
procedure for the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance as set
forth in Section 607 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
53 P.S. § 10607, is hereby declared optional.
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In
addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Borough at points deemed sufficient by the Borough along the
perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The
affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date
of the hearing. Further, at least 30 days prior to the hearing date, notice
of the public hearing shall be mailed to property owners within the area
being rezoned.
C. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Borough Council shall submit each such amendment
to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on
such proposed amendment to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations.
D. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised, to include land
previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment.
E. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the
Borough Council, the Borough shall submit the proposed amendment to
the County Planning Commission for recommendations.
F. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provision thereof
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Borough
Council with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10916.1. the
Borough Council shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days of
§ 375-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-164
1:547
§ 375-165. Borough curative amendments.
If the Borough determines that this chapter, or any portion hereof, is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
the request as provided in Section 916.1. The curative amendment and
challenge shall be referred to the Planning Commission and the County
Planning Commission as provided in Section 609, and notice of the
hearing thereon shall be given as provided in Sections 610 and 916.1
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10609,
10610, and 10916.1.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 908 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10908, and all
references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board shall, for purposes of
this section, be references to the Borough Council. If the Borough does
not accept a landowner's curative amendment brought in accordance
with this subsection and a court subsequently rules that the challenge
has merit, the court's decision shall not result in a declaration of
invalidity for this entire chapter and Zoning Map, but only for those
provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's curative
amendment.
C. The Borough Council, if it determines that a validity challenge has
merit, may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the
challenged defects. The Borough Council shall consider the curative
amendments, plans and explanatory materials submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or Zoning Map;
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
§ 375-164 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § 375-165
1:548
A. The Borough shall declare, by formal action, this chapter or portions
hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days following such
declaration and proposal, the Borough Council shall:
(1) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter, which may include:
(a) Reference to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity;
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revision; or
(c) Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm the
validity of, this chapter pursuant to the provisions of Section 609 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10609, in order to
cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection A, the
Borough Council shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner's curative amendment filed under Section 609.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10609.1, nor shall
the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report requested under
Section 909.1 or 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1, 10916.1, subsequent to the declaration and
proposal based upon the grounds identified by Subsection A. Upon
completion of the procedures set forth in Subsections A and B, no rights
to a cure pursuant to the provisions of Sections 609.1 and 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1,
10916.1, shall, from the date of the declaration and proposal, accrue to
any landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of this chapter
for which there has been a curative amendment pursuant to this
section.
D. The Borough, having utilized the procedures set forth in this section,
may not again utilize said procedure for a period of 36 months following
the date of enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the
validity of this chapter; provided, however, if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty imposed
upon the Borough by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Borough may utilize the
provisions of this section to propose a curative amendment to this
chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
§ 375-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-165
1:549

ARTICLE XXVI
Interpretation and Validity
§ 375-166. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the health, safety, morals, and general welfare. It is not intended to
interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances,
provided that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the
use of buildings or premises, or upon the height or bulk of a building, or
requires larger open spaces, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 375-167. Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or
the location of any district boundary shown on the Zoning Map that forms
a part hereof is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter or the Zoning District Map. The Borough Council
of the Borough of Slippery Rock hereby declares that it would have passed
this chapter and each section or part thereof irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections or parts thereof be declared invalid.
§ 375-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-167
1:551
DERIVATION TABLE
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1983 Code to 2015 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1983 Code Location in 2015 Code
Ch. 1, Administration and Government
Part 1, Elected Officials
§ 101, Time Day and Place of Regular
Council Meetings
Ch. 8, Art. I
§ 102, Compensation of Mayor Ch. 71, Art. I
§ 103, Compensation of Council Ch. 71, Art. II
§ 104, Compensation of Tax Collector Ch. 71, Art. III
Part 2, Appointed Officials
§ 201, Auditor Appointed; Duties Stated Ch. 35, Art. I
§ 202, Borough Secretary/Treasurer Ch. 35, Art. II
§ 203, Assistant Treasurer Ch. 35, Art. III
Part 3, Boards, Commissions and
Departments
A. Planning Commission Ch. 54
B. Park and Recreation Commission Ch. 42
C. Police Department Ch. 60
Part 4, Pensions, Retirement and Social
Security
A. Police Pension Fund Superseded by Ord. No.
590-RSTUV; see now Ch.
48, Art. II
B. Municipal Employees' Retirement
System
Ch. 48, Art. I
C. Firemen's Relief Ch. 22
D. Social Security REP
Part 5, Butler County Council of Governments Ch. 13, Art. I
Ch. 2, Animals
§ 375-167 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § DT-1
1:552
Chapter/Title From 1983 Code Location in 2015 Code
Part 1, Dogs Running at Large or Creating
Disturbance
Ch. 105, Art. I
Ch. 3, Bicycles (Reserved) Excluded
Ch. 4, Buildings (Reserved) Excluded
Ch. 5, Code Enforcement
Part 1, Uniform Construction Code Ch. 296
Part 2, Property Maintenance Code Ch. 217
Ch. 6, Conduct
Part 1, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 98
Part 2, Missiles and Missile Weapons Ch. 186
Part 3, Curfew Ch. 137
Part 4, Disorderly Houses Ch. 145
Part 5, Fireworks Ch. 160
Part 6, Horses and Horse Drawn Vehicles on
Sidewalks
REP
Part 7, Disorderly Conduct Ch. 142
Part 8, Loud, Disturbing and Unnecessary
Noise
Ch. 193, Art. I
Part 9, Sexual Conduct
A. Sexual Conduct and Nudity in Public
Places
Ch. 235, Art. I
B. Obscene and Other Sexual Material Ch. 235, Art. II
Part 10, Smoking Policy Ch. 241
Ch. 7, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Part 1, Outdoor Burning Repealed by Ord. No.
667; see now Ch. 121
Ch. 8, Franchises
Part 1, Community Television Antenna
System
NCM
Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating
Part 1, Grading, Erosion and Storm Water
Management
Ch. 309, Art. I
Ch. 10, Health and Safety
Part 1, Grass and Weeds Ch. 114
Ch. 11, Housing
Part 1, Tenant Registration Ch. 221, Art. I
Part 2, Rental Operating Licenses Ch. 221, Art. II
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:553
Chapter/Title From 1983 Code Location in 2015 Code
Ch. 12, Libraries (Reserved) Excluded
Ch. 13, Licenses, Permits and General Business
Regulations
Part 1, Solicitors and Temporary Businesses Ch. 213, Art. II
Part 2, Public Entertainment, Other Than in
Theatres and Auditoriums
Ch. 152
Part 3, Peddling Ch. 213, Art. I
Ch. 14, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
Part 1, Trailers Ch. 267
Ch. 15, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 275
Ch. 16, Parks and Recreation
Part 1, Park Regulations Ch. 207
Ch. 17, Planned Residential Development
(Reserved)
Excluded
Ch. 18, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Sewer System Ch. 334, Art. I
Part 2, Sewer Line Hookups Ch. 334, Art. II
Part 3, Standards for Sewer and Water Lines Ch. 334, Art. III
Ch. 19, Signs and Billboards (Reserved) Excluded
Ch. 20, Solid Waste
Part 1, Solid Waste Management and
Recycling
Ch. 246, Art. I
Part 2, Recycling Rates and Regulations Ch. 246, Art. II
Ch. 21, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Sidewalks and Curbs
A. Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter
Construction
REP
B. Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair Ch. 343, Art. III
Part 2, Snow Removal from Sidewalks Ch. 343, Art. I
Part 3, Cutting Improved Portions of
Roadways
Ch. 343, Art. II
Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development Ch. 350
Ch. 23, Swimming Pools (Reserved) Excluded
Ch. 24, Taxation; Special
Part 1, Per Capita Tax Ch. 260, Art. I
Part 2, Earned Income Tax Ch. 260, Art. V
Part 3, Real Estate Tax Ch. 260, Art. II
§ DT-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § DT-1
1:554
Chapter/Title From 1983 Code Location in 2015 Code
Part 4, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 260, Art. III
Part 5, Local Services Tax Ch. 260, Art. VI
Part 6, Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights Ch. 260, Art. IV
Ch. 25, Trees (Reserved) Excluded
Ch. 26, Water
Part 1, Requiring Water Hookups Ch. 368, Art. I
Part 2, Water and Sewer Rates and Service Ch. 368, Art. II
Ch. 27, Zoning Ch. 375
Appendix
A. Annexation of Territory Excluded
B. Bond Issues and Loans Excluded
C. Franchises and Services Excluded
D. Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affair
Excluded
E. Public Property Excluded
F. Sewers and Water Excluded
G. Streets and Sidewalks Excluded
H. Zoning Reclassifications Excluded
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
282 9-5-1972, as
amended and
restated 2-2002
Zoning Ch. 375
307 10-25-1977, as
amended and
restated 2-5-2002
Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 350
613 6-1-2004 Zoning amendment
(revisions to Town
Center Overlay District
and sign requirements)
Ch. 375
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:555
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
282-A 12-7-2004 Zoning amendment
(revisions to sign area
requirements for wall
signs)
Ch. 375
1-2006 1-3-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
632 11-7-2006 Zoning amendment
(revisions to minimum
off-street parking
requirements)
Ch. 375
649 10-5-2010 Zoning amendment
(revisions to sign
requirements)
Ch. 375
656 8-2-2011 Stormwater
management;
subdivision and land
development
amendment (stormwater
management
requirements)
Chs. 338; 350
657 9-20-2011 Zoning amendment
(revisions to Mixed-Use
Zoning District)
Ch. 375
658 9-20-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
659 9-20-2011 Subdivision and land
development
amendment (revisions in
conformity with
Comprehensive Plan)
Ch. 350
662 2-7-2012 Zoning amendment
(revisions to Mixed-Use
Zoning District)
Ch. 375
663 2-7-2012 Subdivision and land
development
amendment (addition of
traffic study
requirements)
Ch. 350
664 4-3-2012 Zoning amendment
(revisions to automotive
fueling and service
station requirements)
Ch. 375
665 6-5-2012 Alarm systems: false
alarms
Ch. 93, Art. I
§ DL-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § DL-1
1:556
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
666 6-5-2012 Outdoor wood-fired
boilers
Ch. 200
667 6-5-2012 Open burning Ch. 121
668 6-5-2012 Street vacation NCM
669 6-5-2012 Street vacation NCM
670 6-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 275
671 10-2-2012 Noise: engine brakes Ch. 193, Art. II
542-ABC 3-5-2013 Solid waste
management and
recycling amendment
(addition of regulations
for the collection of
bulky items)
Repealed by
Ord. No. 707
672 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
673 4-2-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 275
674 12-18-2012 Tax rate for 2013 NCM
675 6-4-2013 Street vacation NCM
676 12-3-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
677 12-3-2013 Zoning amendment
(revisions to Educational
District)
Ch. 375
678 2-4-2014 Zoning amendment
(revisions to Mixed-Use
Zoning District)
Ch. 375
679 12-10-2013 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
590-RSTUV4-1-2014 Pensions: police pension
fund
Ch. 48, Art. II
680 5-13-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
681 10-7-2014 Zoning amendment
(deletion of Town Center
Overlay District
regulations and addition
of Main Street Corridor
Overlay District
regulations)
Ch. 375
682 11-4-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 275
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:557
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
683 3-3-2015 Solid waste
management and
recycling amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 707
684 12-16-2014 Tax rate for 2015 NCM
685 6-2-2015 Zoning amendment
(signs)
Ch. 375
686 8-11-2015 Pensions: municipal
employees retirement
fund (amendment of
membership provisions
for the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement
System)
Ch. 48, Art. I
687 10-6-2015 General provisions:
adoption of code
Ch. 1, Art. I
688 10-6-2015 Pensions: municipal
employees retirement
fund (deletion of plan
authorization and
addition of the
Municipal Plan of
Slippery Rock)
Ch. 48, Art. I
689 11-3-2015 Subdivision and land
development:
application and plat
requirements (deletion
of application and plat
requirements and
addition of application
requirements)
Ch. 350, Art. III
690 12-8-2015 Tax rate for 2016 NCM
691 Not yet adopted
692 6-7-2016 Zoning amendment
(definitions; accessory
structures; rental of
residential uses; for R-A,
R-1, R-R-2,, R-3, and MU
districts)
Ch. 375
693 6-14-2016 Officers and employees:
Borough Manager
Ch. 35, Art. IV
§ DL-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § DL-1
1:558
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
623-A 9-13-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk maintenance
and repair amendment
(prohibiting the use of
asphalt for repair and
defining maintenance
obligations)
Ch. 343, Art. III
694 10-11-2016 Zoning amendment
(adding eating and
drinking establishments
as a permitted use by
right in C-2 District)
Ch. 375
695 9-13-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
openings and
excavations amendment
(superseding current
provisions regarding
street excavation
permits)
Ch. 343, Art. II
696 11-30-2016 General obligation note NCM
697 12-13-2016 Tax rate for 2017 NCM
698 12-6-2016 Earned income tax
amendment
(amendment of tax
imposition procedures
and the administration,
powers and duties of the
Tax Officer)
Ch. 260, Art. V
696-A 6-6-2017 General obligation note
amendment
NCM
683-A 12-12-2017 Solid Waste Amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 707
702 10-10-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 275
703 10-10-2017 Alarm Systems: Knox
Boxes
Ch. 93, Art. II
704 12-5-2017 Tax Rate for 2018 NCM
705 10-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 275
706 12-11-2018 Tax Rate for 2019 NCM
707 2-12-2019 Solid Waste
Management and
Recycling
Ch. 246
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:559
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
708 5-14-2019 Zoning Amendment
(adding mobile food
vendor as a permitted
use in the MU, P-1, C-1
and C-2 Districts;
adding regulations for
mobile food vendors)
Ch. 375
§ DL-1 SLIPPERY ROCK CODE § DL-1
1:560