The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 6.
PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE, OF THE CITY OF
SCRANTON, IN ADOPTING THIS HOME RULE
CHARTER, RECOGNIZE THAT GOVERNMENT
IS COMPETENT ONLY WHEN THOSE WHO
COMPOSE IT WORK AS TRUSTEES OF THE
PEOPLE. AS A SERVANT OF THE PEOPLE,
GOOD GOVERNMENT MUST BE
RESPONSIVE TO THEIR BASIC HUMAN
NEEDS, THEREFORE TO SECURE THESE
GOALS THIS CHARTER IS ORDAINED AND
ESTABLISHED.
C:1

ARTICLE I
NAMES AND BOUNDARIES
Section 101. Names and boundaries.
The City of Scranton shall continue to be a municipal corporation under its
present name, "City of Scranton". As used in this charter, the word "City"
shall mean the City of Scranton in Lackawanna County, created pursuant to
an Act of the Pennsylvania Legislature on April 23, 1866.
Section 101 CHARTER Section 101
C:3

ARTICLE II
POWERS OF THE CITY GOVERNMENT
Section 201. Governing body.
The Mayor and Council jointly shall be the governing body of Scranton City
Government.
Section 202. Division of powers in general.
The powers of the city government shall be divided among the executive and
legislative branches of the city government. Power belonging to one branch
of the government shall not be exercised by the other branch, except as
expressly provided in this charter.
Section 203. Allocation of certain powers and duties.
Where the city government has any power or duty and the responsibility
for the exercise of such power or the performance of such duty is not
fixed by this charter or by general law or special law, the power or duty
shall be exercised or performed as follows: All powers and duties of the
city government which are legislative in nature shall be exercised and
performed by the council. All powers and duties which are executive in
nature shall be exercised or performed by the Mayor or such other
executive officer of the city government as the Mayor may designate except
as otherwise specifically provided herein. In the event the nature of any
power or duty is uncertain, or the law creating such power or duty requires
cooperation between branches of the city government, the president of
council and the mayor shall fix the responsibility for the exercise of such
power or the performance of such duty.
Section 204. Powers of the city government.
The governing body of the City of Scranton shall exercise all powers which
may now or hereafter be possible for a municipal corporation in this state
to exercise except as may be limited by this charter. This Charter shall be
construed liberally in favor of the City of Scranton and the specific mention
of particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any
way the generality of the power herein sought to be conferred.
Section 205. Intergovernmental relations.
The City of Scranton shall have the power to enter into intergovernmental
cooperative arrangements as shall be provided under existing law.
Section 206. Eminent domain.
The City of Scranton may acquire by purchase, gift, devise, or condemnation
any property which may be needed by the City of Scranton for any public
use or purpose according to proceedings set forth in the Pennsylvania
Eminent Domain Code.1
Section 201 CHARTER Section 206
C:5
1. Editor's Note: See 26 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
Section 206 SCRANTON CODE Section 206
C:6
ARTICLE III
COUNCIL
Section 301. Composition.
There shall be a City Council of five (5) members, nominated and elected by
the qualified voters of the City at large. Another two (2) councilpersons shall
be elected at the municipal election immediately following the certification
of any census figures indicating that the population of the City of Scranton
has increased by at least 35,000 over the census figures of 1970.
Section 302. Terms.
The terms of all councilpersons shall be for four (4) years commencing at
noon on the first Monday of January following the year in which they are
elected, except that a councilperson appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve
from the date of his appointment until the next general election if more than
fifty (50) percent of the unexpired term remains. In all other instances the
appointment shall be for the unexpired term.
Section 303. Election and election procedures.
The regular election of councilpersons shall be held on the general
municipal election day as established from time to time by the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The procedure for nomination and
election of councilpersons shall be established by the general laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for municipal elections.
Section 304. Salary.
Each councilperson shall receive such a salary as Council shall from time
to time ordain. No salary increase shall become effective until the date of
commencement of the terms of councilpersons elected at the next regular
election after such salary increase, provided that such election follows the
adoption of such ordinance by at least six months. Councilpersons shall
receive no other compensation, direct or indirect, for the performance
of their duties. They shall be entitled to actual expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
Section 305. Qualifications.
A Councilperson shall be a citizen of the United States, shall have been a
resident of the City for at least one (1) year prior to the date of his election;
shall be at least the minimum voting age at the time of his nomination; and
shall reside in the City of Scranton throughout his term of service.
Section 306. Authority.
Council shall deal with all administrative agencies and employees only
as a body through the Mayor. No individual councilperson shall have any
Section 301 CHARTER Section 306
C:7
authority whatsoever under this Charter unless such authority is specifically
delegated by the Charter or by the Council acting as a body.
Section 307. Prohibitions.
No councilperson shall hold any other compensated city office or
employment during the term for which he is elected to Council and no
former councilperson shall hold any compensated appointive city office or
employment, nor shall be act as a paid consultant to the City until one (1)
year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected to Council.
Section 308. Vacancies.
The office of councilperson shall become vacant upon his death, resignation,
removal from office, failure to assume such office within thirty (30) days
after commencement of the term or in any manner authorized by law or by
this charter. A councilperson shall forfeit his office if he lacks at any time
during his term of office any qualifications for the office prescribed in this
Charter or by law or is convicted of a felony or a crime in violation of public
trust or is found in violation of the Code of Ethics by Council.
Section 309. Filling of vacancies.
If a vacancy exists in the city council, the city council shall, as provided in
the administrative code, fill such vacancy, within thirty (30) days thereafter,
by electing a qualified person to serve until the first Monday of January
when his successor who shall have been elected by the qualified electors
at the next municipal election, is duly sworn into office for the remainder
of the term of the person originally elected to said office. If, at any time,
vacancies should occur or exist in the membership of all members of city
council, the court of common pleas shall appoint a city council, of persons
properly qualified, who shall serve as herein provided.
Section 310. Organization of council.
The City Council shall meet at such times and places as shall be designated
in the Administrative Code. The Council shall meet to organize on the
first Monday in January following the municipal election. At this time, the
City Council shall elect, from among its members, officers who shall have
the titles of President and Vice-President, whom who shall serve for a
two (2) year term. The president shall preside at meetings of the Council
and perform such other functions as may be assigned by the charter, by
ordinance or by vote of the City Council. The vice-president shall act as
president during the absence or disability of the president.
Section 311. Oath of office.
Councilpersons prior to assuming office, shall take and shall sign an oath
of office as shall from time to time be prescribed by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such oath may be taken and signed before
a judge, district magistrate, or notary public of the Commonwealth of
Section 306 SCRANTON CODE Section 311
C:8
Pennsylvania, and no person shall be permitted to assume office until the
oath, in written form, is filed with the City Clerk.
Section 312. Investigations.
The Council may make investigations into the affairs of the City and the
conduct of any department, office, or agency in aid of its legislative powers
and functions, and may issue subpoenas for these purposes.
Section 313. Annual independent post audit.
Council shall provide for an independent audit of all City revenue and
accounts by a certified public accountant who has no private interest in
the fiscal affairs of the City government or any of its elected or appointed
officers. Council may provide for more frequent audits, as well as, special
audits, as it deems necessary and said special audits shall be conducted by
a certified public accountant. The complete annual audit shall be submitted
to City Council who shall conform to existing legislation. A summary of the
fiscal affairs shall be published in the local newspapers by May 31 of each
year.
Section 311 CHARTER Section 313
C:9

ARTICLE IV
OPERATION AND PROCEDURES OF CITY COUNCIL
Section 401. Meetings.
The Council shall meet once a week in regular session in regular Council
Chambers. It shall meet at such times and places as the Council may
prescribe by rule. Council may adjourn to a stated time for general business
or special business. If no quorum is present at a regular meeting a majority
of those who do meet may agree until the meeting is held. Special meetings
may be called by the President of Council or upon a written request of at
least one-third of the members thereof. A minimum of 24 hours legal notice
of such meetings shall be necessary. Council may recess for the purpose of
discussing in a closed or executive session limited to its own membership
any matter which would tend to defame or prejudice the character or
reputation of any person, provided that the general subject matter for
consideration is expressed in the motion calling for such session and that
final action thereon shall not be taken by the Council until the matter is
placed on the agenda.
Section 402. Quorum.
A majority of the whole body of Council shall constitute a quorum. Council
shall conduct no business except in the presence of a quorum.
Section 403. Records.
Council shall make and preserve minutes and records of its proceedings.
These records shall be open for public inspection during reasonable hours.
Section 404. Majority action.
The action of a majority of the Councilpersons present and entitled to vote,
unless otherwise stated in this Charter, shall be binding upon and constitute
the action of the Council.
Section 405. Operating rules.
The Council shall by resolution determine its own rules and order of
business. Voting shall be by roll call except on procedural matters and the
ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes. At least twenty-four (24)
hours before any regular meeting of Council, an agenda containing all items
which are scheduled to come before it at the meeting shall be publicly
posted. No action taken on a matter not included in the posted agenda shall
be effective unless the body first adopts by special vote a resolution that an
emergency exists and that the particular matter must be acted upon at a
meeting for the peace, health, safety or convenience of the city.
Section 401 CHARTER Section 406
C:11
Section 406. City clerk.
The council shall appoint at its biennial reorganization meeting an officer
of the city who shall have the title of City Clerk. The City Clerk shall give
notice of council meetings to its members and the public, keep the journal
of its proceedings and perform such other duties as are assigned to him by
this charter or by council.
Section 407. Citizens right to be heard.
Reasonable opportunity shall be provided for citizens and taxpayers to
address Council on agenda matters before a vote is taken. Procedures for
citizens participation shall be determined by Council.
Section 406 SCRANTON CODE Section 407
C:12
ARTICLE V
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section 501. Form of action by council.
Official actions of Council may be taken by adoption of an ordinance,
resolution or motion. All ordinances and resolutions must be in written
form. All action of a legislative character shall be taken by ordinance. All
other actions of Council shall be by resolution or motion unless otherwise
required in this Charter. All final action in adopting ordinances or
resolutions shall be by vote of a majority of all members of Council by roll
call and shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting. An extraordinary
majority of Council shall be necessary to override the mayor's veto.
Section 502. Action requiring an ordinance.
In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this
charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the City Council shall be by
ordinance which:
(1) Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter, or abolish
any city department office, or agency.
(2) Adopt or amend a code establishing a personnel system for the city.
(3) Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for
violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed.
(4) Levy and collect taxes.
(5) Grant, renew, or extend a franchise.
(6) Regulate the rate charges for its services by a municipally owned public
utility.
(7) Authorize the borrowing of money.
(8) Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the
City.
(9) Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted unless proposed by
initiative and referendum.
(10) Provide for the enactment, amendment, and implementation of any
Housing, Plumbing, Electrical, Zoning or Inspection Codes.
(11) Establish and regulate any revenue producing municipal enterprises.
(12) Adoption of a budget which shall include clear statement of wages,
hours, and fringe benefits to be established as conditions for
employment for all employees of the City.
(13) Supplemental appropriations so long as adequate revenue is available.
Section 501 CHARTER Section 502
C:13
Section 503. General ordinance procedures.
Every Ordinance shall:
Section 504. Action by mayor.
No ordinance or resolution shall become effective until it has been signed
by the Mayor or passed by an extraordinary majority of the Council over the
Mayor's veto. Subsequent to the final passage of any ordinance or resolution
by the Council, it shall be forwarded by the City Clerk to the Mayor for
his signature. The Mayor shall have a ten (10) day period in which to sign
or veto the ordinance. If the Mayor does not sign an ordinance within that
ten (10) day period it shall become effective and his approval shall be
assumed. If the Mayor chooses to veto an ordinance within the ten (10) day
period, he shall return the ordinance to the City Clerk within the ten (10)
day period together with a written veto message indicating the reasons for
his veto. The ordinance or resolution shall be placed on the next regularly
scheduled meeting of Council after receipt of the Mayor's veto message and
the question of passage of the ordinance or resolution over the Mayor's veto
shall be considered at that meeting.
Section 505. Codification.
One year following the adoption of this Charter and annually thereafter, the
Council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all city
ordinances and resolutions having the force and effect of law.
(14) Revision of taxing system.
(15) Meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public
peace.
(16) Enact legislation which shall establish the basis for taxation on real
estate within the City of Scranton.
(17) Merger and consolidations may be initiated by Mayor and Council.
However, final approval must be by referendum.
(1) Be limited to one subject matter which shall be clearly expressed in its
title.
(2) Contain an enacting clause.
(3) Be published by summary title following the first reading at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.
(4) Become effective within thirty (30) days of adoption unless otherwise
determined by this charter or law.
(5) Authenticated and entered in an ordinance book.
Section 502 SCRANTON CODE Section 505
C:14
ARTICLE VI
EXECUTIVE BRANCH
Section 601. Composition.
The executive branch shall consist of a Mayor and as many departments as
he shall recommend be ordained and established with the approval of City
Council.
Section 602. Election and term.
The Mayor shall be elected at large by the qualified electors of the City
of Scranton in conformity with the procedures for nomination and election
of the Mayor as established by the general laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for municipal elections. The term of office shall be four years
commencing at noon on the first Monday of January following the year in
which he is elected and ending at the commencement of the term for which
his successor is elected, except that a Mayor appointed to fill a vacancy
shall follow procedures stated in Article III-Section 309.
Section 603. Salary.
The Mayor shall receive a salary as recommended by Council and outlined
in the Administrative Code.
Section 604. Qualifications.
The Mayor shall be a citizen of the United States, a resident of the city and
a qualified voter for at least one year prior to his election and shall reside in
the City of Scranton throughout his term of service.
Section 605. Prohibitions.
The Mayor shall not hold any other compensated city office or employment
during the term for which he is elected as Mayor, and no former Mayor shall
hold any compensated appointive city office or employment nor shall be act
as a paid consultant to the city until one year following the expiration of the
term for which he is elected as Mayor.
Section 606. Vacancies.
The office of Mayor shall become vacant upon his death, resignation,
removal, forfeiture of his office, or failure to assume such office within
thirty (30) days after the commencement of the term thereof. The Mayor
shall forfeit his office if he lacks at any time during his term of office any
qualifications prescribed by this charter or by law or is convicted of a felony,
or a crime in violation of public trust or is found in violation of the Code of
Ethics by Council.
Section 601 CHARTER Section 607
C:15
Section 607. Filling of vacancies.
Should a vacancy occur in the office of Mayor, the City Council shall fill such
vacancy within thirty (30) days and in the ensuing period the President of
Council shall serve as Acting Mayor. If by reason of a tie vote or otherwise,
a vacancy in the office of Mayor shall not have been filled by the Council
within the time as limited herein, the Court of Common Pleas shall fill
such vacancy by appointment of a qualified person for the portion of the
unexpired term as herein provided.
Section 608. Oath of office.
The Mayor, prior to assuming office, shall take and shall sign an oath of
office as prescribed by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such
oath may be taken and signed before any judge, district magistrate, or
notary public of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and no person shall be
permitted to assume such office until the oath is filed with the city in written
form.
Section 609. Powers and authority.
The Mayor shall have the following specific powers, duties, and authority:
(1) All the normal powers that traditionally accrue to executive authority.
(2) Full charge and control of all executive departments in the city.
(3) Appoint a Deputy Mayor who may act as Mayor only in the event the
Mayor cannot fulfill his duties due to illness or temporary absence from
the city.
(4) The power to veto ordinances and resolutions except those affecting the
internal operation of council.
(5) Prescribe order in the city.
(6) Enforce ordinances and regulations in the city.
(7) The duty to sign such papers, contracts, obligations, and documents
that are properly presented to him, as required by law.
(8) Report to the citizenry and Council from time to time regarding the
state of affairs of the City.
(9) Represent the City in deliberations with intergovernmental bodies.
(10) Subject to any ordinance of the city establishing standards for
appointment, promotion, or discharge of employees, he shall have the
power to designate, promote or discharge all city employees except
those controlled by Civil Service.
(11) Power to suspend, with or without pay, all executive department
employees.
Section 607 SCRANTON CODE Section 609
C:16
Section 610. Executive organization.
In the executive branch there shall be established a Department of
Administration, a Department of Public Safety, a Department of Public
Works, a Department of Community Development and a Department of Law.
There is hereby established the position of "Business Administrator" which
position shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the advice and
consent of Council by an individual who shall be chosen solely on the basis
of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference
to his training and/or experience in municipal management. The Business
Administrator shall be responsible for assisting the Mayor and the operating
departments. The Business Administrator shall make periodic reports with
recommendations to the Mayor on the affairs of the City Government. The
heads of the various departments report to the Business Administrator,
who in turn shall be accountable to the Mayor. The Business Administrator
shall also be the director of a Department of Administration which shall
be established and maintained in the administrative structure of the City
of Scranton. The Department of Administration, under the direction of the
Business Administrator, shall have the following responsibilities:
(12) Authority to negotiate intergovernmental agreements with the approval
of Council.
(13) Draft and propose a budget.
(14) Authority to appoint and dissolve voluntary committees of interested
citizens to assist and advise him on all issues and matters pertaining to
his office.
(15) Authority to appoint, suspend, and remove members of his own staff as
may be authorized in the budget.
(16) Enforce any emergency powers that Council may establish by
ordinance to preserve health, welfare, and safety of the citizenry.
(17) Negotiate contracts.
(18) Execute all contracts authorized by Council.
(1) Assisting the Mayor in the preparation of the annual budget.
(2) Administration of the annual budget once it is adopted by the Council
including the installation of quarterly allotments within each
department.
(3) Administration of a centralized purchasing system.
(4) Establishment and administration of a centralized personnel system.
(5) Management of the property of the city.
(6) The development and administration of a system of performance
reporting and such other management and administrative
Section 609 CHARTER Section 610
C:17
responsibilities as may be assigned to it from time to time by the Mayor
or the Council.
Section 610 SCRANTON CODE Section 610
C:18
ARTICLE VII
CITY CONTROLLER
Section 701. Terms and qualifications.
The city controller shall be elected for a term of four years and until
his successor qualifies at the municipal election of 1975 and four years
thereafter, said term to begin on the first Monday of January following his
election. He shall be a qualified voter of the City of Scranton for at least one
year prior to his nomination. He shall reside in the city throughout his term
of service.
Section 702. Deputy controller; employees.
The controller shall appoint a deputy controller, preferably an accountant,
and may also appoint such employees of his office in such number and at
such compensation as is fixed in accordance with law. In all other respects
said employees shall be considered employees of the city.
Section 703. Vacancy.
Should a vacancy exist in the office of the Controller, the Deputy Controller
shall succeed to the office and duties until the next municipal election.
Section 704. Powers and duties of the city controller.
(1) Maintain accounting systems for the city government, in accordance
with generally recognized governmental accounting principles and
procedures, keeping accounting records and exercising financial and
budgeting controls.
(2) Prescribe the accounts to be kept by the city government, the form of
receipts, vouchers, bills or claims, warrants, requisitions, purchase
orders or any financial stationery to be used, and provide suitable
instructions thereof.
(3) Prescribe the times and the manner which moneys received by the city
government shall either be paid to the treasurer or deposited in a bank
account to the credit of the city government.
(4) Examine all contracts, purchase orders and other documents which
would result in or involve financial obligations against the city
government, and approve the same only upon ascertaining that there is
an unexpended, unencumbered and unimpounded balance in each
appropriation and allotment to which they are applicable sufficient to
cover such potential obligations.
(5) Audit before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other claims,
demands or charges against the city government and approve the same
only if duly authorized by appropriations or allotments of
appropriations.
Section 701 CHARTER Section 704
C:19
(6) Submit a monthly financial report to the Mayor and City Council,
showing the financial condition of various funds of the city government,
as well as, the condition of all items included in the adopted annual
operating budget, including estimated revenues, revenues received,
appropriations and allotments for such appropriations.
(7) Submit a report to the Mayor and to Council, at the time of the meeting
of Council preceding the first Monday in April of each year, of the audits
which he shall have made of the accounts of the preceding fiscal year of
all officers having charge, custody and control or disbursement of
public monies and other funds, and at the same time he shall file a copy
of said report with the Court of Common Pleas. Appeals therefrom may
be taken as provided by general law. A summary of said report shall be
prepared by the City Controller and posted in the center hall of the
main entrance of City Hall.
(8) The City Controller shall have the power to administer oaths or
affirmations in relation to any matter touching authentication of any
account, claim or demand of or against the city; and he shall have the
power to issue subpoenas to obtain the attendance of any officers of the
City or elsewhere whose accounts he is required or authorized to
adjust, audit, and settle and of any person whom it may be necessary to
examine as a witness in connection therewith. Any city officer refusing
to appear upon being subpoenaed shall be subject to removal from
office by the Mayor for such refusal; and any person, including a city
officer, willfully refusing to appear upon being subpoenaed, without
sufficient cause therefor, shall upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) and costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment in the Lackawanna County Jail for a period not exceeding
sixty (60) days.
(9) All bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of the city shall be
executed by the controller together with the mayor.
(10) The city controller shall give bonds to the city, as required by general
law, in a sum fixed by council at the time a controller assumes office.
Section 704 SCRANTON CODE Section 704
C:20
ARTICLE VIII
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Section 801. Personnel system.
Employment, promotion and discharge of all persons) from full-time
positions of employment with the city shall be accomplished through a
merit personnel system which shall be based on fitness for the position
demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence. The
Business Administrator and the Department of Administration shall develop
appropriate measures of competence for all positions within the city's
employment. These measures or tests must be approved by the Mayor
and Civil Service Commission of the city, which is hereby charged with
the responsibility of approving the tests or measures of competence for
all city positions and for hearing appeals from individuals who claim that
employment or promotion has been awarded to other than qualified
individuals. Individuals who are employed or promoted to positions in the
city service on the basis of the above mentioned tests or measures of
competence shall retain that position within the city service and shall not
be removed, demoted, disciplined, or discharged except for just cause.
Individuals removed, demoted, disciplined, or discharged from their
positions shall have the right to appeal the question of just cause to the
Civil Service Commission of the city. The decision of the Civil Service
Commission on any appeals shall be final and binding on the individual and
the Mayor and the Administration of the City.
Section 802. Testing and appointment procedures.
Examinations and measures of competence for full-time employment
positions may include, but not be limited to, any or all of the following:
physical examination, psychological examination, demonstrations of
physical dexterity, demonstrations of physical ability to perform specific
tasks, and written or oral examinations. To the extent feasible, the identity
of individuals being examined shall be shielded from the examiner until
after the individual has been rated on that section of the examination.
Each vacant full-time position shall be broadly advertised for a period of
at least ten working days by posting notice of the vacancy on bulletin
boards at city work locations and by advertising the vacancy in at least
one newspaper of general circulation in the city. Interested individuals
may apply for the vacant position and shall then be tested competitively,
utilizing the examinations and other measures of competence developed
by the Business Administrator and approved by the Mayor and the Civil
Service Commission. Individuals shall compete and shall be graded on
each examination or measure of competence approved for the position. The
Civil Service Commission shall finally assign a composite grade to each
individual competing for the position and shall certify the three individuals
receiving the highest grades to the Mayor for his consideration. The Mayor
may appoint anyone of the three top graded individuals to the vacant
position. Individuals who have been certified by the Civil Service
Commission to the Mayor and who have not been appointed by the Mayor
Section 801 CHARTER Section 802
C:21
shall be recertified by the Commission for the next vacant position of a
similar type and level which occurs within the city service.
Section 802 SCRANTON CODE Section 802
C:22
ARTICLE IX
BUDGET AND FISCAL MATTERS
Section 901. Fiscal year and budgetary process.
The fiscal year of the City of Scranton shall commence on January I and
end on December 31. The preparation of the annual operating budget shall
commence no later than September 15 for the subsequent budget year.
Section 902. Budget message.
By no later than November 15 of each fiscal year, the Mayor shall submit
to Council a budget and accompanying message which shall explain the
budget in fiscal terms and in terms of programs and services. It shall outline
the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing year, describe
the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the
current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenue, together with
the reason for such changes, summarize the city's debt position and include
such other material as the Mayor deems desirable.
Section 903. Budget.
The Budget shall contain:
Section 904. Capital budget.
The Mayor shall submit to the Council the first five year capital budget
after adoption of the charter, initially at least nine months prior to the final
date for the submission of the Budget. In all subsequent years, it shall be
(1) General summary of its contents.
(2) All estimated income, indicating the existing and proposed tax levies, as
well as, assessments, fees and charges.
(3) All proposed expenditures, including debt service for the ensuing year.
(4) The number of proposed employees in every job classification.
(5) Comparative figures for estimated or actual income expenditures for
current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding
fiscal year.
(6) Proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year detailed by offices,
departments, agencies, in terms of their respective work programs and
methods of financing such expenditures.
(7) Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed
by offices, departments, and agencies when practicable, and the
proposed method of financing such capital expenditures.
The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total
estimated funds available.
Section 901 CHARTER Section 904
C:23
submitted to the Council at least three months prior to the final date for the
submission of the budget. The capital budget shall contain:
Section 905. Council action on budget.
The Council shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation
in the city a summary of the budget and a notice stating the times where
the budget is available for public inspection. A public hearing shall take
place no later than December 1 of the fiscal year. After the public hearing
the Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending
the Budget, the Council may delete, increase, or decrease programs or
amounts, except for expenditures required by law or for debt service.
Should a change in a program or budgetary item exceed 10 percent of
the Mayor's recommended budget, another public hearing must take place
within 72 hours to justify said change. In no case can an amendment
increase authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total
estimated funds available. The Council must adopt an annual budget by no
later than December 15 of the fiscal year currently ending. If Council fails
to adopt a budget by December 15, then the Mayor's proposed budget shall
become the official budget for the city for the ensuing fiscal year.
Section 906. Council action on capital budget.
The Council shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation
in the City a general summary of the capital budget and a notice stating
the times and places where copies of the capital budget are available for
public inspection. Within two weeks after such publication, a public hearing
shall take place on the capital budget. The Council shall adopt a Capital
budget with or without amendments after the public hearing but no later
than December 15 of the current fiscal year.
(1) Summary of its contents.
(2) List of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken
during the five fiscal years ensuing with appropriate supporting
information as to the necessity for such improvement.
(3) Cost estimated, method of financing, and recommended time schedules
for such improvements.
(4) Estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be
constructed or acquired.
(5) Inventory replacement schedule for purchase and replacement of major
equipment.
The above information may be revised and extended each year with
regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of
construction or acquisition.
Section 904 SCRANTON CODE Section 907
C:24
Section 907. Tax levy.
Immediately after the adoption of the budget, Council shall by ordinance set
the tax rates and levy on various subjects of taxation.
Section 908. Public records.
Copies of the budget and capital program shall be made part of the public
records and shall be made available to the public for inspection.
Section 909. Amendments after adoption.
Supplemental, emergency and transfer appropriations should be defined in
the Administrative Code. Should a deficit develop the Mayor shall make
recommendations to minimize the deficit and for that purpose Council may
reduce other appropriations. No appropriation for debt service may be
reduced or transferred to resolve this deficit.
Section 910. Lapse of appropriations.
Every appropriation, except for capital expenditures, shall lapse at the close
of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered.
An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the
purpose for which it was made has been accomplished, but if three years
pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation,
the appropriation shall lapse.
Section 911. Administration of the budget.
The Business Administrator shall supervise the administration of each
annual budget. He shall utilize modern management practices for the
operation of the budget. Immediately after the budget has been enacted
and after consultation with the heads of the departments the Business
Administrator shall establish quarterly or such other periodic allotments
of appropriations to each department. At the beginning of each allotment
period, the amount specified shall become available to each department
for obligations during that period. Such allotments for any department may
be modified upon request of the head of the department, by the Business
Administrator, or by direction of the Mayor. The Business Administrator
shall file with the President of Council a copy of each allotment and
modification thereof. An encumbrance system of accounts to control
expenditures within the limits of the budget appropriation and the control of
such allotments shall be maintained by the Department of Administration.
Section 912. Payment of funds.
The payment of city funds shall not be made unless specifically provided for
in the budget and specifically authorized by the Controller.
Section 907 CHARTER Section 913
C:25
Section 913. Fidelity bonds.
Before entering upon the duties of their offices or positions, all executive
branch personnel shall execute and file with the City, corporate surety
bonds conditioned to honest and faithful performance of their respective
duties.
Section 913 SCRANTON CODE Section 913
C:26
ARTICLE X
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 1001. General authority.
Section 1002. Commencement of proceedings; petitioners'
committee, affidavit.
Any five qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum
proceedings by filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating they will
constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the
petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses
and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to
be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing
the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Promptly after the affidavit of the
petitioners' committee is filed the clerk shall issue the appropriate petition
blanks to the petitioner's committee.
Section 1003. Petitions.
(1) Initiative. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose
ordinances to the council, and if the council fails to adopt an ordinance
so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a
city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or
capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money,
levy of taxes or salaries of city officers or employees.
(2) Referendum. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to require
reconsideration by the council of any adopted ordinance, and, if the
council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or
reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to
the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinances or
ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes.
(1) Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least fifteen
(15) per cent of all votes cast for all candidates for Mayor at the last
mayoralty election.
(2) Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and
style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each
signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be
followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or
have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the
ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
(3) Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of petition shall have attached to it
when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he
personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that
all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to
be the genuine signatures of the person whose names they purport to
Section 1001 CHARTER Section 1003
C:27
Section 1004. Procedure after filing.
Section 1005. Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of an
ordinance.
When a referendum petition is filed with the city clerk, the ordinance sought
to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension
shall terminate when:
be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the
full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
(4) Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be
filed within thirty (30) days after the ordinance becomes law.
(1) Certificate of clerk; amendment. Within twenty days after the petition is
filed, the city clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency,
specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and
shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners'
committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of
the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the
petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the
clerk within two days after receiving the copy of his certificate and files
a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten days after
receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition
shall comply with the requirements of subsections (2) and (3) of section
1003, and within five days after it is filed the clerk shall complete a
certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly
send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by
registered mail as in the case of the original petition. If a petition or
amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee
does not elect to amend or request council review under subsection (2)
of this section within the time required, the clerk shall promptly present
his certificate to the council and the certificate shall then be a final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
(2) Council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the
petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it and
if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee
may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a
request that it be reviewed by the council. The council shall review the
certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and
approve or disapprove it, and the council's determination shall be final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
(3) Court review, new petition. A final determination as to the insufficiency
of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of
insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review shall not prejudice the
filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
(1) There is a final determination of insufficiency of a petition, or
Section 1003 SCRANTON CODE Section 1005
C:28
Section 1006. Action on petitions.
Section 1007. Results of election.
(2) The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition, or
(3) The council repeals the ordinance, or
(4) Thirty days have elapsed after a vote of the city on the ordinance.
(1) Action by council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
finally determined sufficient, the council shall promptly consider the
proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Article II or
reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the council
fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in
substance within sixty (60) days or fails to repeal the referred
ordinance within thirty (30) days after the date the petition was finally
determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred
ordinance to the voters of the city.
(2) Submission to voters. The vote of the city on a proposed or referred
ordinance shall be held not less than thirty (30) days and not later than
one year from the date of the final council vote thereon. If no regular
city election is to be held within the period prescribed in this
subsection, the council shall provide for a special election; otherwise,
the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except
that the council may in its discretion provide for a special election at an
earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or
referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls.
(3) Withdrawal of petition. An initiative or referendum petition may be
withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth day by four members of the
petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall
have no further force of or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be
terminated.
(1) Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed
initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in
the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by council. If
conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one
receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the
extent of such conflict.
(2) Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred
ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results.
Section 1005 CHARTER Section 1007
C:29

ARTICLE XI
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1101. Amendment procedures.
This Charter shall be amended in conformity with the provisions of Act 62
of 1972 53 P.S. Ch. 1/2, 2 as amended.
Section 1102. Election procedures.
The procedure for the nomination and election of the officers of the City of
Scranton shall be in conformity with the general laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania for municipal elections.
Section 1103. Code of ethics.
The Administrative Code of the City shall contain a Code of Ethics.
Section 1104. General laws.
All reference to the general laws contained in this charter refer to the
general laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and are intended to
include any amendments or revisions to such chapter and section or to the
corresponding chapters and sections of any rearrangement of the general
laws enacted subsequent to the adoption of the charter.
Section 1105. Gifts or donations.
Every department, board, or commission, may with council approval accept
on behalf of the city, gifts or donations of money, securities, or other
personal property, or the income of which shall be useful to the work of any
department, board, or commission.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 1-221 et seq.
Section 1101 CHARTER Section 1105
C:31

ARTICLE XII
CONTRACTS
Section 1201. Contracts.
All contracts whether for purchasing goods, properties, services, or supplies
or the leasing or renting of same, necessary for the administration of the
city shall be done in accordance with the requirements of and procedures
established in the Administrative Code.
Section 1201 CHARTER Section 1201
C:33

ARTICLE XIII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISION
Section 1301. Administrative Code.
The attached Administrative Code3 which contains a Code of Ethics will
become effective with the Charter and will remain in full force and effect as
the Administrative Code of the City of Scranton unless and until amended
by proper ordinance of the City Council, which may be finally adopted
only after a Public Hearing held following public notice stating clearly the
proposed amendment to the Administrative Code.
Section 1302. Elected officials.
Elected officials in office at the time of adoption of this charter shall remain
in office for the full term to which they were elected. Their powers, duties,
and responsibilities shall be modified at the effected date of this charter to
reflect the provisions herein.
Section 1303. Continuation.
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and procedures of the City of
Scranton Government shall remain in full force and effect unless and until
amended by a proper ordinance of City Council or action of the Mayor in
accordance with authority granted by this charter.
Section 1304. Salaries.
(a) Compensation to be paid to elected officials holding the positions of
Mayor, Councilperson, and Controller shall be established by the City
Council no later than February 1 of the year in which an election will be
held to fill any or all of these positions for a full four-year term.
Compensation of any elected officials occupying these positions shall
not be increased or changed in any way during their elected term of
office.
(b) The base annual salary for newly elected officials who assume their
office on or after January 1, 1980, shall be:
(1) Mayor--Twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per year.
(2) Controller--Eighteen thousand dollars ($18,000.00) per year.
(3) Councilperson--Seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) per year.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Code .
Section 1301 CHARTER Section 1304
C:35

ARTICLE XIV
SEVERABILITY
Section 1401. Constitutional construction.
The provisions of this Charter shall be severable; and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, the validity of any of the
remaining provisions of the Charter shall not be affected thereby.
Section 1401 CHARTER Section 1401
C:37

ARTICLE XV
EFFECTIVE DATE
Section 1501. Effective date.
The effective date of this Charter shall be the first Monday of January, 1976.
Section 1501 CHARTER Section 1501
C:39
The Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1501 SCRANTON CODE Section 1501
1:40
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Renumbering of Code
§ 1-1. Adoption of renumbering;
The ordinances and resolutions of the City of Scranton of a general and
permanent nature adopted by the City Council of the City of Scranton on
September 26, 1979, as the "1979 Codified Ordinances," as amended and
supplemented, are hereby readopted, revised, codified and consolidated
into chapters, articles and sections by General Code Publishers Corp.,
and as renumbered to consist of Chapters I through 445, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the City of Scranton (1997)," hereafter known and referred to as
the "Code."
§ 1-2. Additional changes.
The following changes are hereby adopted as part of the process of
republication:
§ 1-3. Supplementation of Code.
A. The terms "Justice of the Peace" and "District Magistrate" are hereby
revised to refer to "District Justice."
A. By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City
Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code.
The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit
properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which
have become obsolete or partially obsolete.
B. In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.
C. When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement)
may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as is necessary to do so
to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance materials into appropriate chapters,
sections and subsections.
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and
other subsections of the code printed in the supplement and make
changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:41
§ 1-4. Filing of copy of Code.
One copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the City Clerk and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy shall be certified
to by the City Clerk, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall
remain on file in the office of the City Clerk, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized and directed
by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the office of the City Clerk for the use
of the public. All changes in said Code and all legislation adopted by the
City Council subsequent to the effective date of this recodification which
the City Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when
finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
legislation are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-6. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code of part or portion thereof,
in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $600,
plus cost of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days.
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subsections to
be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new
material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers.
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning
to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may
be, and to insert section numbers to indicate the sections of the
Code.
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but
in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already
embodied in the Code.
(6) Editor's notes indicating sources of section, giving other
information or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the code
are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the
Code for the convenience of the person using the Code and are not
part of the legislation.
§ 1-3 SCRANTON CODE § 1-7
1:42
§ 1-7. When effective.
This ordinance and the 1997 Code shall become effective immediately upon
approval.
§ 1-8. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance or any
ordinances contained herein shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other
section, clause or provision or portion of this ordinance so long as it remains
legally enforceable minus the invalid portion. The city reserves the right to
amend this ordinance or any portion thereof from time to time as shall deem
advisable in the best interest of the promotion of the purposes and intent of
this ordinance and the effective administration thereof.
§ 1-9. Home Rule Charter.
This ordinance is enacted by the Council of the City of Scranton under the
authority of the Act of the Legislature, April 13, 1972, Act No. 62, known as
the "Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law," and any other applicable
law arising under the laws of the State of Pennsylvania.
§ 1-10. (Reserved)
§ 1-11. (Reserved)
§ 1-12. (Reserved)
§ 1-13. (Reserved)
§ 1-14. (Reserved)
§ 1-15. (Reserved)
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:43

ARTICLE II
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Sec. 1-5 of the 1979 Code]
§ 1-16. General penalty.
Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any city ordinance, an act
is declared unlawful or a nuisance or is prohibited, or the performance
of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared unlawful,
each violation or noncompliance thereof shall, where another penalty is not
otherwise provided for, subject the violator to a penalty for the violation
thereof, not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.) for one offense,
recoverable with costs, together with judgment of imprisonment not
exceeding ninety (90) days if the amount of such judgment and costs shall
not be paid; except where otherwise provided by state law.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:45

ARTICLE III
Terminology
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Sec. 1-2 of the 1979 Code]
§ 1-17. Definitions and rules of construction.
A. In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall control, except
those inconsistent with the manifest intent of Council as disclosed in a
particular provision, section or Article:
AUTHORITY — Whenever in this Code authority is given to an officer or
an act is required to be performed, such authority may be exercised and
such act may be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy
or subordinate, unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such
particular provision.
CALENDAR-COMPUTATION OF TIME — The calendar month or year.
The time expressed in days within which an act is to be done or a period
is to expire shall be computed by excluding the first and including
the last day, except if the last day be a Sunday or holiday, it shall be
excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole day of Sunday or any
holiday shall be excluded.
CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter of the City of Scranton, effective
January 5, 1976, and shall include any amendment to such Charter.
CITY and MUNICIPALITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
CODE — The Code of Ordinances, City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL — The Council of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY — The County of Lackawanna, Pennsylvania.
JOINT AUTHORITY — Words giving authority to a board, commission,
authority or to three (3) or more officers or employees or other persons
shall be construed as giving authority to a majority thereof, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
KEEPER or PROPRIETOR — Includes persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves
or as a servant, agent or employee.
LAND or REAL ESTATE — Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.
OATH — The word oath includes affirmation. When an oath is required
or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a
person having conscientious scruples to taking an oath. An affirmation
shall have the same force and effect as an oath.
OWNER — When applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner
or tenant in common of the whole or any part of such property.
PERSON — Extends and applies to associations, clubs, corporations,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic, as well as to individuals.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:47
PREMISES — The word "premises," when used as applicable to
property, extends to and includes land and buildings.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal, and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. The words "personal property" include
every kind of property except real property, and the words "real
property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
REASONABLE TIME — In all cases where provision is made for an act
to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be
deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such act or giving of such notice.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STATE or COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STREET — Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets
and other public ways in the City.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — As applied to buildings or land, shall extend
and be applied to any person holding a written or oral lease or who
occupies the whole or any part of a building or land, alone or with
others.
B. Word usage.
(1) Conjunctions. "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and," if the
sense so requires.
(2) Gender. Words importing the masculine shall extend and be applied
to the feminine and neuter genders.
(3) General rule. Except as otherwise provided in this section, words
and phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of
the English language. However, technical words and phrases and
such others as may have acquired a special meaning in the law
shall be construed according to such technical or special meaning.
(4) Number. Words in the plural include the singular and words in the
singular include the plural number.
(5) Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the
future.
§ 1-17 SCRANTON CODE § 1-17
1:48
Chapter 6
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter — See Charter.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:49

ARTICLE I
Short Title and Definitions
§ 6-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the City of Scranton."
§ 6-2. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter shall, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, mean or include the following:
CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
CITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL ELECTION — That election required by the Constitution of
Pennsylvania to be held in odd-numbered years.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, an association and a
corporation.
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-2
1:51

ARTICLE II
Legislative
§ 6-3. Council.
§ 6-4. City Clerk.
A. Legislative power. The legislative power of the City government shall be
exercised by the Council.
B. Number and election of Council. The Council shall consist of five
members elected at large.
C. Meetings of Council.
(1) Regular meetings of Council shall be held at least once a week at
such place and time as fixed by resolution of Council.
(2) All meetings of Council shall be open to the public and public notice
of such meetings shall be given as required.
(3) The proceedings of the Council shall be governed by rules and
regulations as fixed by resolution of Council.
(4) City Council shall recess for the month of August unless a majority
of members vote to conduct weekly or biweekly meetings, or at the
call of the President.
D. Appointment of Counsel. The Council of the City of Scranton shall
designate and appoint one person, learned in the law, to act as Counsel
for the Council of the City of Scranton. Such Counsel shall be an
attorney-at-law admitted and qualified to practice in the courts of this
Commonwealth. Such Counsel shall be the legal adviser of the Council
of the City of Scranton in matters pertaining to or affecting their office
and shall act as their Counsel in any litigation involving any matters or
things pertaining to or affecting their duties as members of City
Council. Said Counsel shall hold office at the pleasure of the City
Council and shall be paid a salary in an amount provided for and fixed
by City ordinance. [Amended by Ord. No. 14-1985]
A. Appointment. The City Clerk shall be appointed by a majority of the
members of Council and shall serve at the pleasure of Council.
B. Duties. The City Clerk shall perform such functions as may be required
by law and such duties as are assigned to him by Council.
C. Appointments and removal of employees. City Council and the City
Clerk will be responsible for the appointments and removal of
employees under the jurisdiction of the Office of City Council/City
Clerk.
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4
1:53

ARTICLE III
Executive
§ 6-5. Mayor.
A. Executive power. The executive power of the City government shall be
exercised by the Mayor.
B. Powers of Mayor.
(1) Enforcement and supervisory powers, reports and
recommendations. The Mayor shall enforce the Charter and
ordinances of the City and all general laws applicable thereto. He
shall, annually, report to the Council and the public on the work of
the previous year and on the condition and requirements of the City
Government and shall, from time-to-time, make such
recommendations for action by the Council as he may deem in the
public interest. The Mayor will present to City Council and the
public, within 30 days after the close of the quarter, a quarterly
report covering the City's state of affairs. He shall supervise all of
the Departments of the City government, with the exception of the
Office of City Council/City Clerk and the City Controller's Office
and shall require each Department to make annual and such other
reports of its work as he may deem desirable.
(2) Ordinances and resolutions, council meetings, votes, bonds, notes,
contracts and written obligations.
(a) Ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council shall be
submitted to the Mayor and he shall, within 10 days, including
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays and during normal working
hours, presently between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., after
receiving any ordinance or resolution, either return it to the
Council by delivering it to the City Clerk together with a
statement setting forth his objections thereto or to any item or
part thereof. If the 10th day falls on a Saturday, Sunday and/or
holiday, all ordinances and/or resolutions shall be returned by
4:00 p.m. on the following business/work day. The day it is
delivered to the Mayor's office and returned to City Clerk's
office will constitute the 10 days and not the date of signature
and/or veto. No ordinance or resolution or any item or part
thereof shall take effect without the Mayor's approval, unless
the Mayor fails to return an ordinance or resolution to the
Council within 10 days after it has been presented to him or
unless Council, upon reconsideration thereof, at its next
regular scheduled meeting, shall by a vote of extraordinary
majority, override the Mayor's veto.
(b) The Mayor may attend meetings of Council and may take part
in discussions of Council but shall have no vote except in the
§ 6-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-5
1:55
§ 6-6. Bureau of Law, Human Relations and Community Relations.
case of a tie on the question of filling a vacancy in the Council,
in which case, he may cast the deciding vote.
(c) All bonds, notes, contracts and written obligations of the City
shall be executed on its behalf by the Mayor and the Controller.
Said bonds, notes, contracts and written obligations are to be
signed by the City Solicitor as to form and attested to by the
City Clerk.
(3) Appointments and removal of Department directors. The Mayor
shall appoint all Department directors pursuant to the Charter,
including directors for federal and/or state projects. All
appointments shall be submitted by the Mayor to Council at least
48 hours prior to Council's next scheduled meeting. Council will
have 35 days after introduction to approve or reject the
appointment. If Council fails to take final action, the appointment
will automatically take effect.
C. Deputy Mayor. The Mayor shall designate any Department head or the
City Clerk to act as Deputy Mayor whenever the Mayor cannot fulfill his
duties due to illness or temporary absence from the City. During such
time the person so designated by the Mayor shall possess all the rights,
powers and duties of Mayor.
D. Vacancy in office of Mayor.
(1) If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, the City Council shall fill
such vacancy within 30 days thereafter by choosing a Mayor to
serve for the portion of the unexpired term.
(2) If by reason of a tie vote or otherwise a vacancy in the office of
Mayor shall not have been filled by Council within the time as
limited herein, the Court of Common Pleas, upon petition of 10 or
more qualified electors, shall fill such vacancy by the appointment
of a more qualified person for the portion of the unexpired term as
herein provided. Until such time as either Council or the Court fills
a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Council President shall serve
as acting Mayor and shall possess all the rights, perform all the
duties and exercise all the powers thereof.
A. Listing of Department. The City shall have the following Departments
under the supervision of the Mayor: [Amended by Ord. No. 84-1993]
(1) Administration.
(2) Community Development.
(3) Public Works.
(4) Law.
§ 6-5 SCRANTON CODE § 6-6
1:56
(5) Parks and Recreation.
(6) Police.
(7) Fire.
B. Department Directors. Each Department shall be headed by a Director,
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council, solely
on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications appropriate
to the duties of each Department. Each Department Director shall serve
subject to removal at the pleasure of the Mayor, during the term of
office of the Mayor appointing him and until his successor is appointed
and qualified. Subject to provisions of the Charter as to Civil Service
and personnel appointment, Department Directors shall appoint
subordinate officers and employees within their respective
Departments and may, with the approval of the Mayor, remove any such
officers or employees. In addition to the duties prescribed in general
law, each Director of a Department shall, under the direction of the
Mayor:
(1) Direct the performance of all duties and responsibilities required of
his Department or its subordinate agencies provided by state law,
this Administrative Code, or other ordinance of the City, and such
other duties as may be required by the Mayor which are not in
conflict with law or ordinance.
(2) Prescribe the internal organization of the Department and the
duties of subordinate officers and employees within the
Department.
(3) Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within the Department and modify such assignments as
need appears.
(4) Supervise the work of the Department through the provisions
provided by the Administrative Code and such other organization
units as the Director of the Department may find necessary or
desirable and supervise and direct the work of the employees of the
Department.
(5) Delegate to division heads such of his powers as he may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
(6) Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council in such form as
shall be approved by the Business Administrator on the work of the
Department during the preceding year and, upon request of the
Mayor and/or Council, file interim monthly reports for periods
requested.
(7) The Mayor may appoint acting Department Directors for a period
not to exceed 35 days. After 35 days, said person must be either
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:57
approved as permanent or dismissed. No Acting Director can be
reappointed to that classification for a period of six months.
C. Department of Administration. The Department of Administration shall
be headed by a Director who shall be known and designated as Business
Administrator and who shall perform the fiscal and administrative
service function for the City. The major responsibilities of the Business
Administrator and this Department are delineated in the Charter.
Additional areas of responsibility of this Department shall be to
supervise established standard personnel policies and practices, assist
the Mayor in the preparation of the budget, administer a centralized
purchasing system and a payroll system for all Departments of the City
government, maintain and supervise the City tax program and shall be
responsible for tabulation of all Departmental reports and such other
functions as by law or ordinance shall be assigned to this Department.
D. Department of Police and Department of Fire. [Amended by Ord. Nos.
19-1993; 84-1993]
(1) Department of Police. Department of Police shall carry out law
enforcement services for the protection of persons and property in
the City as provided for by Council. The Superintendent of Police
shall be responsible for emergency management of matters related
to the Department of Police.
(2) Department of Fire. The Department of Fire shall carry out fire
prevention and protection services for the protection of persons
and property the City has provided for by Council. The
Superintendent of Fire shall be responsible for emergency
management of matters relating to the Department of Fire.
E. Department of Community Development. The Department of
Community Development shall be responsible for those functions
required for the desirable growth and development of the City. The
Department shall include planning, zoning, community renewal, social
welfare inspections and health. [Amended by Ord. No. 84-1993]
F. Department of Public Works. The Department of Public Works shall
perform those activities required in construction, operation and
maintenance in the following City functions: engineering, which shall
include traffic maintenance; streets; municipal garage; the water
system, including meters, distribution and collection and storage
facilities; sewage, including the sewage treatment plant; maintenance;
and solid waste collection and disposal. This Department shall provide
engineering services not only for its own activities, but in cooperation
with the operating activities in other Departments of City government.
[Amended by Ord. No. 84-1993]
G. Parks and Recreation. The Department is responsible for planning,
organizing and conducting programs that are beneficial to the
community designed to improve the physical, psychological and social
§ 6-6 SCRANTON CODE § 6-6
1:58
economic well-being of its citizens. This includes programs for senior
citizens and for the physically and mentally handicapped. The
Department is also responsible for the servicing and maintaining of all
City-owned recreational facilities.
H. Department of Law.
(1) The Department of Law shall consist of a City Solicitor, who shall be
the head thereof and shall hold his office until his successor shall
be duly chosen and qualified. The City Solicitor shall be the legal
adviser to all of the executive Departments and officers under the
supervision of the Mayor and shall act as attorney and counsel for
the City in all actions, suits, citations or claims filed on behalf of or
against the City. The Mayor may appoint, with the advice and
consent of Council, such assistant Solicitor or Solicitors as he and
the City Solicitor deem necessary. Such appointments are to
include federal and/or state subsidized programs.
(2) The City Solicitor shall be furnished by the heads of the various
Departments with statements of claims of the City which remain
due and unpaid within 30 days from the date that said claims
became due and payable, and the City Solicitor shall enter such
claim in the City lien docket. Upon payment of any claim so
entered, the person receiving said payment shall forward to the
City Solicitor a satisfaction piece, and it shall be the duty of the City
Solicitor to cause satisfaction to be entered upon the proper
record.
I. Residence.
(1) Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CITY — Any reference to "City" herein shall be construed as
meaning the City of Scranton.
EMPLOYEE — Any reference to "Employee" herein shall be
construed as meaning all employees working for the City of
Scranton, including all those employees working in federally
funded projects under CETA or Community Development.
MOVING — Any reference to "Moving" herein shall be construed as
meaning a change of principal residence or location characterized
by the transfer of household and/or furnishings form one place to
another.
(2) On or after March 1, 1980, any new employee of the City of
Scranton who is not a resident of the City of Scranton at the time of
the commencement of employment shall have six months from the
time of commencement of employment to acquire a bona fide
residence within the corporate limits of the City. Such residence
must be maintained during continuous employment by the City or
be a cause for immediate termination of the employment
relationship between the City of Scranton and the new employee.
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:59
(3) On or after March 1, 1980, any current employee of the City of
Scranton shall be required to move back within the corporate limits
of the City of Scranton in the event that a change in their residence
is made by moving. If no change in the residence of a current
employee is made, they shall be allowed to remain in their present
residence outside of the City of Scranton's corporate limits despite
their status as an employee and such shall not be cause for
termination of employment.
(4) The best interest of the City of Scranton shall be most important in
employing a person or persons to work for the City. It shall be
within the sole discretion of the Mayor in evaluating the
circumstances of each candidate for employment to determine
whether or not to seek a waiver of the residency requirements
contained herein. If the Mayor decides to seek a waiver of these
residency requirements for a potential candidate or candidates for
employment by the City, the such an appointment to any and all
employment positions within the City shall not be made unless the
advice and consent of Council is secured prior to employment of the
potential candidates for employment in the same manner as
cabinet departmental heads and solicitors are confirmed.
(5) The Controller of the City of Scranton may, from time to time, after
the six-month period, require adequate proof of bona fide residence
within the City of Scranton.
§ 6-6 SCRANTON CODE § 6-6
1:60
ARTICLE IV
Authorities, Boards and Commissions
§ 6-7. Appointment of members to authorities, boards and
commissions. [Amended 8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 83-19984; 2-12-1999
by Ord. No. 13-1999; 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 24-2000]
A. Where the appointment of members to authorities, boards or
commissions is vested in the City of Scranton's governing body, such
member or members shall be appointed by resolution by the Mayor. All
appointment resolutions shall be submitted by the Mayor to Council at
least 48 hours prior to Council's next meeting. Council shall place the
appointment resolution on its agenda for introduction within 30 days of
receipt of the appointment resolution, and Council shall have 35 days
after placing the resolution on its agenda to approve or reject the
resolution. If Council fails to act on the resolution within this time
period, the appointment resolution will automatically become law.
B. The Mayor shall submit the appointment resolution to Council within 30
days of the expiration of an individual's term. If the Mayor fails to
submit the resolution within that time period, then Council shall fill the
vacancy by resolution.
C. Nothing in this section shall later, modify or affect Council's authority to
appoint to various boards and commissions when the appointment
power traditionally has been vested in Scranton City Council.
4. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 7-31-1998 and was overridden by
an extraordinary majority vote of the City Council.
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:61

ARTICLE V
Officers and Employees
§ 6-8. City Treasurer.
§ 6-9. City Controller.
A. The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor. He shall function
within the Department of Administration and report to the Business
Administrator.
B. The City Treasurer shall carry out such duties and exercise such powers
with respect to the receipt and disbursement of public moneys as are
provided by general law and, in addition thereto, shall receive for
deposit from the Departments of the City government, all City moneys
collected by such Departments.
C. The City Treasurer shall disburse all City funds in accordance with
warrants presented to him therefore and duly signed by the City
Controller and the head of the City Department or office requesting said
disbursement.
D. The City Treasurer shall give lawful fidelity bond to the commonwealth,
shall account for and pay over all moneys received by him as taxes,
penalties and interest with a surety company authorized by law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as surety, to be approved by
ordinance direct, for the accounting for and paying for overall moneys
received by him in his capacity as City Treasurer and the safekeeping
and payment over of all public moneys entrusted to his care.
E. Such fidelity bonds shall be purchased through a regular City
Purchasing Office based on competitive quotes and such bonds are to
be approved by City Council prior to the first day of the year he is sworn
into office.
F. The City Treasurer shall furnish insurance protection with an insurance
company authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to be
approved by City Council in an amount set by ordinance of City Council
against the loss of funds through fire, burglary, larceny, theft, robbery
or forgery.
G. All fees for such bonds shall be paid for by the City.
A. The City Controller shall maintain an encumbrance system of budget
operation. He shall receive from the Business Administrator and
Department heads such information regarding City properties and
obligations and City income and expenditures as he deems necessary to
carry out these duties. He shall furnish the Mayor and Council with a
report concerning these matters on a monthly basis. Said report shall
be submitted within two weeks after the close of the month. He shall
submit such other reports as he deems necessary.
§ 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-9
1:63
§ 6-10. Blanket bonds.
§ 6-11. Rules and regulations.
B. The City Controller shall review all warrants for the expenditures of
City moneys and, if satisfied that such expenditures are within the
budget allotment pertaining thereto, shall sign said warrant before it is
presented to the City Treasurer for payment. In so doing, he shall also
preaudit all claims and demands against the City prior to payment and
shall approve warrants for payment thereof only if satisfied that such
payment is in accordance with law. He shall only approve such warrants
that have sufficient appropriations and moneys available.
C. The City Controller-elect shall give lawful fidelity bonds for his honest
and faithful discharges of his official duties to the Commonwealth, with
a surety company authorized by law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, to act as surety, to be approved by the City Council, in
such sum as it may by ordinance direct.
D. Such fidelity bonds shall be purchased through the regular City
Purchasing Office based on competitive quotes and approved by City
Council prior to the first day of the year he is sworn into office. All fees
for such bonds are to be paid by the City.
E. The City Controller shall, with the advice and consent of Council,
appoint one person, learned in the law, to act as Solicitor for the office
of the City Controller. Such Solicitor shall be an attorney-at-law
admitted and qualified to practice in the courts of this Commonwealth.
Such Solicitor shall be the legal adviser of the City Controller in matters
pertaining to or affecting his office and shall act as his counsel in any
litigation involving any matters or things pertaining to or affecting the
duties of the office of the City Controller. The Solicitor shall hold office
at the pleasure of the City Controller and shall be paid a salary in an
amount provided for and fixed by City ordinance.
A. All employees of the City shall be covered by a public employee's
blanket bond with a surety company authorized by law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as surety to be approved by City
Council in such sum as it may by ordinance direct.
B. Such public employee's blanket bond shall be purchased through the
regular City Purchasing Office based on competitive quotes and
approved by City Council. All fees for such bonds are to be paid by the
City.
A. No rule or regulation made by any Department, office, agency or
authority of the City, except such as relates to the organization or
internal management of the City government or part thereof, shall take
effect until it has been approved as to form and legality by the City
Solicitor and approved by the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk.
§ 6-9 SCRANTON CODE § 6-11
1:64
City Council shall receive all such rules and regulations which shall be
filed with the City Clerk.
B. All such rules and regulations shall be published by posting in the Office
of the City Clerk for 20 days and in whatever other manner Council
deems desirable.
C. The City Clerk shall keep a current record of all rules and regulations
filed with him.
§ 6-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-11
1:65

ARTICLE VI
Fiscal
§ 6-12. Budget.
The budget shall be prepared by the Mayor with the assistance of the
Business Administrator.
§ 6-13. Appropriation. [Amended by Ord. No. 29-1994; 7-28-2003 by
Ord. No. 195-2003]
A. On or before April 1 of each year, the Director of the Department of
Community Development, with the assistance of the Bureau of
Planning, shall submit a proposed six-year capital improvement
program to the City Planning Commission for its study and
recommendations. On or before June 1 of each year, after receipt of the
report of the Planning Commission, the Mayor shall submit the program
to City Council, incorporating any of the recommendations of the
Planning Commission which he deems advisable. The program
submitted may be modified by a majority of the members of Council.
Passage of the six-year capital improvement program shall be subject to
annual revision.
B. The Business Administrator shall supervise the administration of each
annual budget. Immediately after the budget has been enacted and
after consultation with the heads of the Departments, he shall establish
quarterly or such other periodic allotments of appropriations to each
Department. At the beginning of each allotment period, the amount
specified shall become available to each Department for obligation
during that period. Such allotments for any Department may be
modified, upon request of the head of the Department, by the Business
Administrator, or by the direction of the Mayor. The Mayor must file
with the Controller and the City Council a copy of each Department/
Bureau allotment and modification thereof. An encumbrance system of
accounts to control all expenditures within the limits of budget
appropriations and to control such allotments shall be maintained by
the City Controller. If at any time during the budget year, the Business
Administrator shall ascertain the probability of a cash deficit, he shall
reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several offices,
Departments and agencies. Upon such reconsideration and with the
approval of the Mayor and Council, the Business Administrator shall
revise the allotments so as to forestall, so far as possible, the making of
commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenue to be realized
during the fiscal year.
A. No monies shall be paid out of the City Treasury except upon
appropriation previously made by Council and upon warrant pursuant
thereto, which warrant shall explicitly state the purpose for which the
money is to be drawn. No work shall be hired to be done, no materials
purchased, no contracts made and no order issued for the payment of
§ 6-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-13
1:67
§ 6-14. Contracts. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 76-1980; 29-1981;
105-1981; 20-1982; 44-1982; 66-1984; 112-1986; 101-1991;
76-1991; 47-1993]
any monies in any amount which will cause the sums appropriated
to specific purposes to be exceeded. Council may make supplemental
appropriations for any lawful purpose from funds on hand or estimated
to be received within the fiscal year and not appropriated to any other
purpose. Such supplemental appropriations shall be considered by
Council as an ordinance amending the annual budget. The Business
Administrator shall have the power to authorize the transfer of any
unexpended balance of any appropriation item, or any portion thereof,
within a department, but if it is between departments, then the
Business Administrator shall make such transfer with the approval of
Council.
B. Expenditures from the contingency fund shall be made only upon the
express approval of Council.
A. For the purchase, leasing or renting of goods, properties, services or
supplies, all contracts with the exception of those as specified in
§ 6-14C that are in the amount of $19,400 or in excess thereof shall be
bid competitively through sealed bids. All such bids/specifications and
invitations to bidders must be advertised twice on different days in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City of Scranton. For
purchasing, leasing or renting of goods, properties, services or supplies
in the amount of $10,500 to $19,399.99, the Business Administrator
and the City Controller will secure three written or telephonic price
quotations, and will be responsible for selecting the lowest, most
responsible bidder. The City shall be deemed to reserve the right to
reject any and all bids in connection with any such contract and to index
any increases as per the Department of Labor and Industry Notices
Consumer Price Index Adjustment of Base Amounts on Bids Effective
January 2015, regarding requirements for public bids, attached hereto
as Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference
thereto. [Amended 12-2-2002 by Ord. No. 86-2002; 4-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 26-2004; 3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010; 9-24-2015 by
Ord. No. 108-2015; 3-10-2016 by Ord. No. 12-2016]
B. The bidding requirements as established by the Administrative Code
may be waived in the event of an emergency. An emergency shall exist
when declared by the Mayor and certified by the Controller. All
emergencies must be submitted to City Council, in writing, within 24
hours of declaration by the Mayor and City Controller.
C. Professional services contracts. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010; 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 109-2015]
(1) The City of Scranton will publicly advertise for professional
services when the payment for such is expected to exceed the
threshold of $19,400 in one calendar year.
§ 6-13 SCRANTON CODE § 6-14
1:68
(2) Professional services shall include any profession or occupation
which requires the issuance of a license to practice that profession
or occupation within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(3) Professional services shall exclude any profession or occupation
which is required to be used and/or selected from an approved list
provided by an insurance company, selection of arbitrator(s)
pursuant to an agreement to which the City is a party and/or the
engagement of an expert witness to consult with the City or testify
on behalf of the City at the time of hearing or trial.
(4) The City has the right to index any increases as per the Department
of Labor and Industry Notices Consumer Price Index Adjustment of
Base Amounts on Bids Effective January 2015, regarding
requirements for public bids, attached hereto as Exhibit B,
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference thereto.
D. All contracts must be reviewed and approved by the City Solicitor and
signed by the Mayor and the Controller or their designated substitutes
and attested to by the City Clerk.
E. The following purchases, lease or renting for goods, properties,
services or supplies, shall not require advertising or bidding as
required in the Administrative Code:
(1) Those for maintenance or repair of any public work of the City in
the event that an emergency arises with regard to such work and
there is insufficient time to proceed as set forth in the
Administrative Code.
(2) Those where a particular property is needed, is subject to patent or
copyright, and the need cannot be satisfied by an equally
satisfactory alternative.
(3) Those involving public utility service under tariffs on file with the
appropriate governmental regulatory agency, those made with a
state or local or federal government or any agency or public
authority thereof as long as the price for any goods purchased or
leases therefrom is not in excess of that fixed by the seller or lessor.
F. In order to provide for the protection of the City, contracts awarded
must require a proper bond, check or other security to be forfeited for
nonperformance; where appropriate, a bond for the protection of
persons furnishing material to or supplying or performing labor for the
City in carrying out of any contract for no fewer than $1,500 and in
excess of $4,000 for construction, repair or addition to any public work
or improvement; whenever the contract involves the employment of
labor that the contractor will accept, with respect to the work involved,
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation Act5 and will
either insure his liability from the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
5. Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 6-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-14
1:69
and Industry; whenever the contract involves employment of labor that
the contractor or any subcontractor will not discriminate on account of
race, color, creed or national origin in his hiring of employees for the
performance or work under the contract.
G. This section has specific limits pertaining to the purchase of used
vehicles. The term “vehicles” means police vehicles, cruisers and/or
detective cars and accessories thereto. When purchasing used vehicles,
the bidding limits set forth in the subsection above are not applicable.
The bidding limits set forth herein pertain to the unit cost of a given
vehicle. For the purchase of used vehicles with a unit cost of up to and
including $10,000, no bidding is necessary. The City of Scranton may
engage in direct negotiation with the vendor of said used vehicles. For
used vehicles for which the unit price exceeds $10,000 but is less than
$20,000, the City of Scranton must obtain three written quotations, as
set forth in the subsection above. If the unit price is $20,000 or more,
then the vehicle must be purchased through formal bidding as set forth
in the subsection above. [Added 4-12-2007 by Ord. No. 81-2007]
§ 6-14 SCRANTON CODE § 6-14
1:70
ARTICLE VII
Code of Ethics
[Amended by Ord. No. 40-1990; 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 51-2019]
§ 6-15. Declaration of policy.
A. The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to
the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper
channels of governmental structure; that public office not be used for
personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its
government.
B. Each official or employee of the City of Scranton must be constantly on
guard against conflicts of interest. No official or employee should be
involved in any activity which might be seen as conflicting with his/her
responsibilities to the City. The people of Scranton have a right to
expect that their representatives act with independence and fairness
towards all groups and not favor a few individuals or themselves.
C. The following principles, although not representing substantive rights,
are fundamental driving forces for officials and employees of the City of
Scranton in everything they do.
(1) Public office as a public trust. Public servants should treat their
office as a public trust, only using the powers and resources of
public office to advance public interests, and not to attain personal
benefits or pursue any other private interest incompatible with the
public good.
(2) Independent, objective judgment. Public servants should employ
independent, objective judgment in performing their duties,
deciding all matters on the merits, free from avoidable conflicts of
interest and both real and apparent improper influences.
(3) Accountability and democratic leadership. Public servants should
honor and respect the principles and spirit of representative
democracy and set a positive example of good citizenship by
scrupulously observing the letter and spirit or laws and rules.
(4) Respectability and fitness for public office. Public servants should
safeguard public confidence in the integrity of government by
being honest, fair, caring and respectful and by avoiding conduct
creating the appearance of impropriety or which is otherwise
unbefitting a public official. In recognition of these aforementioned
goals and principles, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics to
be administered by the Board of Ethics. The purpose of this Code is
to establish ethical standards of conduct for all officials and
employees of the City of Scranton, its agencies and authorities,
whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, by providing
guidelines to clarify actions or inactions which are incompatible
§ 6-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-15
1:71
§ 6-16. Board of Ethics.
with the best interests of the City and by directing disclosure
of private, financial or other interests in matters affecting the
City. The provisions and purpose of this Code and such rules,
regulations, opinions and disciplinary decisions as may be
promulgated by the Board pursuant hereto, and under provisions
of Article XI of the Charter, are hereby declared to be in the best
interest of the City.
(5) To the extent and only to the extent this code conflicts with the
existing rights of labor or its members by statute or contract then
such statute or contract shall supersede this code.
A. Composition and structure of Board.
(1) Composition. The Board established hereunder shall be composed
of five residents of the City of Scranton. The members to be
appointed shall be appointed as follows: two by the Mayor, two by
City Council and one by the Controller. Thereafter, the
appointments or reappointments shall be made by the Mayor, City
Council or the Controller to their respective appointed positions.
(2) Terms of service. Members of the Board shall serve for terms of
three years, except that members shall continue to serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified. The terms of the initial
members shall be staggered, with one member serving a term of
one year, two members serving for two years, and two members
serving for three years. The initial Board's staggered terms shall be
determined by lottery.
(3) Vacancy. An individual appointed to fill a vacancy occurring other
than by the expiration of a term of office shall be appointed for the
unexpired term of the member he/she succeeds and is eligible for
appointment thereafter according to the terms herein.
(4) Election of Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. The Board shall
elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson annually at a meeting
held in January of each year. The Vice Chairperson shall act as
Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson or in the event of a
vacancy in that position.
(5) Quorum. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum, and the votes of a majority of the members present are
required for any action or recommendation of the Board.
(6) Staff. The Board shall appoint a Solicitor, a Secretary and such
other staff as may be deemed necessary. The Solicitor, Secretary
and such other staff as may be necessarily appointed need not be
members of the Board.
§ 6-15 SCRANTON CODE § 6-16
1:72
(7) Meetings. The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or at
the call of a majority of its members.
(8) Investigative officer. The Board shall appoint an investigating
officer as set forth herein. The Board shall, from time to time,
determine an amount to be paid as reasonable compensation to the
investigating officer as payment for such services. The
investigative officer shall be a member in good standing of the
Lackawanna County Bar and shall have so been for at least five
years. The investigative officer need not be a resident of the City of
Scranton and shall not be a Board member. The investigating
officer is authorized to retain the services of investigators and may
only delegate nondiscretionary functions.
B. Powers and duties. The powers and the duties of the Board of Ethics
may be summarized as follows:
(1) Give advice as to the application of the ethics provisions of the
Charter of the City of Scranton and this Code of Ethics.
(2) Receive and dispose of complaints of violations of the ethics
provisions of the Charter and Code of Ethics, and exercise
discretion in declining to pursue an investigation if such a course
would be in the best interest of the citizens of the City of Scranton
or where the activity complained of amounts to no more than a de
minimis violation.
(3) Appoint an investigating officer to conduct investigations and to
issue findings reports where appropriate.
(4) Hold hearings, issue subpoenas and compel the attendance of
witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, require evidence on
any matter under investigation before the Board, and issue orders,
including but not limited to those related to adjudications and
penalties.
(5) Conduct educational programs to promote the ethical conduct of
public officials, City employees, and individuals and groups doing
business with the City.
(6) Adopt rules and regulations to administer, implement, enforce and
interpret the Code of Ethics.
(7) Annually review the statements of financial interest filed pursuant
to § 6-18 of the Code.
C. Prohibitions. Due to their special position, Board members have a
higher duty than other public officials to avoid conflicts of interest.
Respect for the Code can be maintained only if members are models of
ethical behavior. The prohibitions in this section are in addition to the
duties, responsibilities or obligations imposed upon the Board members
as public officials under other provisions of the Code.
§ 6-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-16
1:73
§ 6-17. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Code, the following terms shall have the following
definitions. All other words and phrases shall have their normal meaning
unless further defined herein.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE — The Administrative Code of the City of
Scranton.
APPEARANCE OF IMPROPRIETY — The perception that wrongdoing or
misconduct may have occurred; when a reasonable person could reasonably
believe that improper actions have taken or are taking place.
BOARD — The Board of Ethics of the City of Scranton.
CANDIDATE — An individual who files nomination papers or petitions for
City elected office or who publicly announces his or her candidacy for City
elected office.
CANDIDATE CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION — Money, gifts, forgiveness of
debts, loans or things having a monetary value incurred or received by a
(1) No member may hold or campaign for any other public office.
(2) No member may hold office in any political party or political
organization or political committee.
(3) No member may hold a position of employment or appointment
with any municipal government or any board or commission formed
by the City of Scranton.
(4) No member may actively participate in or contribute to any
political campaign in the City of Scranton for a candidate running
for or from the office of the Mayor, City Council, Controller and Tax
Collector. This does not abridge the right of a member to vote or
attend a debate, speech or similar event that is held primarily for
the purpose of communicating a candidate's platform or position on
issues of public concern.
(5) No member shall receive compensation but shall be reimbursed by
the City for documented expenses actually incurred.
D. Preservation. Complaints and proceedings pending before the Board at
the time this Code is adopted shall be preserved insofar as they are
consistent with recent orders of the Court of Common Pleas of
Lackawanna County. The Board shall take any and all steps necessary to
adjudicate all pending complaints so as to comply with said orders,
including the establishment of a committee of Board members not
previously involved in the disposition of said complaints to adjudicate
and dispose of the same. Said committee shall consist of at least three
Board members and shall act with the authority of the Board in
adjudicating said complaints and instituting penalties and restitution
where applicable.
§ 6-16 SCRANTON CODE § 6-17
1:74
candidate or his/her agent for use in advocating or influencing the election
of the candidate.
CANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEE — The one political committee used
by a candidate to receive all contributions and make all expenditures.
CHARTER — City of Scranton Home Rule Charter.
CITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
CITY ELECTED OFFICE — The offices of Mayor, City Council, Controller,
and Tax Collector.
CODE — City of Scranton Code of Ethics.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — A situation(s) or potential situation(s) in which
a public official or employee uses or may use his/her office or employment
for the private gain of himself/herself; a member of his/her immediate
family; or a business of any type with which he/she or a member of his/her
immediate family has a material interest.
CONTRACT — An agreement or arrangement for the acquisition, use or
disposal by the City or a City agency or instrumentality of consulting or
other services or of supplies, materials, equipment, land or other personal
or real property. This term shall not mean an agreement or arrangement
between the City or City agency or instrumentality as one party and a City
Official or City Employee as the other party, concerning his/her expense,
reimbursement, salary, wage, retirement or other benefit, tenure or other
matters in consideration of his/her current public employment with the City
or a City agency or instrumentality.
CONTRIBUTION — Money, gifts, forgiveness of debts, loans or things
having a monetary value incurred or received by a candidate or his/her
agent for use in advocating or influencing the election or candidacy of the
candidate.
COVERED ELECTION — Every primary, general, or special election for City
elected office.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — An official elected or appointed to fill a position
normally filled by election.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual receiving full-time salary or wages and
benefits from the City of Scranton.
GIFT —
The term "gift," for the purposes of this Code shall mean: any gratuity,
benefit, or any other thing of value, which is accepted by, paid for, or
given to a City employee or City official, or by another individual or
organization on behalf of a City employee or City official, either directly
or indirectly, without consideration of equal or greater value.
A.
This definition may include, by way of illustration and without limitation
to, the following:
B.
§ 6-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-17
1:75
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — A parent, spouse, living partner, child, brother, or
sister, natural or adopted.
INDIVIDUAL — A person.
MATERIAL INTEREST — Direct or indirect ownership of more than 5% of
the total assets or capital stock of any business entity.
NO-BID CONTRACT — A contract (as defined herein), which is not awarded
or entered into pursuant to an open and public process, in accordance
with Pennsylvania law, including prior public notice and subsequent public
disclosure of all proposals considered and contracts awarded related
thereto. A no-bid contract excludes sole-source procurement, contracts
below the bidding threshold, and those contracts arising out of an
emergency declaration.
OFFICER — Investigating officer appointed by the Board to oversee the
investigative procedures on behalf of the Board. The investigating officer
need not be a Board member and may be compensated as any other member
of the staff.
Preferential rate or terms on a debt, loan, goods, or services, which
rate is below the customary rate and is not either a government
rate available to all other similarly situated government employees
or officials or a rate which is available to similarly situated
members of the public by virtue of occupation, affiliation, age,
religion, sex, or national origin;
(1)
(2) Transportation, lodging, or parking;
Food or beverage, other than that consumed at a single sitting or
event;
(3)
Membership dues or admissions to cultural or athletic events,
which exceed $250 per calendar year in the aggregate and $100
per calendar year from any single person, agent or other interested
party; and/or
(4)
Political contributions in excess of those limitations set forth
hereinafter or in any other applicable laws or regulations, including
but not limited to, the City Codified Ordinances.
(5)
The term "gift," for purposes of this Code, shall explicitly exclude:
(1) Gifts from direct family members;
Nonpecuniary awards publicly presented, in recognition of public
service;
(2)
(3) An occasional nonpecuniary gift of nominal value;
(4) Complimentary travel for official purposes; and/or
(5) Admissions to charitable, civic, political or other public events.
C.
§ 6-17 SCRANTON CODE § 6-17
1:76
OFFICIAL — Any elected or appointed paid or unpaid member of the
government of the City of Scranton, including without limitation members
of any City boards, authorities, and commissions.
ORGANIZATION — An individual, partnership, corporation, or sole
proprietorship, whether for profit or not for profit, or any other form of
business organization.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY — Any activity which promotes the candidacy of any
individual seeking elective office, or the advocacy of any political party or
position, including but not limited to the circulation of election petitions and
the sale or distribution of fund-raising items or tickets.
POLITICAL COMMITTEE — Any committee, club, association, political
party, or other group of persons, which receives contributions or makes
expenditures for the purpose of influencing the outcome of a covered
election, including but not limited to: a) political action committees
recognized under Section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code, and b) the
candidate political committee of a candidate in a covered election.
POST-CANDIDACY CONTRIBUTION — A contribution made to a former
candidate or political committee for use in retiring debt that was incurred to
influence the outcome of a covered election, or for the purpose of defraying
the cost of transition or inauguration of a candidate elected to City elected
office.
PRE-CANDIDACY CONTRIBUTION — A contribution made to a political
committee that: a) has been transferred to, or otherwise becomes available
for expenditure by, a candidate for City elective office; and b) was made
before such candidate became a candidate.
PRIVATE GAIN — Of personal benefit, whether economic, social, or
otherwise.
VIOLATION — Any activity that is restricted by the ethics provisions of the
Charter and/or the Code.
§ 6-18. Statement of financial interests.
Any official or employee of the City or authorities or boards with
decisionmaking authority, including advisory boards, shall file with the City
Clerk a statement of financial interests for the preceding calendar year by
May 1 of each year, as defined by the State Code of Ethics. Any individual
appointed to such a position after May 1 has 15 working days to file the
statement of financial interest. All statements must be made available for
public inspection and copying at an amount not to exceed actual costs. All
statements must be posted on the City's website.
§ 6-19. Disclosure of confidential information.
A. City employees and officials often have access to important nonpublic
information regarding the property, operations, policies or affairs of the
City. Such information may concern, among other things, employees
and officials, real estate transactions, expansion of public facilities, or
§ 6-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-19
1:77
§ 6-20. Prohibited behaviors.
Every City official and employee is a public servant. Public servants must
treat members of the public fairly and equitably. Receipt of money, favors,
gifts, gratuities, invitations, food, drink, loans, promises or other benefits
(collectively and subsequently referred to in this section as "gifts") offered
to a public servant because of that person's position may create the
appearance of a conflict interest, if not an actual conflict of interest.
Similarly, solicitation of gifts by a public servant in that person's capacity as
a public servant, for that person's own benefit, likely establishes a conflict
of interest.
Public servants, in performing their duties, must work for the benefit of
the community as a whole, giving equal consideration to each member of
the public, and doing so without giving special regard because of finances,
political affiliations, gender, orientation, creed, or other categorization.
Conflicts of interest betray the trust of the public with its government and
violate traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.
other City projects. Using or furnishing information that would place
employees or recipients in an advantageous position over the general
public constitutes a violation of public trust. Anyone who is privy to
confidential information may not disclose that information to any
private citizen and should disclose it to other public employees only if
appropriate and in the normal course of their duties as employees or
officials of the City of Scranton.
B. Should an official or employee find himself/herself in any direct or
indirect financial interest with any person or other entity proposing to
contract with the City, that individual must fully disclose said interest
and refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the
transaction or the making of such decision, contract or sale. Violation of
this section shall render the contract voidable by the decisionmaking
body or upon review and authority of the Board of Ethics.
A. Conflicts of interest.
(1) Employees and officials of the City may not bid on or have a
material interest in:
(a) The furnishing of any materials, supplies or services to be used
in the work of the City;
(b) Contracts for the construction of any City facility;
(c) The sale of any property to the City or the purchase of any
property from the City unless said property is offered to the
general public at auction or by competitive bid.
(2) Employees and officials of the City may not:
§ 6-19 SCRANTON CODE § 6-20
1:78
(a) Use or attempt to use their official position to secure special
privileges or exemptions for themselves or others;
(b) Accept employment or engage in any business or professional
activity which might reasonably be expected to require or
induce the disclosure of confidential information acquired by
the public officer or employee by reason of their official
position;
(c) Disclose to others, or use for personal benefit, any confidential
information gained by reason of an official position;
(d) Accept other employment which might impair the
independence or judgment of the public officer or employee in
the performance of public duty;
(e) Receive any compensation for official services to the City from
any source other than the City;
(f) Transact any business in an official capacity with any other
business entity of which the public officer or employee is an
officer, director, agent, member, or owns a material interest;
(g) Have personal investments in any enterprise which will create
a substantial conflict between any private interest and the
public interest.
(3) Outside employment. City officials or employees may accept, have,
or hold any employment or contractual relationship with any
individual, partnership, association, corporation (for-profit or
nonprofit), utility or other organization, whether public or private,
but only if the employment or contractual relationship does not
constitute a conflict of interest or impair their efficiency.
B. Gifts: solicitation; acceptance.
(1) Restriction on acceptance/solicitation of gifts by City officials and
employees.
(a) No City official or employee or member of his/her immediate
family shall accept or solicit any gift, gratuity, money, favors,
invitations, food, drink, loans, promises, or other benefits
(collectively referred to as "gifts") from any person, firm,
corporation, or association which to his knowledge is
interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in
business dealings with the City, provided that City official or
employee has any influence, directly or indirectly, in any
manner whatsoever, in the City's participation in those
business dealings.
(b) No City official or employee or member of his/her immediate
family shall accept or solicit any gift that may in any
§ 6-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-20
1:79
circumstance appear to be an attempt to influence that official
or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties.
(c) City officials and City employees are also subject to those
related, applicable ordinances of the City Charter, Codes of the
City of Scranton and the Pennsylvania Public Official and
Employee Ethics Act (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 1101.1 et seq., as
amended), and all related statutes and regulations.
(2) Exceptions. A City official, employee, or member of his/her
immediate family may accept, but not solicit, the following gifts,
notwithstanding that the person giving the gift may be seeking
official action from that officer or employee:
(a) Hospitality provided at a residence when the donor is present;
(b) Food, beverages, or entertainment provided at an event for
which attendees do not have to purchase a ticket;
(c) Food and beverages provided to all participants in the ordinary
course of a meeting where the food and beverages are
provided at the site of the meeting;
(d) Gifts of food (cookies, candy, etc.) received shall be made
available for consumption on the premises to the public and
employees when such offer may not be reasonably seen as
seeking to influence the public servants or to induce more
favorable treatment toward the donor;
(e) Gifts resulting solely from the officer's or employee's outside
employment, or from his or her membership in a bona fide
charitable, professional, educational, labor, or trade
organization;
(f) Rebates or discounts offered to members of the general public
or a class of persons;
(g) Free admission to an event, including food, beverages, and
entertainment, if the officer or employee is a guest speaker;
(h) Free admission to political events, including food and
beverages, if the officer or employee is permitted to engage in
political activity in coordination with candidates, political
parties, or partisan political groups;
(i) Nominal, de minimis tokens of appreciation given at public
appearances;
(j) Gifts totaling less than $50 from a single individual during a
single calendar year.
(3) Return of gifts: reporting.
§ 6-20 SCRANTON CODE § 6-20
1:80
(a) In all but de minimis cases, all gifts received must be publicly
recorded and submitted to the City Clerk on a form from the
City's Board of Ethics specifying: the donor; the address of the
donor; the date received; a concise description of the gift; and
the value of the gift. A gift having a value in excess of $50 may
not be considered de minimis.
(b) The City Clerk shall file the gift disclosure form with the Board
of Ethics and have the gift form uploaded onto the City's
website.
(c) The Ethics Board shall designate two members (hereinafter the
Subcommittee) who will evaluate the propriety of gifts valued
at $50 or more, and determine if the gift must be returned to
the donor. The Subcommittee shall evaluate the propriety of
the gift according to the provisions of Subsection B(1),
Restrictions and B(2), Exceptions, above.
(d) The Subcommittee shall issue a written opinion to the party
that submitted the form within 21 days unless a shorter
timeline is agreed upon. The opinion shall include all material
facts relied on by the Subcommittee, and articulate a basis for
the decision. All opinions shall be posted on the City's website.
The officer or employee shall have the right to appeal the
decision to the full Ethics Board.
(4) Political candidates for City offices.
(a) The provisions of Subsection B(1), (2), and (3) above shall not
apply to any campaign contribution to any candidate for City
office, whether or not he or she is a City official or employee,
provided the campaign contribution is legal and appropriately
reported according to the Pennsylvania Election Code at 25
P.S. § 2600 et seq., as amended, and all related statutes and
regulations, as applicable and Ethics Code § 6-23.3, Campaign
contributions and reporting requirements.
(b) The provisions of Subsection B(1), (2), and (3) above shall
apply in full to any other gift received by any candidate for City
office, whether or not he or she is a City official or employee.
(c) Upon certification of any individual's candidacy for City office,
the City Clerk shall provide the candidate with a copy of this
article and a brief explanation of its requirements, receipt of
which shall be acknowledged by the candidate's signature.
C. Nepotism. Hiring a relative is a special type of a conflict of interest that
should be avoided. No public official or employee shall appoint, hire,
advance or advocate the appointing, hiring or advancing of a member of
his/her immediate family or household member to a City position.
D. Whistleblowing.
§ 6-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-20
1:81
(1) Employees are expected to expose a violation of the Code of Ethics
by any employee or business entity with which the City is doing
business if such a violation creates a serious and specific danger to
the public's health, safety or welfare.
(2) Employees are expected to expose improper use of public office or
any other abuse or neglect on the part of a City employee or public
official. An employee with knowledge of actions or activities of
ethical concern shall report them to the Board of Ethics. The
identity of the employee will be confidential information of the
Board of Ethics until a full investigation is initiated.
(3) Retaliation against an employee who reports any violation, abuse
or other improper action is strictly prohibited. Any such action will
be a violation of the Code of Ethics and subject to the disciplinary
and corrective action as ordered by the Board of Ethics.
E. Fraudulent or other activity.
(1) City employees or officials are expected to act ethically in the
performance of all duties and responsibilities and avoid any
involvement with, or any appearance of, behavior constituting
fraud, misappropriation or other inappropriate conduct while
carrying out the duties and obligations of their employment or
office.
(2) City employees or officials may not willfully or deliberately act,
attempt to act, conspire to act, or solicit with the intent to act, carry
out, or participate in any of the following activities:
(a) Embezzlement of money or resources for private purposes or
use from any City official, City employee, City department, City
contractor or subcontractor or third-party agent doing
business with the City government;
(b) Misappropriation of City funds, supplies, assets or resources;
(c) Falsification of any City record, including personnel records;
(d) Forgery or alteration of any check, bank draft, bank account,
or other financial document;
(e) Forgery or alteration of timecard data and/or information;
(f) Receipt of a bribe or kickback, or willing participation in a
scheme of bribery;
(g) Impropriety in the handling or reporting of money or financial
transactions;
(h) Using insider knowledge of City activities to earn or generate
any gift, profit or pecuniary benefit;
§ 6-20 SCRANTON CODE § 6-20
1:82
(i) Accepting, requesting, or seeking any material item or
pecuniary benefit from contractors, vendors or parties
providing services or materials to the City;
(j) Unauthorized destruction, removal or inappropriate use of City
property, including data records, furniture, fixtures and
equipment;
(k) Making false or intentionally misleading written or oral
statements or representations in carrying out any official or
employment duty or obligation; or
(l) Participation in any willful or deliberate act carried out with
the intention of obtaining an unearned or unauthorized benefit
by way of deception or other unethical means.
(3) City employees or officials are to be familiar with the types of fraud
and the potential activities and circumstances that may give rise to
a fraudulent activity within his or her department, bureau, and area
of responsibility.
(4) City employees or officials are charged with the duty to be alert for
any indication of fraudulent activity, and all City employees or
officials have a duty to report immediately any suspected
fraudulent activity to the City Board of Ethics.
F. Use of City property and personnel. City employees or officials may not
use any personnel, equipment, supplies, facilities, vehicles, or any other
property owned and belonging to the City for their private purposes,
use, enjoyment, or benefit. City employees or officials who hold a
supervisory position may not use the time, effort and resources of any
subordinate City employees or officials for their private purposes, use,
enjoyment, or benefit.
G. Political activities. The appropriate provisions of the Act of the United
States Congress, popularly known as the "Hatch Act," shall apply to and
regulate the conduct of all employees of the City of Scranton.
H. Awarding contracts.
(1) To the extent that it is not inconsistent with federal or state law: i) a
City employee, ii) a City official, iii) any immediate family of a City
employee or City official; or iv) any for-profit business entity in
which the City employee, City official, or any immediate family has
a material interest, shall not enter into any contract valued at $500
or more with the City or any City agency or instrumentality, unless
the contract has been awarded through an open and public
process, in accordance with Pennsylvania law, including prior
public notice and subsequent public disclosure of all proposals
considered and contracts awarded. In such a case, the City official
or City employee shall not have any supervisory or overall
responsibility for the implementation or administration of the
§ 6-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-20
1:83
§ 6-21. Penalties; restitution.
contract. Any contract or subcontract made in violation of this
subsection may be subject to further penalties, pursuant to the
terms and provisions of the Pennsylvania Public Official and
Employee Ethics Act (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 1101.1 et seq.).
(2) Prior to entering into or awarding any no-bid contract, the City
Employee, Official, agent or instrumentality entering into such nobid
contract on behalf of the City must immediately provide the
Board of Ethics with the following information:
(a) The name and address of all contracting parties;
(b) A draft copy of the contract to be entered into;
(c) A report in compliance with Section 1641 of the Pennsylvania
Election Code (25 P.S. § 3260a), which shall provide the
following:
[1] An itemized list of all political contributions known to each
contracting party by virtue of the knowledge possessed by
every officer, director, associate, partner, limited partner,
or individual owner that has been made by:
[a] Any officer, director, associate, partner, limited
partner, individual owner or members of the
immediate family of the aforementioned parties when
the contributions exceed an aggregate of $1,000 by
any individual during the preceding year; or
[b] Any employee or members of his or her immediate
family whose political contribution exceeded $1,000
during the preceding year.
(d) Any other information that the Board of Ethics may require.
(3) In the event that the intended recipient of a City no-bid contract or
any officer, director, associate, partner, limited partner, individual
owner, member, employee, or immediate family of any of the
aforementioned parties has made a donation to a political
committee of a City employee, City official, agent or
instrumentality, in excess of the contribution limitations set forth in
§ 6-23.3 herein during any of the preceding two calendar years
from the date the draft copy of the proposed contract is submitted
to the Board of Ethics, then and in that event the City is prohibited
from awarding that no-bid contract to that intended party.
(4) For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be as
provided for by the established purchasing policies of the City of
Scranton.
§ 6-20 SCRANTON CODE § 6-21
1:84
A. Penalties. Upon any violation of the City provisions, including the
undertaking of wrongful acts as described above or in the City of
Scranton Home Rule Charter, any of the following penalties shall be
available to the Ethics Board for imposition:
(1) Admonition: in compliance with existing personnel practices,
collective bargaining agreements and/or statutes, a letter to the
respondent, the Mayor, the Director of the department in which the
respondent is employed, if any, and the complainant, if any,
indicating that the respondent has been found to have violated the
City provisions;
(2) Public censure: in compliance with existing personnel practices,
collective bargaining agreements and/or statutes, notification to
the respondent, the Mayor, the Director of the department in which
the respondent is employed, if any, and the complainant, if any, and
the news media indicating that a violation of the City provisions
took place and that the Board strongly disapproves of the actions of
the public official or public employee;
(3) Recommendation to the Mayor without compensation for a stated
period of time not to exceed 30 days, in compliance with existing
personnel practices, collective bargaining agreements and/or
statutes, with notification to the respondent, the Mayor, the
Director of the department in which the respondent is employed, if
any, and the complainant. If any such suspension is not imposed by
the City, a written explanation of such decision shall be provided
within five days to the Board;
(4) Recommendation to the Mayor in compliance with existing
personnel practices, collective bargaining agreements and/or
statutes, with notification going to the respondent, the Mayor, the
Director of the department in which respondent is employed, if any,
and the complainant, if any. If any such termination is not imposed
by the City, a written explanation of such decision shall be provided
within five days to the Board;
(5) Referral to the appropriate authorities for criminal prosecution in
cases where a violation of this article is also a violation of federal or
state law;
(6) Ineligibility for holding any office or position within the City for a
period of up to five years;
(7) Imposition of a fine, not to exceed $1,000 per violation;
(8) Imposition of an administrative fine of not more than $1,000 to
defray the actual cost and expense of investigating any violation;
and
(9) Any person who realizes financial gain by way of a violation of any
provisions of this article, in addition to any other penalty provided
§ 6-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-21
1:85
§ 6-22. Advisory opinions.
by law or this article, shall pay into the Treasury of the City a sum
of money up to the financial gain resulting from the violation. The
Board shall determine the amount of financial gain realized; and
(10) Any public official, public employee, person, corporation, company
or other entity found to have participated in or benefited from a
violation of this article may be barred from participating in
business dealings with the City for a period of time not to exceed
five years, said period of time to be determined by the Board, in
addition to being subject to any other penalty (prescribed by this
article) deemed appropriate by the Board.
B. Restitution; other penalties and remedies. After finding that an
individual has violated any provision of the Charter or this Code within
the jurisdiction of the Board as provided for in this Code, the Board may
take one or more of the following actions, if appropriate, in addition to
penalties described in Subsection A:
(1) Order the subject to make restitution to those incurring damage or
injury as a direct result of the actions of the subject that have been
adjudicated as a violation of the Code or Charter;
(2) Order the subject to cease and desist from engaging in a particular
activity that is in violation of the Code, Charter, or any order issued
by the Board;
(3) Order the subject to take specified action to bring him/her into
compliance with Board directives;
(4) Refer the matter for review or with specific recommendation for
action to law enforcement, regulatory or other authorities with
jurisdiction of the matters;
(5) Institute appropriate civil or equitable action to enforce the order
and decision of the Board; and
(6) Recommend to City Council the forfeiture of the office or position
held by the subject with the City and recommend that the subject
be ineligible to hold any City office or position for a period of up to
five years following such decision.
A. Upon the written request of any public official or City employee, or
without such request should a majority of the Board deem it in the
public interest, the Board may render advisory opinions concerning
matters of governmental ethics, shall consider questions as to ethical
conduct, conflicts of interest and the application of ethical standards
set forth in this article, and shall issue an advisory opinion in writing as
to any such question. The Board may in its discretion publish its
advisory opinions with any redactions necessary to prevent disclosure
§ 6-21 SCRANTON CODE § 6-22
1:86
§ 6-23. Complaint and investigation procedure.
of the identity of the person who is the subject of the opinion. Such
opinions shall be rendered within 30 days of the request for same.
B. An advisory opinion may be used as a defense in any subsequent
investigation or prosecution, provided that the official or employee who
sought the opinion did so in good faith and only to the extent material
facts were not misrepresented in the request for the opinion.
A. Who may file. Any person may file a complaint about alleged ethics
violations of the Scranton Code of Ethics or the City Charter. In
addition, the Board may initiate proceedings. A person signing a
complaint shall:
(1) Reasonably believe in the existence of facts upon which the claim is
based; and
(2) Reasonably believe that the complaint may be valid under the
ethics provisions of the Code of Ethics and the City Charter.
B. How to file.
(1) Complaints must be submitted on forms provided by the Board. The
Board shall make available this form upon request. The complaint
shall state the name, job or office held by the alleged violator and a
description of the facts that are alleged to constitute a violation. It
must contain a notarized signature subject to the penalties of 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn falsification to authorities. The
Board shall establish a separate PO Box through which to receive
complaints. This PO Box shall be generally accessible by the
investigative officer and/or the Secretary, provided that the
Secretary is not a Board member.
(2) Complaints must be filed within one year (365 days) of the date on
which the alleged ethics violation that is the subject of the
complaint occurred. Any complaint filed after this date shall be
rejected.
C. Jurisdiction; preliminary investigation.
(1) Each complaint filed with the Board shall be immediately directed
to and preliminarily reviewed by an investigating officer appointed
by the Board (the "officer") to determine whether the complaint
falls within the jurisdiction of the Board. The aforesaid
determinations shall be made within 30 days of the filing of the
complaint. If the officer determines that the Board does not have
jurisdiction over the matter underlying the complaint, the
complainant will be notified, and no further action will be taken
with regard to the complaint. If, however, the officer determines
that the complaint falls within the jurisdiction of the Board, the
officer shall authorize a preliminary investigation.
§ 6-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-23
1:87
(2) The preliminary investigation shall be initiated and accomplished
at the sole direction of the officer. If the officer, in his/her sole
discretion, finds that the violation(s), as alleged in the complaint,
would, if proved, constitute a deminimis infraction, he/she may
decline to initiate a preliminary investigation and dismiss the
complaint, if to do so would be in the best interest of the citizens of
the City of Scranton.
(3) At the onset of the preliminary investigation, the officer shall notify
both the complainant and the subject of the investigation of the
filing of the complaint, the nature of the same, and the initiation of
a preliminary investigation.
(4) The preliminary investigation shall be completed within 60 days of
the officer's finding of jurisdiction.
(5) If, at any time during the preliminary investigation, an extension is
necessary and justified, the officer shall have additional time in
thirty-day segments. The officer shall timely notify both the
complainant and the subject of the investigation of each such
extension.
(6) At the conclusion of the preliminary investigation, the officer shall
determine whether there may exist facts to support the complaint.
If the inquiry fails to establish such facts, the officer shall dismiss
the complaint and notify both the complainant and the subject of
the complaint of the dismissal of the complaint. If, however, at the
conclusion of the preliminary investigation the officer determines
that there may exist facts to support the complaint, the officer shall
authorize a full investigation.
D. Full investigation. If a preliminary investigation uncovers facts to
support the complaint, the officer shall authorize a full investigation.
The complainant and the subject of the investigation shall be notified
within three days of the initiation of a full investigation, and the subject
shall be notified of the identity of the complainant. Until the
investigation is concluded or terminated, the officer will notify both the
complainant and the subject of the investigation of the status of the
investigation at least every 90 days. Within 180 days of the initiation of
the full investigation, the officer must either terminate the investigation
or issue a findings report to the subject.
E. Findings report.
(1) The findings report shall set forth the pertinent findings of fact as
determined by the officer. The officer shall deliver the findings of
fact to the complainant and the subject of the investigation. The
subject of the investigation may, within 30 days of the report,
request an evidentiary hearing, unless an extension is obtained
from the officer. When such a request is received by the officer, the
officer shall immediately notify the Board of the request for a
hearing, and the names of the parties involved. The Board shall
§ 6-23 SCRANTON CODE § 6-23
1:88
upon receipt of such notice engage two attorneys: one to represent
the facts in support of the complaint; and one to advise the Board
in matters related to the evidentiary hearing.
(2) The Board Solicitor shall not have any involvement in a particular
matter once the findings report has been issued.
F. Evidentiary hearing.
(1) Timing. An evidentiary hearing must be held within 45 days of the
filing of a request for the same.
(2) Evidence. The subject of the investigation shall have reasonable
access to any evidence intended to be used at a hearing. The
subject of the investigation shall have the opportunity to be
represented by counsel and to subpoena witnesses, present
evidence, cross-examine witnesses against him/her, submit
argument and shall be entitled to exercise all rights of
confrontation and the like afforded him/her by the United States
Constitution and the Pennsylvania Constitution.
(3) Closed hearing. The hearing shall be closed to the public unless the
subject requests an open hearing in writing to the Board at least
five days before the hearing.
G. Decision by Board; final order.
(1) At the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing, the Board will
determine by majority vote of those members presiding whether
the evidence supports a finding that the subject of the complaint
violated provisions of either the Charter or the Code.
(2) Upon reaching a determination on the complaint, the Board shall
issue a final order. A copy of said final order shall be immediately
delivered to both the complainant and the subject of the complaint.
H. Petition for reconsideration. A subject, having been found to have
violated a provision of the Charter or Code, may file a petition for
reconsideration of the Board's decision. Such petition shall be filed with
the Board within 10 days of the day the Board issues its final order.
I. Protection of complainant. No person may be penalized, nor any
employee of the City be discharged, suffer change in his/her official
rank, grade or compensation, denied a promotion, or threatened, for a
good faith filing of a complaint with the Board, or providing information
or testifying in any Board proceeding.
J. Mediation.
(1) In addition to the procedures set forth above regarding preliminary
investigation, full investigation, and findings report, the officer
may, in his/her sole discretion, engage in mediation of a complaint
at any time prior to the issuance of the findings report. The purpose
§ 6-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-23
1:89
of mediation would be to resolve the complaint in a voluntary
manner, compliant with the Charter and the Code.
(2) In the event the officer determines that mediation would be useful,
he/she shall notify both the complainant and the subject of the
investigation of his/her intent to mediate and obtain the consent of
both parties to mediate. If the complainant and the subject agree to
mediation, the officer shall conduct the mediation in whatever
manner he/she deems best under the circumstances, considering
the time in the investigative process when the mediation will take
place.
(3) If a resolution is achieved following mediation, the officer shall
prepare and present to the Solicitor a written mediation report,
which shall be signed by the subject and the officer. The Solicitor
shall immediately present the mediation report to the Board for
review and approval. If a complete resolution is not achieved
following mediation, the officer shall prepare and present to the
Solicitor a statement indicating only that mediation occurred, but
the matter was not resolved at mediation. The statement shall not
state any particulars of the mediation, names, or identifying
information of the parties. The Solicitor shall immediately present
such statement to the Board for review. The matter shall then
continue to proceed in accordance with Subsections A to I above.
(4) Any mediated resolution must be compliant with the Charter and
the Code. It shall be the sole province of the Board to determine if a
mediated resolution is compliant with the Charter and the Code. At
the Board's sole discretion and direction, it may resubmit a matter
to mediation to resolve any aspect of a mediated resolution that is
not compliant with the Charter or Code or as the Board may desire
for other administrative reasons.
(5) If the Board approves a mediated resolution of the entire matter,
the Board shall issue a final order. A copy of said final order shall be
immediately delivered to both the complainant and the subject of
the complaint. In all respects, the general confidentiality provisions
of the Code shall apply. There shall be no release or settlement
agreement. If the Board does not approve a mediated resolution of
the entire matter, the matter shall continue to proceed in
accordance with Subsections A to I above. However, nothing in this
Subsection J shall prevent the officer and the subject from entering
into a stipulated administrative settlement after the issuance of a
findings report and a subject's demand for evidentiary hearing.
(6) The time frames set forth above in Subsections C to E shall be
tolled while any mediation is taking place. However, the officer
shall ensure that mediation does not unduly delay the process set
forth in Subsections A to I above.
(7) Miscellaneous matters.
§ 6-23 SCRANTON CODE § 6-23
1:90
§ 6-23.1. Confidentiality of Board information.
All Board proceedings and records relating to an investigation shall be
confidential until a final determination is made by the Board, except as may
be required to affect due process. The final order shall become a public
record once the subject has exhausted all appeal rights or has failed to
timely exercise such rights. All other file material shall remain confidential.
§ 6-23.2. Wrongful use of Board of Ethics.
(a) Knowledge by the Board of the identity of the complainant or
subject is permitted, provided that the identity of the
complainant or subject is revealed to the Board only through a
mediation report.
(b) Nothing herein shall preclude the Board from taking any action
permitted by the Charter or Code with respect to the
mediation, any resolution, and the issues raised in the
complaint.
(c) All mediations, and all information exchanged, created, or
transmitted in any way involving a mediation under these
procedures, shall be confidential except as provided by the
Code.
(d) The officer shall not be permitted or compelled to testify in any
proceeding, before any court, tribunal, or hearing board,
including the Board, concerning any aspect of mediation.
(e) The officer/mediator shall not exchange any information with
the Board or Solicitor concerning the mediation except as
reduced to writing as provided in Subsection J(3) above.
(f) At all times, as between the officer and the Solicitor and/or
Board, the officer shall form, keep and maintain a wall of
separation between himself/herself as it pertains to any
information obtained, learned, reported, supplied, or otherwise
brought forth at the mediation except as reduced to a writing
as provided in Subsection J(3) above.
A. The purpose of the Board of Ethics is to endeavor to maintain a high
standard of ethical behavior by City employees and officials. This will be
most effective when City employees, officials and citizens work together
to set and maintain high ethical standards. Complaints directed to the
Board must be based on fact. Those filing complaints must have the
intent to improve the ethical climate of the City. Wrongful use of the
Code is prohibited, and those individuals engaged in such conduct may
be subject to penalties as set forth in § 6-21.
B. Wrongful use of the Code of Ethics is defined as either:
§ 6-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-23.2
1:91
§ 6-23.3. Campaign contributions and reporting requirements.
(1) Filing an unfounded, frivolous or false complaint. A complaint is
unfounded, frivolous or false if it is filed in a grossly negligent
manner without a basis in law or fact and was made for a purpose
other than reporting a violation of this Code. A person has not filed
a frivolous complaint if he/she reasonably believes that facts exist
to support the claim and either reasonably believes that under
those facts the complaint is valid under this Code or acts upon the
advice of counsel sought in good faith and given after full
disclosure of all relevant facts within his/her knowledge and
information; or
(2) Publicly disclosing or causing to be disclosed information
regarding the status of proceedings before the Board and facts
underlying a complaint before the Board, including the identity of
persons involved and that a complaint has been filed.
A. Campaign contribution limitations.
(1) During a calendar year in which a covered election is held and in
each calendar year thereafter:
(a) To the extent that it is not inconsistent with federal or state
law, hereinafter, no individual shall make, and no candidate
and/or no candidate political committee shall accept, a
candidate campaign contribution, including those
contributions made to or through one or more political
committees by such individual, in excess of $2,700.
(b) To the extent that it is not inconsistent with federal or state
law, hereinafter, no organization (excluding individuals
covered by the Code of Ethics as part of the Administrative
Code, as amended), shall make, and no candidate and/or no
candidate campaign committee shall accept, a candidate
campaign contribution, including those contributions made to
or through one or more political committees by such
organization, in excess of $5,000.
(c) To the extent that it is not inconsistent with federal or state
law, hereinafter, no political committee (excluding candidate
political committees) shall make, and no candidate and/or no
candidate campaign committee shall accept, a candidate
campaign contribution in excess of $5,000.
(2) Candidate's personal resources. The limitations imposed by the
Code of Ethics as part of the Administrative Code, as amended,
shall not apply to contributions from a candidate's personal
resources to his or her candidate political committee.
(3) Volunteer labor. The limitations imposed by this section shall not
apply to volunteer labor.
§ 6-23.2 SCRANTON CODE § 6-23.3
1:92
(4) Adjustments.
(a) On January 1, 2020, and on every January 1 every four years
thereafter, the maximum contribution amounts set forth in §
6-23.3 shall be adjusted, as follows: on the December 15
immediately preceding the adjustment, the City Business
Administrator shall calculate the CPI multiplier by dividing the
average consumer price index for Scranton, Pennsylvania,
during the then-current calendar year by the average
Consumer Price Index for Scranton, Pennsylvania, during the
calendar year of 2013. To determine the average Consumer
Price Index for Scranton, Pennsylvania, the City Business
Administrator shall use the latest available figures for the
Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U),
Scranton, Pennsylvania, as measured by the United States
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. After
calculating the CPI multiplier, the Business Administrator shall
determine the new maximum amounts as follows:
[1] The maximum amount for purposes of § 6-23.3A(1)(a) shall
equal $2,700, multiplied by the CPI multiplier, rounded to
the nearest $100.
[2] The maximum amount for purposes of § 6-23.3A(1)(b) and
(c) shall equal $5,000, multiplied by the CPI multiplier,
rounded to the nearest $100.
(b) The Business Administrator shall calculate the new maximum
amounts in writing to the Mayor, the City Controller, the City
Council President, and the City Clerk.
(5) Candidate political committees. A candidate shall have no more
than one candidate political committee and one checking account
for the City elected office sought, into which all contributions and
post-candidacy contributions for that sought office shall be made,
and out of which all expenditures for that sought office shall be
made, including expenditures for retiring debt and for transition or
inauguration to that office. If the candidate maintains other
political or nonpolitical accounts for which contributions are
solicited, such funds collected in these accounts shall not be used
for the purpose of influencing the outcome of a covered election, or
to retire debt that was incurred to influence the outcome of that
covered election, or to cover transition or inauguration expenses.
(6) Enforcement; injunctive relief.
(a) The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the City of
Scranton Board of Ethics, in accordance with the Code of
Ethics (of the City Administrative Code, as amended),
including but not limited to the complaint, investigation,
restitution and penalties provisions thereof.
§ 6-23.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-23.3
1:93
(b) In addition to the provisions of the Code of Ethics, any person
residing in the City of Scranton, including the City Solicitor,
may bring an action for injunctive relief in any court of
competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violations of, or to compel
compliance with, the provisions of this section in accordance
with the Code of Ethics as part of the Administrative Code, as
amended. The court may award to a prevailing plaintiff in any
such action his or her costs of litigation, including reasonable
attorney's fees.
B. Reporting requirements.
(1) Statement of financial interests.
(a) Any City employee or City official must be in compliance with
Code § 6-18 (Statement of financial interests) prior to filing any
nomination papers or petitions for City elected office or
publicly announcing his or her candidacy for City elected
office.
(2) Campaign finance disclosure.
(a) Whenever a candidate, treasurer of a candidate political
committee, or other representative of a candidate political
committee files a required report of receipts and expenditures
with the Lackawanna County Board of Elections and/or
Secretary of the Commonwealth as required by the
Pennsylvania Election Code (25 P.S. § 2601 et seq.), or other
applicable laws or regulations, such person shall at the same
time file with the City Clerk a copy of all information set forth
in such report(s), in that format mandated by the Board of
Ethics. Such filing with the City Clerk shall be accompanied by
a written statement, signed by the person making the filing,
that subscribes and swears to the information set forth in such
filing.
(b) The City Administration shall make all reports of receipts and
expenditures and written statements filed with the City Clerk
available for review by the public on the City's website.
C. Required notice of contribution limits.
(1) The Board of Ethics shall post on the City's website a notice setting
forth the contribution limits set forth in this Code together with a
plain English explanation of the provisions of this section and the
penalties and remedies for violations thereof. Such notice shall
remain posted and available for review on the City's website at all
times.
§ 6-23.3 SCRANTON CODE § 6-23.3
1:94
ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions
§ 6-24. Time periods expiring on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
Whenever any time established by this Administrative Code for the taking of
any action expires on a Saturday, Sunday and/or any legal holiday, such time
shall not expire on said day, but shall expire by 4:00 p.m. on the following
business/work day.
§ 6-25. Effective date.
This Administrative Code shall take effect the first Monday of January
1, 1976. All amendments to the Administrative Code will take effect
immediately unless stated otherwise.
§ 6-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-25
1:95
Chapter 12
AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Fire — See Ch. 59. Bureau of Police — See Ch. 105.
§ 6-25 SCRANTON CODE § 6-25
12:96
ARTICLE I
Ambulance Service
[Adopted as Ord. No. 59-1979]
§ 12-1. Declared governmental function.
The operation, free of charge to the citizens of Scranton, of emergency
ambulance service on the streets of the city is hereby declared to be a
governmental function of the city to be performed and administered by
the Division of Ambulance within the Bureau of Fire of the city exclusively
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 12-2. Division of Ambulance created.
There is hereby created and established a Division of Ambulance within
the Bureau of Fire of the city. The Division of Ambulance shall employ a
sufficient number of regular appointed full-time employees of the Bureau of
Fire of the city to furnish emergency ambulance service, free of charge to
the citizens of Scranton, and to provide such other services as the Director
of Public Safety shall promulgate. The basic qualifications for each such
employee which shall include but will not be limited to the possession
of a certificate by the Department of Health of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania attesting to the successful completion of an approved course
of instruction as an emergency medical technician and minimum levels of
experience and training by the Bureau of Fire in the performance of rescue
work within the city and also certified by the City of Scranton Civil Service
Commission.
§ 12-3. Charge for use of ambulance. [Amended by Ord. No.
18-1983]
The City of Scranton shall make a charge of seventy dollars ($70.) to
any person, corporation or any other entity utilizing the services of an
ambulance.
§ 12-1 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 12-3
12:97

ARTICLE II
Rescue One Vehicle
[Adopted 6-26-1996 as Ord. No. 82-1996]
§ 12-4. Reimbursement to city for services.
The City of Scranton Bureau of Fire shall be reimbursed whenever the
Rescue One Vehicle responds to an emergency. Said emergency shall
include, but not be limited to automobile accidents and residential and
commercial fires. Emergency services provided include, but are not limited
to extrication by the Jaws of Life and the use of any other specialized
equipment.
§ 12-5. Information to be provided.
Any person who is rendered the services herein specified shall provide the
Bureau of Fire the following information:
§ 12-6. Fees.
The City of Scranton Bureau of Fire shall be reimbursed a fee of one
hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.) whenever the Rescue One vehicle
responds to an emergency.
§ 12-7. Administration and enforcement.
§ 12-8. Refused for lack of insurance or ability to pay prohibited.
Nothing in this Article shall authorize any city bureau or department of and
city staff member or bureau or department personnel to refuse or delay any
emergency service to any person, firm, organization or corporation, due to
the lack of insurance coverage or ability to pay for said emergency services.
§ 12-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this Article or of any regulation or requirement, pursuant
hereto and authorized hereby shall upon conviction thereof be ordered to
pay a fine of six hundred dollars ($600.) and, in default of payment of fines
A. Name, address and telephone number.
B. Name and address of insurance carrier (if applicable).
A. The City of Scranton through the Bureau of Fire and the City
Treasurer's Office shall have the responsibility and authority to assess
the fees as herein provided.
B. Any applicable charges for emergency services rendered to a person
shall be billed by the city to the person and/or person's insurance
carrier.
§ 12-4 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 12-9
12:99
and costs, imprisoned not more than ninety (90) days. Each days' violation
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 12-9 SCRANTON CODE § 12-9
12:100
Chapter 18
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Human relations and discrimination — See
Ch. 296.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
423.
Trees and weeds — See Ch. 434.
Zoning — See Ch. 445.
§ 12-9 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 12-9
12:101

ARTICLE I
Board of Examiners
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6, of the 1979 Code]
§ 18-1. Creation and composition; purpose.
A Board of Examiners for stationary engineers and firemen, consisting of
three (3) qualified engineers of at least eight (8) years' experience is hereby
created to conduct examinations at least four (4) times each year.
§ 18-2. Appointment and term.
Members of the Board of Examiners for stationary engineers and firemen
shall be appointed by the Mayor for a period of four (4) years.
§ 18-3. Examinations; fee.
Examinations by the Board of Examiners for stationary engineers and
firemen shall be conducted according to the rules and regulations of the Act
of Assembly of April 4, 1905, P.L. 102 (53 P.S. § 25311 et seq.), and Ord. No.
37-1907, as amended. The annual fee for any license issued hereunder shall
be ten dollars ($10.) per year and shall be collected by the Department of
Public Safety.
§ 18-1 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-3
12:103

ARTICLE II
Golf Course Commission
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 24, Art. II, of the 1979 Code]
§ 18-4. Creation.
There is hereby created a Commission to be known as the "Scranton
Municipal Golf Course Commission."
§ 18-5. Members. [Amended by Ord. No. 11-1980]
Said Commission shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the Mayor.
Appointed members shall hold office at the pleasure of the power that
appointed them. The members of the Commission shall elect one (1) of their
own number to serve as Chairman. The Commission shall have the power
to adopt rules and regulations governing their procedure and the operation
and control of the Scranton Municipal Golf Course and its facilities.
§ 18-6. Organization; rules and regulations.
The members of the Golf Course Commission shall elect one (1) of their
own number to serve as Chairman. The Commission shall have the power to
adopt rules and regulations governing its procedure and the operation and
control of the municipal golf course and its facilities.
§ 18-7. Conflict of interests.
No member of the Golf Course Commission shall, while serving on the
Commission, be an officer or director of any private corporation or company
with which the Commission may enter into any contract for the purchase of
materials or supplies for such golf course facility.
§ 18-8. Duty to manage golf course.
The Golf Course Commission shall be charged with the supervision and
management of the property owned or leased to the City devoted to the use
as a golf course, particularly the municipal golf course located in Jefferson
Township, Lackawanna County.
§ 18-9. Fees and personnel; expenditures limited. [Amended by Ord.
No. 50-1979]
The Golf Course Commission shall fix the fees to be charged for the use
of the municipal golf course, shall engage the personnel necessary for
the maintenance, upkeep and operation of such golf course and shall fix
the salaries of such personnel. The Commission shall have no authority to
make expenditures for capital improvements or equipment in an amount
exceeding one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.) without first having
secured the approval of the Council and the advertising for the purchase of
the same through the Department of Administration, Bureau of Purchasing,
of the City.
§ 18-4 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-10
12:105
§ 18-10. Council approval of leases; fund deposit and use.
The Golf Course Commission shall have no authority to enter into leases for
any part of the premises or facilities except with the consent of Council.
All funds received by the Commission for the use of the golf course and its
facilities shall be deposited in the City treasury in a separate account as
a revolving fund under the supervision of the Commission, and are hereby
appropriated as the same are received for the use of the Commission in
carrying out its functions under this Article.
§ 18-11. Disposition of funds; audit of accounts.
A. All funds withdrawn from the special golf course fund shall be on
warrant or check, similar to that used by the City, and payment shall be
made upon the signature of the Chairman or Treasurer of the
Commission and the countersignature of the City Controller.
B. On or before December 1 of each year, beginning with December 1,
1960, the Commission shall pay over to the City general account all
funds which the Commission has in the special fund other than an
amount sufficient to maintain the golf course up to June 1 of the
following year.
C. The City Controller shall audit the accounts of the Commission in the
same manner as other City accounts are audited.
§ 18-10 SCRANTON CODE § 18-11
12:106
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)6
§ 18-12. (Reserved)
§ 18-13. (Reserved)
§ 18-14. (Reserved)
§ 18-15. (Reserved)
§ 18-16. (Reserved)
§ 18-17. (Reserved)
§ 18-18. (Reserved)
6. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Human Relations Commission, adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 2,
Art. III, Div. 3, of the 1979 Code, was superseded 12-8-2003 by Ord. No. 243-2003. See
now Ch. 296, Human Relations and Discrimination.
§ 18-12 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-18
12:107

ARTICLE IV
Planning Commission
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2, of the 1979 Code]
§ 18-19. Creation.
There is hereby created the Planning Commission of the City.
§ 18-20. Members; appointment.
The Planning Commission is to consist of seven (7) members appointed by
the Mayor and concurred in by the Council.
§ 18-21. Residency requirements.
All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the
City. On all Planning Commissions appointed pursuant to this Article, at
least five (5) shall be citizen members.
§ 18-22. Compensation.
All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation,
but they may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses.
§ 18-23. Terms; vacancies.
§ 18-24. Removal of members.
Any member of the Planning Commission once qualified and appointed may
be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in
office or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council, taken after
the member has received fifteen (15) days' advance notice of the intent to
take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if
the member shall request it, in writing. Any appointment to fill a vacancy
created by removal shall be only for the unexpired term. The refusal or
failure of a member of the Commission to consistently attend meetings
A. Two (2) members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed for a
period of four (4) years whose terms shall expire December 31, 1979,
two (2) members shall be appointed for three (3) years whose terms
shall expire December 31, 1978, two (2) members shall be appointed
for two (2) years whose terms shall expire December 31, 1977, and one
(1) member shall be appointed for one (1) year whose term shall expire
December 31, 1976. Thereafter all terms shall be for four (4) years or
until a successor is appointed and qualified.
B. The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify the
Mayor concerning vacancies in the Commission, and such vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term. When a vacancy exists for a
reason other than expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment
for the remaining period of the existing term.
§ 18-19 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-24
12:109
of the Planning Commission without cause shall be sufficient reason for
removal from the Planning Commission.
§ 18-25. Conduct of business.
§ 18-26. Powers and duties.
A. The Planning Commission shall elect its own chairman and vicechairman
and create and fill such other offices as it may determine.
Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The
Commission may make and alter bylaws and rules and regulations to
govern its procedures consistent with the ordinances of the City and the
laws of the commonwealth. The Commission shall keep a full record of
its business and shall annually make a written report by March 1 of
each year of its activities to the Council. Interim reports may be made
as often as may be necessary, or as requested by the Council.
B. The Planning Commission shall follow procedure for meetings as
hereby established:
(1) The time and place of regular meetings shall be properly posted on
the bulletin board on the first floor of City hall at least three (3)
days before such meetings are held.
(2) The time and place of special meetings shall be posted on the
bulletin board on the first floor of City hall at least twenty-four (24)
hours before such meetings are held.
(3) Regular and special meetings shall be opened to the public and
citizens shall be allowed to speak. Public involvement shall be
encouraged at all times.
(4) Regular and special meetings shall be opened to the news media
(press, radio and television), including tools of their trade, so that
meetings can be fully covered and properly reported for the
public's information.
(5) The Mayor, Council and Department and Bureau heads shall be
notified of the time and place of any meeting.
(6) If the Planning Commission fails to comply with this section,
business transacted at meetings of the Commission will not be
considered official. Therefore, Council will take no action based
upon business transacted at meetings not considered official under
this section.
A. The Planning Commission shall at the request of the Council have the
power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare the comprehensive plan for the development of the City as
set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code,7 and present it for
the consideration of the Council.
§ 18-24 SCRANTON CODE § 18-26
12:110
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files
of the Planning Commission shall be in the possession of the
Council.
B. The Planning Commission at the request of the Council may:
(1) Make recommendations to the Council concerning the adoption or
amendment of an official map.
(2) Prepare and present to the Council a zoning ordinance,8 and make
recommendations to the Council on proposed amendments to it as
set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code.9
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development, planned residential development regulations, as set
forth in the Municipalities Planning Code.
(4) Prepare and present to the Council a building code and a housing
code10 and make recommendations concerning proposed
amendments thereto.
(5) Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
(6) Prepare and present to the Council an environmental study.
(7) Submit to the Mayor a recommended capital improvements
program.
(8) Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the
comprehensive plan and planning.
(9) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
(10) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(11) Require from other departments and agencies of the City such
available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Commission.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 445, Zoning.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Building Construction and Ch. 360, Property Maintenance.
§ 18-26 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-26
12:111

ARTICLE V
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted as Ord. No. 39-1980 (Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 7, of the 1979
Code)]
§ 18-27. Commission established; purpose.
The Shade Tree Commission is hereby established. The purpose of said
Shade Tree Commission shall be to supervise, manage and regulate the
planting and seeding of shade trees throughout the City of Scranton.
§ 18-28. Authority to receive funds from grants.
The Shade Tree Commission is authorized to receive funds from grants and
any other source in order to fulfill the purpose of this Article.
§ 18-29. Appointment of members.
Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of City Council.
§ 18-30. Composition; terms.
§ 18-31. Appointment of officers; terms.
The membership, at their first organizational meeting, shall appoint a
chairman and Cochairman of the Commission whose term of office shall be
for a period of one (1) year.
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall consist of five (5) members, each of
whose term shall be for a period of five (5) years except the original
appointments made pursuant to this Article:
(1) One (1) member shall be appointed for one (1) year.
(2) One (1) member shall be appointed for two (2) years.
(3) One (1) member shall be appointed for three (3) years.
(4) One (1) member shall be appointed for four (4) years.
(5) One (1) member shall be appointed for five (5) years.
B. Said term shall expire at a specific time. If a vacancy should exist in the
membership because of death, resignation or any other reason then the
new appointee shall serve for the remainder of the term of the person
whom he succeeds. After the original appointments, all terms shall be
for five (5) years.
§ 18-27 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-31
12:113

ARTICLE VI
Vacant Property Review Committee
[Adopted byOrd. No. 101-1989 (Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 8, of the 1979
Code)]
§ 18-32. Ordination of Committee.
The Vacant Property Review Committee is hereby ordained.
§ 18-33. Membership. [Amended 1-27-2005 by Ord. No. 101-2005]
The Mayor shall appoint a Vacant Property Review Committee consisting
of the President of City Council or designee; the Chairman of the
Redevelopment Authority of the City or designee; the Chairman of the City
Planning Commission or designee; a member of the executive branch of the
City government; and the City Planner.
§ 18-34. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Vacant Property Review Committee shall be
as follows:
§ 18-35. Criteria for determination.
A building, structure, site or object which is vacant and/or blighted shall
include:
A. Review buildings, structures, site and objects alleged to be vacant and/
or blighted.
B. Determine whether such buildings, structures, sites or objects are
vacant and/or blighted.
C. Certify such vacant and/or blighted buildings, structures, sites or
objects to the Redevelopment Authority for acquisition.
A. Any premises which because of physical condition or use is regarded as
a public nuisance at common law or has been declared a public
nuisance in accordance with the local housing, building, plumbing, fire
and related codes.11
B. Any premises which because of physical condition, use or occupancy is
considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not limited
to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences
or structures.
C. Any dwelling which because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe,
vermin-infested or lacking in the facilities and equipment required by
the Housing Code12 of the municipality, has been designated by the
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Building Construction, Ch. 345, Plumbing, and Ch. 243, Fire
Prevention.
§ 18-32 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-35
12:115
§ 18-36. Procedures. [Amended by Ord. No. 85-1989]
The procedures to be followed by the Vacant Property Review Committee
shall be as set forth in the Act of 1945, May 24, P.L. 991, § 12.1, as amended
(35 P.S. § 1712.1).
§ 18-37. Cooperating agencies.
The Council of the City of Scranton requests the assistance of the City
Planning Commission in the certification of blighted property; and the
cooperation of the redevelopment authority in the acquisition, restoration,
rehabilitation, replacement and/or reuse of vacant and/or blighted
buildings, structures, sites or objects located within the corporate limits of
the City.
department responsible for enforcement of the code as unfit for human
habitation.
D. Any structure which is a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to the
safety of persons or property.
E. Any structure from which the utilities, plumbing, heating, sewerage or
other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or
rendered ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended use.
F. Any vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a predominantly
built-up neighborhood, which by reason of neglect or lack of
maintenance has become a place for accumulation of trash and debris
or a haven for rodents or other vermin.
G. Any unoccupied property which has been tax delinquent for a period of
two (2) years prior to the effective date of this act, and those in the
future having a two-year tax delinquency.
H. Any property which is vacant but not tax delinquent, which has not been
rehabilitated within one (1) year of the receipt of notice to rehabilitate
from the appropriate code enforcement agency.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Property Maintenance.
§ 18-35 SCRANTON CODE § 18-37
12:116
ARTICLE VII
Architectural and Urban Design Review Commission
[Adopted 3-13-1996 as Ord. No. 45-1996]
§ 18-38. Purposes.
The purposes of this Article are to:
§ 18-39. Scope.
The Commission for Architectural and Urban Design Review shall
recommend the designation of Historic Districts or landmarks and shall
perform certain procedures relating to the issuance of permits for the
alteration, construction, erection, reconstruction, restoration, demolition or
razing of any building or structure, in whole or in part, located in an historic
district or landmark within the City of Scranton.
§ 18-40. Definitions.
A. Protect those areas of the City of Scranton which are of historic,
architectural, cultural, archaeological, educational and aesthetic merit
to the City of Scranton, the state and the nation.
B. Awaken, in our people, an interest in our historic past.
C. Promote the use and reuse of the areas of the City of Scranton for the
culture, education, health, pleasure and the general welfare of the
people of the City of Scranton, the state and the nation.
D. Strengthen the economy of the City of Scranton by stabilizing and
improving property values.
E. Encourage new buildings and developments that will be compatible
with existing historic and architecturally significant buildings and
districts.
A. For the purposes of this Article, all words used in the present tense
include the future tense. All words in the plural number include the
singular number and all words in the singular number include the
plural number, unless the natural construction of the word clearly
indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
B. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Any change, modification or addition to a part of or
all of the exterior of any building or structure, which is visible from a
public street or way.
APPLICANT — One who applies for a certificate of appropriateness.
APPLICATION — A request for permission to alter, reconstruct, repair,
restore, demolish or raze all or part of a landmark; or construct, alter,
§ 18-38 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-40
12:117
reconstruct, repair, restore, demolish or raze all or part of any building
or structure located in an historic district or landmark. An application
shall contain the information and documentation required for the scope
of the proposed work. (Refer to § 18-44 regarding exception for interior
alterations or modifications).
BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure which is a combination
of materials to form a construction for occupancy and/or use, including
mobile homes and trailers, to be used for any reason whatsoever.
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL — The Building Code Official, or his
designee, for the City of Scranton.
BUILDING PERMIT — Any approval statement issued by the Building
Code Official, or his designee, authorizing the construction, alteration,
reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition or razing of all or part of
any building or structure.
BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION — The request filed by any person
with the Building Code Official that seeks authorization to construct,
alter, reconstruct, repair, restore, demolish or raze all or part of any
building or structure.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The approval statement,
which certifies the appropriateness of an applicant's request to
construct, alter, reconstruct, repair, restore, demolish, raze, sandblast
and/or chemically clean the exterior of all or part of any building or
structure located in an historic district or landmark.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP — The approval statement
wherein the applicant's request to perform specific work on a building
or structure located in an historic district or certified as a landmark is
permitted after consideration of the financial concerns and limitations
of the applicant are set, made known and accepted with or without
modification.
CITY — The City of Scranton.
CITY CLERK — The Clerk of the City of Scranton.
CITY COUNCIL — The legislative branch of the governing body of the
City of Scranton.
CITY ENGINEER — The licensed, registered professional engineer,
employed by the City of Scranton, whose duties include, but are not
limited to ensuring that buildings and structures are structurally safe
and fit for habitation or their intended use.
CITY SOLICITOR — The legal representative of and for the City of
Scranton.
COMMISSION — The Commission for Architectural and Urban Design
Review created through the enactment of this Article and governed by
the provisions contained herein.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 18-40 SCRANTON CODE § 18-40
12:118
CONSTRUCTION — Any and all work necessary for the erection,
alteration, reconstruction, repair or restoration of any building or
structure from a combination of materials.
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any
building or structure.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the City of Scranton.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — The geographic areas delineated in accordance
with the provisions of this Article possessing a significant
concentration, linkage or continuity of buildings, structures, sites or
objects united by past events, plan or physical development which
contain historical, architectural, cultural, archaeological, educational
or aesthetic merit. An historic district may comprise an individual
site or individual elements separated geographically but linked by
association, plan, design or history.
HISTORIC DISTRICT MAP — The official map adopted by the governing
body of the City of Scranton which shall be filed of record in the Office
of the City Clerk.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER — The City employee who shall
provide technical assistance to the Commission for Architectural and
Urban Design Review including, but not limited to reviewing all
applications for certificates of appropriateness, attending all meetings
of the Commission and, in conjunction with the Superintendent of
Building Inspection and the Council of the City of Scranton, ensure that
the purposes of this Article and the decisions of the Commission are
adhered to.
INCENTIVE PLAN — A coordinated effort wherein federal, state and
local agencies provide funds for the preservation of a structure which
has been determined to be located within the historic district or
certified as a landmark.
LANDMARK — An individual site, element or building which
demonstrates historical, architectural, cultural, archaeological,
educational or aesthetic merit.
MAYOR — The chief executive of the City of Scranton.
NATION — The United States of America.
PERMANENT SITE FURNISHINGS — Objects or equipment serving
a particular site that are intended to last indefinitely; e.g, outdoor
lighting, flagpoles, benches, statues, fountains, etc.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of applying measures necessary
to sustain the existing form, integrity and materials of an historic
property. Work, including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize
the property, generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and
repair of historic materials and features rather than extensive
replacement and new construction.
§ 18-40 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-40
12:119
§ 18-41. Membership; compensation.
PUBLIC STREET OR WAY — Any land dedicated to public use or
passage including, but not limited to streets, alleys, parks, pedestrian
rights-of-way, whether constructed, dedicated or proposed.
RECONSTRUCTION — The act or process of accurately depicting,
by means of new construction, the form, features and detailing of
a nonsurviving site, landscape, building, structure or object for the
purpose of replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in
its historic location.
REHABILITATION — The act or process of making possible a
compatible use for a property through repair, alterations and additions
while preserving those portions or features which convey its historical,
cultural or architectural values. NOTE: The limited and sensitive
upgrading of mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems and coderequired
work to make properties functional is appropriate within
restoration, preservation and rehabilitation projects.
REPAIRS — Any and all work involving the replacement of existing
work with equivalent material for the purpose of maintenance, but not
including any addition, change or modification in construction.
REPLICATE — To make an exact copy; duplicate.
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately depicting the form,
features and character of a property as it appeared at a particular
period of time by means of the removal of features from other periods in
its history and reconstruction of missing features from the restoration
period.
SIGN — Any device, structure or object for visual communication,
including its structure and component parts, that is used for the
purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of people, but
not including any cloth flag of any public, quasi-public, civic, charitable
or religious group.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STRUCTURE — Any constructed, erected or placed material, or
combination of materials, in or upon the ground including, but not
limited to buildings, mobile homes, permanent site furnishings, radio
towers, sheds, signs and works of art.
WORK OF ART — The term work of art, as used in this Article, shall
apply to and include all mural decorations, statues, bas-reliefs,
sculptures, monuments, fountains, arches, ornamental gateways and
other structures of a permanent character, intended for ornament or
commemoration.
A. Membership.
(1) Membership of the Commission shall consist of nine (9) residents of
the City of Scranton, not in the employ of the City of Scranton, who
§ 18-40 SCRANTON CODE § 18-41
12:120
shall serve without remuneration and shall be composed of the
following:
(a) One (1) registered architect.
(b) One (1) registered engineer.
(c) One (1) licensed contractor.
(d) One (1) licensed real estate broker.
(e) One (1) member of the Architectural Heritage Association.
(f) One (1) property owner whose property is located within an
historic district or who owns a landmark property.
(g) One (1) member who by professional training or occupation is
an urban planner, architectural historian, archaeologist,
historic preservationist or has professional expertise in a field
closely related to historic preservation or discipline such as
American studies, American civilization, cultural geography or
cultural anthropology.
(h) One (1) property owner at-large.
(i) One (1) other person who by training, experience or interest is
qualified to carry out the duties as a member of the
Commission.
(2) The members of the Commission shall be governed by the Code of
Ethics as contained in the Administrative Code13 of the City of
Scranton and in this regard shall not participate in the discussion,
or in any vote taken, on any proposal before the Commission in
which they have any financial interest either directly or indirectly.
B. Appointment; terms of membership. Members of the Commission shall
be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of City Council,
and shall serve for a period of five (5) years. The terms of those
members initially appointed shall be staggered so that no more than
two (2) terms expire in any one (1) year. Qualified replacements shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of City Council,
within a period of ninety (90) days after the expiration of the former
member's term. Members shall not serve more than two (2) consecutive
five (5) year terms. No member shall be reappointed until five (5) years
after the completion of his/her previous two (2) consecutive terms of
service to the Commission.
C. Organization of the Commission. The Commission may establish its own
bylaws, rules of procedure subject to the approval of the Governing
Body of the City of Scranton and the provisions of the Local Agency
Act,14 establish offices and elect officers from its own membership. For
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Code.
§ 18-41 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-41
12:121
§ 18-42. Powers and functions of the Commission.
the conduct of any meeting and the taking of any action, a quorum shall
not be less than a majority of the Commission as a whole. Any action
taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority
of the quorum. The Commission shall keep full public records of its
business and shall submit a report of its activities to the Mayor and City
Council at least once a year.
D. Removal of members. Any Commission member may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just
cause by the Mayor.
E. Expenditures for service. The Commission may expend funds for legal,
secretarial, clerical, consultant and other technical assistance required
to achieve the aims of this Article. Commission members shall serve
without compensation except that the City of Scranton may reimburse
Commission members for expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties. The Commission shall adhere to the competitive bidding
requirements as contained in the Administrative Code of the City of
Scranton.15
F. Compliance with the Sunshine Act. The Commission shall comply with
the requirements for meetings under the Sunshine Act, 65 P.S. § 271 et
seq.
A. Advice to the governing body of the City of Scranton. The Commission
shall recommend to the governing body of the City of Scranton whether
an application for a certificate of appropriateness should be approved.
The Commission shall also recommend the designation of landmarks
and historic districts to the governing body of the City of Scranton.
B. Use of criteria. The criteria to be used by the Commission in making its
reports/recommendations to the governing body of the City of Scranton
concerning the issuance of certificates of appropriateness shall include
the effect of the proposed change upon each of the following:
(1) The broad historical values representing the cultural, political,
economical or social history of the City of Scranton.
(2) The relationship of the structure to historic personage or events.
(3) The specimen architectural types representative of a certain
period, style or method of construction.
(4) The general historical and architectural nature of the landmark or
historic district or of other buildings and structures in the
immediate proximity.
14.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Administrative Code.
§ 18-41 SCRANTON CODE § 18-42
12:122
§ 18-43. Landmarks and historic districts.
(5) The appropriateness of exterior architectural features which can
be seen from a public street or way.
(6) The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building, structure or landmark and the relationship of such factors
to similar features of adjacent buildings and structures in the
historic district or the immediate vicinity.
A. Designation of landmarks and the creation of historic districts. The
Commission shall prepare, in accordance with the criteria set forth in
Subsection B of this section, recommendations for consideration by the
governing body of the City of Scranton of those buildings, structures,
sites, objects or areas to be designated as landmarks or included in an
historic district or historic districts. After receipt of the
recommendations of the Commission, the governing body of the City of
Scranton may, after notice to all affected property owners and the
opportunity for all affected property owners to be present at a hearing
to designate any building or structure as a landmark or determine the
boundaries of any historic district, consider for adoption an Ordinance
which shall designate landmarks and shall define, in accordance with
the criteria set forth in Subsection B of this section, the boundaries of
the historic district or historic districts. All landmarks and individual
sites or areas included within an historic district or historic districts
shall be placed on the Historic District Map and kept on file in the Office
of the City Clerk.
B. Criteria for designation of a landmark or an historic district. A building,
complex of buildings, structure, site, object or area may be designated a
landmark or an historic district if it:
(1) Has significant character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City,
commonwealth or nation, or is associated with the life of a person
significant in the past.
(2) Is associated with an event of importance to the history of the City,
commonwealth or nation.
(3) Reflects the built environment of an era characterized by a
distinctive architectural style.
(4) Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style,
or engineering specimen.
(5) Is the work of a designer, architect, landscape architect or engineer
whose work has significantly influenced the historical,
architectural, economic, social or cultural development of the City,
commonwealth or nation.
§ 18-42 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-43
12:123
(6) Contains elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship
which represent a significant innovation.
(7) Is part of or related to a square block or other distinctive area
which should be preserved according to an historic, cultural or
architectural motif.
(8) Owing to its unique location or singular physical characteristic,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood, community or City.
(9) Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
(10) Exemplifies the cultural, political, religious, ethnic, economic,
social or historical heritage of the community.
C. Review and amendment of the Historic District Map. The Commission
shall, upon the written request of a resident of the City of Scranton, or
at least once every five (5) years, review the boundaries of the Historic
District Map to ensure the appropriateness of an historic district or
historic districts included therein, in accordance with the criteria
contained in § 18-53B. Any recommendations for amendments to the
Historic District Map may be acted upon by the governing body of the
City of Scranton in accordance with the procedure contained in
§ 18-43A.
D. Recommendations concerning moneys for historic preservation.
(1) The Commission shall make recommendations to the governing
body of the City of Scranton concerning the creation of economic
incentives and the use of grants, gifts and budgetary
appropriations to promote the preservation of buildings,
structures, sites, objects or districts of historic importance to the
City.
(2) With the prior approval of the governing body of the City of
Scranton, the Commission may prepare grant applications and
submit proposals to appropriate funding agencies, in order to
promote the preservation of buildings, structures, sites, objects or
districts of historic importance to the City.
E. Recommendations regarding historic preservation action by the City of
Scranton. The Commission may make recommendations to the
governing body of the City of Scranton that the City purchase any
building, structure, site or object of historic significance where private
preservation is not feasible or that the City acquire facade easements,
development rights or any other property interests that would promote
historic preservation.
F. Promotion of increased public awareness. The Commission may develop
educational programs or publicity aimed at increasing public
§ 18-43 SCRANTON CODE § 18-43
12:124
awareness of the value of architectural, cultural and historic
preservation.
G. Incentive plan. The purpose of an incentive plan is to provide a
mechanism to allow a reasonable use without the demolition of the
complete building or structure or its important architectural elements.
The Commission, in cooperation with other City agencies and
departments, and the property owner may prepare a report and
recommend to the governing body of the City of Scranton an incentive
plan to assure reasonable use of the building or structure. The incentive
plan may include, but not be limited to loans or grants from the City of
Scranton or other public or private sources, acquisition by purchase or
eminent domain, building and safety code modifications to reduce the
cost of maintenance, restoration, rehabilitation or renovation, changes
in applicable zoning regulations, including a transfer of development
rights or waiver of the provisions of this Article sufficient to allow
reasonable use of the building or structure.
H. Governing body consideration of incentive plan.
(1) Upon receipt of a report from the Commission recommending an
incentive plan to assure reasonable use of a property, the governing
body of the City of Scranton shall give prompt consideration to the
determination of economic hardship and the report of the
Commission, including the recommended incentive plan. The
governing body of the City of Scranton shall approve, or
disapprove, the Commission's recommended incentive plan to
allow reasonable use of the building or structure within ninety (90)
days immediately following the Commission's report.
(2) If approved by the governing body of the City of Scranton, the City
Clerk shall mail a copy of the legislative approval (and incentive
plan) to the property owner within five (5) days following
enactment of the legislation; the City Clerk will also provide copies
to the Commission and other appropriate City agencies and
departments.
I. Issuance of certificate of economic hardship by the commission.
(1) Upon receipt of a copy of the governing body's action authorizing
an incentive plan for an applicant's building or structure, the
Commission shall in accordance with the authorizing legislation,
issue a certificate of economic hardship within thirty (30) days. The
certificate of economic hardship may be subject to conditions
including design guidelines for subsequent construction not
inconsistent with the standards set forth by the Secretary of the
Interior's guidelines for the rehabilitation of historic buildings. The
certificate, and any applicable conditions, shall be mailed to the
applicant within five (5) days of its issuance. The certificate of
economic hardship shall be valid for a period of one hundred eighty
(180) days from its date of issue. Certificates of economic hardship
§ 18-43 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-43
12:125
§ 18-44. Certificate of appropriateness requirements.
No person shall reconstruct, alter, repair, restore, demolish, raze, sandblast
or chemically clean, in whole or in part, any landmark or erect, construct,
reconstruct, alter, repair, restore, demolish, raze, sandblast or chemically
clean, in whole or in part, except for interior alterations, demolition of
partitions or interior modifications, any building or structure located within
an historic district, without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness.
A certificate of appropriateness shall be required not only for work which
would require a building permit according to the currently enacted Building
Code16 of the City of Scranton, but also for all work affecting general design,
arrangement, texture and material, which can be seen from a public street
having a minimum legal right-of-way of thirty-three (33) feet including
utility installations or other public improvements. This includes, but is not
limited to the following:
§ 18-45. Duties of the Building Code Official.
shall not be transferable from the applicant to another subsequent
owner of the same property.
(2) Upon presentation by the applicant of a valid certificate of
economic hardship, the Building Code Official shall issue a
certificate of appropriateness to the applicant within five (5) days,
which will enable the applicant to apply for a building permit from
the City of Scranton.
A. Sandblasting.
B. Chemical cleaning.
C. Stucco, or other applied textures.
D. Replacement or major repair of windows, cornices, trim or other
nonstructural elements.
E. Signs required to have a permit under the Chapter 445, Zoning.
F. Other work affecting the visual appearance of the structure as defined
in this section.
A. Issuance of permits.
(1) The Building Code Official shall be responsible for the issuance of
permits for any work that would affect the general design,
arrangement, texture or material of any landmark or any building
or structure in any historic district, when the results of such work
are capable of being viewed from a public street having a minimum
legal right-of-way of thirty-three (33) feet. Permits shall be required
for such work, even if a permit is not required according to the
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Building Construction, Art. I.
§ 18-43 SCRANTON CODE § 18-45
12:126
currently enacted Building Code of the City of Scranton. This
includes, but is not limited to the following:
(a) Sandblasting.
(b) Chemical cleaning.
(c) Stucco or other applied textures.
(d) Replacement or major repair of windows, cornices, trim or
other nonstructural elements.
(e) Signs.
(f) Other work affecting the visual appearance of the building or
structure as defined in this section.
(2) No such permit shall be issued by the Building Code Official until a
Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued.
B. Conduct of office. Upon receipt of an application for a permit for work
to be done pursuant to this Article on a landmark or in any historic
district, the City of Scranton Building Code Official shall notify the
Historic Preservation Officer and shall act in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) The City of Scranton shall forward, within three (3) working days,
to the Commission, a copy of the application containing the
information and documentation required for the scope of the
proposed work.
(2) The City of Scranton Building Code Official shall maintain a record
of all such applications. The record shall include details of the
handling and disposition of the same and shall be in addition to,
and appropriately cross-referenced to, other building inspection
records.
(3) The City of Scranton Building Code Official shall require applicants
to submit an original and no more than three (3) copies of the
application and information/documentation required for the scope
of the proposed work to allow compliance with the foregoing.
(4) Upon receipt of the decision of the governing body of the City of
Scranton on the application, the Building Code Official shall
approve (or disapprove) the permit in accordance with the decision
of the governing body of the City of Scranton, and shall so notify
the applicant.
(5) The City of Scranton Building Code Official shall institute any
proceeding at law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this
Article in the same manner as in the enforcement of the Building
Code of the City of Scranton.
§ 18-45 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-45
12:127
§ 18-46. Procedure for consideration of application.
C. Hazardous buildings or structures. In the event that the application
involves a building or structure which presents a clear and present
danger to the public, or if said building or structure has been rendered
unfit for habitation because of fire, explosion or other similar cause, the
terms of this Article may be waived to the extent that the applicant can
proceed to render the subject property safe under the terms of the
Building Code of the City of Scranton. If the property cannot be made
safe and the City Engineer after a survey certifies that there is a clear
and present danger to the public if the building structure is allowed to
stand, then the building or structure may be demolished. However, any
other changes made to the subject property must be approved, finally,
under the terms of this Article.
A. Application. Upon receipt by the Commission of an application for
certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall schedule a meeting
to consider the advice/report which the Commission will give to the
Council of the City of Scranton.
B. Notice. The applicant shall be given not fewer than ten (10) days'
written notice, by registered mail, return receipt requested, of the time
and place of said meeting and shall be invited to appear to explain their
reasons for the application. The applicant may waive, in writing, this
notification period. If the applicant is not the owner of the property,
then the owner of the property shall be given not fewer than ten (10)
days' written notice by registered mail, return receipt requested, of the
time and place of said meeting and shall be invited to appear.
C. Meeting. At the meeting, which may be at the time and place scheduled
for a regularly scheduled Commission meeting, the Commission shall
review the application, hear the applicant, owner or other interested
person(s) and determine whether the criteria for a certificate of
appropriateness have been met.
D. Decision. [Amended 11-25-2019 by Ord. No. 76-2019]
(1) The Board shall notify the applicant of its decision as soon as
possible, by certified mail, return receipt requested, but no later
than 30 days after the submission of the application to the Building
Code Official.
(2) If the Board decides to recommend the granting of a certificate of
appropriateness, the Board shall, simultaneously with notifying the
applicant, submit its advice/report, in writing, to the Building Code
Official for issuance of a permit.
(3) If the Board, on the basis of the information received at the
meeting, and from its general knowledge and background
information, decides to recommend a denial of the certificate of
appropriateness, it shall indicate to the applicant the changes, if
§ 18-45 SCRANTON CODE § 18-46
12:128
§ 18-47. Denial of application. [Amended 11-25-2019 by Ord. No.
76-2019]
any, in the plans and specifications which would enable the
applicant to meet the requirements of this article, and shall
forward its report to the governing body of the City of Scranton.
The Board shall withhold its report from the governing body of
the City of Scranton for a period of five days following its notice
to the applicant that the Board intends to recommend against the
granting of a certificate of appropriateness. This grace period,
which is intended to allow the applicant time to decide whether
or not to make the suggested changes, may be extended by an
additional 15 days upon written request of the applicant. At the
expiration of this grace period, the Board shall forward its advice/
report denying a certificate of appropriateness to the governing
body of the City of Scranton, including any pertinent information
regarding suggested changes to the proposed plan/application in
question, and the applicant's response(s) to said suggested
changes.
A. In the event that the Board denies an application, the Board shall
submit its advice/report, in writing, to the governing body of the City of
Scranton within 30 days of the date of the submission of the application
unless the time limitation is waived, in writing, by the applicant. This
thirty-day period shall be extended, automatically, by the number of
grace period days given pursuant to § 18-46. Should the Board fail to
provide its advice/report to the governing body of the City of Scranton
within the time limits specified herein, it shall be deemed as a matter of
law that the Board has recommended that the City of Scranton issue the
subject certificate of appropriateness, and the applicant may notify the
Building Code Official accordingly.
B. Should the Board decide to deny the application, it shall provide its
advice/report to the governing body of the City of Scranton; it shall be
in writing; and it shall include the following:
(1) The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done;
(2) The exterior changes to be made, or the exterior character of the
structure to be constructed or erected;
(3) A list of the surrounding structures with their general exterior
characteristics and the names of their owners;
(4) The effect of the proposed change(s) upon the general historical
and architectural nature of the area;
(5) The appropriateness of the exterior architectural features which
can be seen from a public street or way;
§ 18-46 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-47
12:129
§ 18-48. Responsibilities of the governing body. [Amended
11-25-2019 by Ord. No. 76-2019]
(6) The general design, arrangement, texture, and material of the
building or structure, and the relation of such factors to similar
features of the buildings or structures in the area;
(7) The opinion of the Board (pro and con) as to the appropriateness of
the work proposed as it will preserve or destroy the historical or
visual aspects and nature of the area.
A. Receipt of Board advice/report. Upon receipt of the written denial of a
certificate of appropriateness and the advice/report of the Board, or,
absent the Board's advice/report, notification to the Building Code
Official of the City of Scranton, the governing body of the City of
Scranton shall consider within 45 working days the question of
upholding or remanding the denial of the application to the Board.
B. Notice. The applicant shall be advised by the City Clerk of the City of
Scranton, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time and
place of the meeting, at which time the denial will be reviewed by City
Council, and the applicant shall be advised that they have the right to
attend the meeting and be heard as to their reasons for filing the
application. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, then the
owner shall be notified in the same manner.
C. Criteria and procedures. In determining whether or not to uphold the
denial of a certificate of appropriateness of the proposed erection,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition, or razing of all or
part of any building or structure, the governing body of the City of
Scranton shall consider the same factors as considered by the Board,
set forth in § 18-42B of this article, as well as the advice/report of the
Commission. Any hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of 53 P.S. § 10908(2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8) and (9), except that
the time periods shall be those prescribed by this article.
D. Decision.
(1) If the governing body of the City of Scranton concurs with the
denial of a certificate of appropriateness, it shall do so in writing,
and copies shall be given to the applicant, the Board, and to the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, where
applicable, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice,
rejecting the application, shall indicate what changes, if any, in the
application's plans and specifications would enable the applicant to
meet the requirements of this article.
(2) If the governing body of the City of Scranton does not concur with
the Board's denial of the certificate of appropriateness, it shall
remand the matter to the Board, with an explanation for its
rationale, and provide a copy its decision to the Board. Thereafter,
§ 18-47 SCRANTON CODE § 18-48
12:130
§ 18-49. Works of art.
§ 18-50. Public property in an historic district.
the Board shall evaluate the governing body's recommendations
and revise its decision and report accordingly.
A. Preservation and location of works of art. The Commission shall also
consider the preservation and existing location of works of art in
historic districts and may make recommendations for changes in
location thereof.
B. Commission review of works of art. No work of art shall be erected in an
historic district or placed upon any street, park, public building or
structure or other property belonging to the City, until such work of art
and its proposed location have been reviewed by the Commission and a
course of action is recommended to the governing body of the City of
Scranton. No work of art, or public building or structure in an historic
district may be removed, relocated, demolished, razed or altered in any
way without the recommendation of the Commission to the governing
body of the City of Scranton.
C. Public funds. The Commission shall recommend that works of art be a
part of any new construction, begun after the effective date of this
Article, in an historic district which is funded with public moneys, in
whole or in part, and may recommend that one percent (1%) of the total
public funding of said new construction be used for works of art.
A. Approval of design of building, structure or site. No design for a
building, bridge, approach, gate, stairs, fence, lamp, street furniture,
other structure or addition which shall be erected in an historic district
or upon any street or property which is owned, leased or occupied by
the City, or any agency thereof shall be implemented without the
recommendation of the Commission to the governing body of the City of
Scranton. The Commission's recommendation shall not be binding on
the governing body.
B. Alterations, location and demolition. No arch, bridge, approach,
permanent sign or property of any person intended to extend, or
extending, over or upon any City sidewalk or street, City park or
property in an historic district shall be erected, altered or demolished
without the recommendation of the Commission to the governing body
of the City of Scranton. The Commission's recommendation shall not be
binding on the governing body.
C. Submission and resubmission of design drawings and/or models. The
Commission shall require submission of drawings and/or models of
designs of municipal property located in an historic district for its
approval, including materials and colors intended for exterior use. After
an alteration or change in design is made upon advice from the
Commission, or otherwise, the design drawings and/or models shall be
§ 18-48 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-50
12:131
§ 18-51. Uncertainty in boundaries.
Should a dispute arise as to the boundaries of the historic district(s), the
Historic District Map shall be the final authority. Where uncertainty exists
as to the boundaries of an historic district, the following rules shall apply:
§ 18-52. Conflict with other laws.
Should any provisions set forth in this Article be found to conflict with any
law of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, such
federal and/or state law shall govern and this Article shall be construed
accordingly. Such conflict shall not affect the validity of this Article.
§ 18-53. Violations and penalties.
resubmitted to the Commission. If the Commission recommends
approval of the design to the governing body of the City of Scranton,
these drawings and/or models shall be retained by the City's Building
Code Official until completion of the project.
A. Where historic district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following the center line or street line of streets or center line or alley
line of alleys, such boundaries shall be construed to extend to the
center lines of said streets or alleys.
B. Where historic district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the street lines, the alley lines of alleys, or the
limits of rights-of-way, such boundaries shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the
Historic District Map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be
determined by the use of the scale as shown on the Historic District
Map.
C. Where historic district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries.
D. Where historic district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following a body of water, such lines shall be construed as coincident
with the shoreline of said body of water.
E. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Historic District Map or in other
circumstances not covered by the above, the Commission shall
interpret the boundaries of the Historic District and refer the findings
of the Commission to the Council of the City of Scranton for action.
A. Notice of violations. The Building Code Official shall serve a notice of
violation on the person in violation of this Article, or of a plan approved
thereunder, or in violation of a permit of certificate of appropriateness
issued under the provisions of this Article. Such notice shall direct the
abatement of said violation.
§ 18-50 SCRANTON CODE § 18-53
12:132
§ 18-54. Appeals.
§ 18-55. Relief from personal responsibility.
Any person whose duties include the implementation or enforcement of
this Article, while acting within the scope of those duties for the City
of Scranton, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable for
B. Prosecution of violation. If the violation is not abated within the time
specified in the notice of violation, the Building Code Official and the
City Solicitor shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
C. Violation penalties. Any persons who shall violate the provisions of this
Article or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall conduct activities in violation of a permit or a certificate of
appropriateness issued under the provisions of this Article, or who
shall, without having applied for and received an appropriate permit,
conduct activities for which a permit is required under the terms of this
Article, shall be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine not
exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.) per day, plus costs, or
imprisonment for a period of up to ninety (90) days if such fine and
costs be not paid. Each day that a violation continues unabated shall be
deemed a separate offense.
A. An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness, or a property owner of
a property designated historic, aggrieved by an adverse decision of the
governing body of the City of Scranton, or any person(s) who has
actively participated in opposition to the application for a certificate of
appropriateness and clearly demonstrates a particularized harm will be
caused by the approval of the application, may file an appeal with the
Court of Common Pleas of Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania, or any
other court having jurisdiction over the matter, within thirty (30) days
after the issuance of the governing body of the City of Scranton's
decision on the application, the historic designation of a landmark
property or an historic district. Failure to file an appeal within the time
frame herein specified shall preclude an appeal on said decision of the
governing body of the City of Scranton.
B. Upon the filing of an appeal and during its pendency before the Court,
all work under appeal shall be stayed unless the City Engineer or the
Building Code Official certifies to the governing body of the City of
Scranton, in writing, that such stay would cause imminent peril to life
or property, in which case the work shall not be stayed, other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by any Court having
jurisdiction. Any interested party may petition the Court having
jurisdiction to order such appellants to post bond as a condition of
continuing the proceedings before the Court. The question of whether
or not such petition should be granted and the amount of the Bond shall
be within the sole discretion of the Court.
§ 18-53 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-55
12:133
any damage that my accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit instituted
against any City officer, employee or Commission member because of an
act performed by him/her in the lawful discharge of his/her duties shall be
defended by the City Solicitor and/or the City Solicitor's Office. In no case
shall any such City Officer, employee or Commission member be liable for
costs in any action, suit or proceedings that may be instituted in pursuance
of the provisions of this Article when he/she performs his/her duties in good
faith and without malice. For the purpose of this Article, any person who
has been assigned duties pursuant to this Article, or his/her designee, shall
be considered an employee of the City of Scranton and shall be entitled to
the protection of this section.
§ 18-56. Severability; right to amend.
If any section, clause, portion or provision of this Article shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect any other section, clause, portion or provision of this Article
so long as it remains legally enforceable minus the invalid section, clause,
portion or provision. The City reserves the right to amend this Article, or
any portion thereof, from time to time as it shall deem advisable in the best
interest of the promotion of the purposes and intent of this Article and the
effective administration thereof.
§ 18-57. Amendments.
The Commission may recommend amendments to this Article which shall
not take effect until an ordinance amending this Article is enacted by the
governing body of the City of Scranton in accordance with the Home Rule
Charter of the City of Scranton and state law.17
§ 18-58. Fees.
In order to cover the costs of advertising, the expenses of the Commission
and a proportional part of the Historic Preservation Officer's salary used
for these reviews, a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.) is imposed
for a certificate of appropriateness, which shall be made payable to the
Treasury of the City of Scranton and paid to the Building Code Official upon
application.
§ 18-59. Present landmarks and historic districts.
When all members of the Commission are appointed they shall prepare a list
of landmarks and historic districts within the City of Scranton pursuant to
§ 18-43 hereof and submit its recommendation to the governing body within
sixty (60) days.
17.Editor's Note: See Charter.
§ 18-55 SCRANTON CODE § 18-60
12:134
§ 18-60. When effective.
This Article shall become effective when the Mayor appoints all members
to the Commission pursuant to § 18-41 hereof. For purposes of this section,
the Commission shall be fully empaneled when Council accepts the
appointments of all members.
§ 18-60 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE § 18-60
12:135
Chapter 24
BONDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 6.
Funds and trusts — See Ch. 70.
Reimbursements — See Ch. 111.
§ 24-1. Bonds required for city officials.
Chapter 30
CITY CLASSIFICATION
§ 30-1. Election to become Second Class A city.
The Council elects to be a city of the Second Class A in accordance with the
provisions of the Act 98 of the General Assembly approved by the Governor
of Pennsylvania, August 31, 1971 (53 P.S. § 101).
A. The following officials of the city shall be bonded in the following sums
as mandated by §§ 6-9 through 6-11 of Chapter 6, Administrative Code,
and in accordance with the Comprehensive Employment and Training
Program (CETA) mandates:
(1) City Treasurer as City Treasurer, two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.).
(2) City Treasurer as Delinquent Tax Collector, ten thousand dollars
($10,000.).
(3) City Controller, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.).
(4) Mayor, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.).
(5) Business Administrator, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.).
(6) CETA Administrator, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.).
(7) Director of Planning, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.).
(8) Finance Director, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.).
(9) Chief Clerk, Purchasing, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.).
B. The terms and conditions of the bond shall be as set forth in §§ 6-9
through 6-11 of Chapter 6, Administrative Code, which sections of said
chapter are incorporated herein by reference hereto.
§ 18-60 SCRANTON CODE § 30-1
24:136
Chapter 35
CODE AND SUPPLEMENT SALES
§ 35-1. Sale authorized; distribution of funds.
General Code Publishers, Inc., is hereby authorized to sell the Code of the
City of Scranton and any and all supplements thereto, and any and all
funds received from said sale shall be distributed in accordance with the
agreement between the City of Scranton and General Code Publishers, Inc.
§ 35-2. Fees.
General Code Publishers, Inc., shall offer the printed code for sale at $300;
printed Code and Code on disks at $345; and annual subscription to updates
for $75.
Chapter 41
CONTRACTING PROCEDURES
§ 41-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY OF SCRANTON — The municipal corporation chartered by the State
of Pennsylvania known as the City of Scranton, its agents or Departments.
SUPPORTS A POLICY OF DISCRIMINATION — Doing business in Northern
Ireland without subscribing to the MacBride Principles.
§ 41-2. Award of contracts.
A. Notwithstanding any other requirement of law, the City of Scranton
shall not contract for goods or services with a person, firm or
corporation which supports a policy of discrimination as defined in
§ 41-1 hereof, except as required by the General Municipal Law of
Pennsylvania.18
B. If a contract must be awarded to a contractor who supports a policy of
religious discrimination as defined in § 41-1 hereof, because the
contractor is the lowest responsible bidder or the goods or services are
not reasonably obtainable from other contractors who do not provide
such support, then the contracting agency shall submit a statement to
the Business Administrator detailing the reasons for such an action. The
Business Administrator shall file that statement with the City Clerk.
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 101 et seq.
§ 30-1 CODE AND SUPPLEMENT SALES § 41-3
35:137
§ 41-3. Listing to be provided; report.
The Business Administrator shall provide a list of the persons, firms or
corporations with which the city has contracted for goods or services which
have refused to subscribe to the MacBride Principles to the City Council on
an annual basis. The first report shall be due one (1) year after the effective
date of this chapter.
Chapter 47
DEFENSE COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 6.
§ 47-1. Creation; membership.
There is hereby created a local Council of Defense of the city to be
composed of the Mayor as Chairman, and such other persons, not exceeding
fifteen (15) in number, as the Mayor may appoint from time to time.
§ 47-2. Compensation.
Each member of the local Council of Defense shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor and without compensation.
§ 47-3. Designation of Director.
The Mayor shall designate one (1) of the members of the local Council of
Defense as Director who shall be the coordinator for the city.
§ 47-4. Employment of personnel; expenditures.
The local Council of Defense may employ such personnel and fix their
compensation, and may make such expenditures within the appropriation
therefor, or from other funds made available to it, as are necessary to carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
§ 47-5. Duties generally.
The local Council of Defense shall be charged with the duty of coordinating
all defense activities of the city. It shall:
A. Cooperate with and assist the state Council of Defense and perform
such services as may be requested by it and may act jointly with other
Councils of Defense.
B. So far as applicable, have the same power and duties within the city as
are vested in the state Council of Defense.
§ 41-3 SCRANTON CODE § 47-5
47:138
§ 47-6. Committees; rules and regulations.
The local Council of Defense may appoint committees to meet any
emergency that may arise and prescribe such rules and regulations as may
be necessary to govern its procedure and activities.
Chapter 51
ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
§ 51-1. Creation of Housing Supervisor/Lead-Based Paint Manager
position; compensation.
The position of a Housing Supervisor/Lead-Based Paint Manager within
the City of Scranton Office of Economic and Community Development is
hereby created with a salary of $25,000 to be paid from the Administrative
Fund line item in the budget of the Office of Economic and Community
Development.
Chapter 53
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Funds and trusts — See Ch. 65. Pensions — See Ch. 99.
C. Keep in contact with the office of the state Council of Defense to the end
that all requests and suggestions from that office shall receive prompt
and efficient response.
D. Act as a clearinghouse on municipal defense information for all
governmental and private agencies cooperating in the defense
program.
E. Direct information regarding the defense program to all municipal
departments or agencies which are or may be affected thereby.
F. Make recommendations, from time to time, for improvements in the
handling of defense problems affecting the city.
G. Perform such other advisory functions as may be requested by agencies
or departments of the federal government in connection with the
national defense program.
H. Do whatever is necessary and proper to carry out the intent and
purpose of this chapter, tending to protect life and property.
§ 47-5 ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY § 51-1
51:139

ARTICLE I
Labor Relations
§ 53-1. Representative for collective bargaining; labor contracts.
The governing body of the city shall designate a representative to act for
the city in matters of collective bargaining. All labor contracts between the
city and its employees shall be ratified by resolution of the governing body
and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 53-1 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS § 53-1
53:141

ARTICLE II
Military Service
§ 53-2. Credit for military service in computing pension time.
A. If any employee of the city, whether regular, reserve or substitute
policeman or fireman, or other employee, per diem or otherwise, shall
be enlisted in time of war, or shall have been drafted to serve in the
armed services of the United States in time of war or peace, such
service in the armed services of the United States shall be credited in
full to the service record of such employee to the city in computing his
service for pension purposes.
B. If any such employee shall return from military service to the service of
the city, he shall be permitted to compute and pay into his respective
pension fund the amount of money required by applying the pension
rate to the period of military service. Thereupon the proper pension
fund shall credit such employee with the period of municipal service
represented by such military service.
C. This section shall apply to all present employees of the city but shall not
apply to military service performed prior to entry into municipal
service.
§ 53-2 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS § 53-2
53:143

ARTICLE III
Deductions
§ 53-3. Deductions for Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
§ 53-4. Deductions for social security.
A. The Controller and Treasurer are hereby authorized and directed to
accept from officials and employees of the city voluntary authorizations
to make deductions as prescribed by them from their earnings for
accumulation and subsequent payment to the proper companies
affording Blue Cross and Blue Shield protection to city employees.
B. All moneys so deducted shall be paid over to the City Treasurer by
warrant for deposit in one (1) of the legally designated depositories, in a
special account to be known as "City of Scranton, Pennsylvania,
Officials and Employees Blue Cross and Blue Shield Fund." Such fund
shall be drawn upon only by proper city warrant for the authorized
payment of premiums for officials and employees participating in the
Blue Cross and Blue Shield program, and for the payment of
accumulated deductions remaining to an official's or employee's credit
upon termination of his or her participation in the plan, or employment
by the city.
C. The proper officials are hereby authorized and directed to do and
perform any and all acts necessary to carry out and direct the payment
of moneys as herein proposed for the official's and employee's Blue
Cross and Blue Shield protection plan.
D. The authorizations for deductions shall be voluntary and may be
terminated at any time by written notice from officials or employees of
the city, at which time any sums of money held by the City Treasurer for
their account shall be returned to them.
A. The Controller and Treasurer are hereby authorized and directed to
accept from officials and employees of the city voluntary authorizations
to make deductions as prescribed by them from their earnings for
accumulation and subsequent payment to the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Social Security Division, for Old Age and Survivors'
Insurance under the provisions of the Federal Social Security Act.
B. All moneys so deducted shall be paid over to the City Treasurer by
warrant for deposit in one (1) of the legally designated depositories, in a
special account to be known as "City of Scranton, Pennsylvania,
Officials and Employees Social Security Fund." Such fund shall be
drawn upon only by proper city warrant for the authorized payment of
taxes due on account of federal social security regulations and for the
payment of accumulated deductions remaining to an official's or
employee's credit upon termination of his participation in the plan, or
employment by the city.
§ 53-3 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS § 53-4
53:145
§ 53-5. Deductions for United States savings bonds.
§ 53-6. Deductions for school district income tax.
C. The proper officials are hereby authorized and directed to do and
perform any and all acts necessary to carry out and direct the payment
of moneys as herein proposed for the employee's social security
benefits plan.
D. The authorizations for deductions shall be voluntary and may be
terminated at any time by written notice from officials or employees of
the city, at which time any sums of money held by the City Treasurer for
their account shall be returned to them until the time of the obtaining of
federal social security coverage for all employees of the city, when the
same shall be mandatory.
A. The proper officers of the city are hereby authorized and directed to
accept from the officials and employees of the city, voluntary
authorizations to make deductions from their earnings for accumulation
and subsequent purchase of United States savings bonds.
B. All moneys so deducted shall be paid over to the City Treasurer by
warrant for deposit in (1) one of the legally designated depositories, in a
special account to be known as "City of Scranton, Pennsylvania,
Officials and Employees Bond Purchase Fund." Such fund shall be
drawn upon only by the proper city warrant for the authorized purchase
of bonds for the officials and employees participating in the plan, and
for the payment of accumulated deductions remaining to his or her
credit upon termination of his participation in the plan or upon
termination of the plan by the city.
C. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to purchase for
and deliver United States savings bonds to the officials and employees
upon receipt of a purchase order and warrant to cover the same from
the City Controller.
D. The proper officers are hereby authorized and directed to do and
perform any and all acts necessary to carry out the purchase of United
States savings bonds by officials and employees of the city who
subscribe to the same.
E. The authorizations for deductions shall be voluntary and may be
terminated at any time by written notice from officials or employees of
the city at which time any sums of money held by the City Treasurer for
their account shall be returned to them.
A. From and after January 1, 1949, and for such other years as the income
tax of the Scranton School District shall be effective requiring
employees to withhold, collect and pay to the Scranton School District
the sum of one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) from the wages of
employees, there shall be deducted, withheld and collected from the
§ 53-4 SCRANTON CODE § 53-6
53:146
§ 53-7. Deductions for United States income tax.
wages paid all employees of the city, one-half of one percent (1/2 of
1%) on each wage payment for every semimonthly payroll period. The
heads of the several Departments of the city are hereby authorized and
directed to deduct, withhold and collect such tax from the wages of
employees and to pay by warrant to the city, the amount of the tax so
deducted and withheld.
B. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to open a special
account to be designated "City of Scranton, Pennsylvania, Current
Scranton School District Tax Fund" in one (1) of the legally designated
depositories and to deposit therein all warrants for such current tax
withheld and collected from the employees of the several city
Departments. Such fund shall be drawn upon only by a proper city
warrant for the payment to the Scranton School District of the current
tax withheld and collected from the employees of the several city
Departments as required by resolution of the Scranton School District
imposing such tax.
C. The officials of the several Departments of the city are authorized and
directed to keep the records necessary to make, issue, file and furnish
such returns, statements, receipts, etc., as required by any such
resolution or regulations made in accordance therewith or pursuant
thereto for the employees and their respective Departments.
A. From and after January 1, 1945, and for such other years as an
individual income tax shall be effective requiring employers to
withhold, collect and pay any United States current individual income
tax from the wages of employees, there shall be deducted, withheld and
collected from the wages paid all employees of the city a United States
individual income tax in excess of each wage payment over the
withholding exemption allowable for the semimonthly payroll period in
compliance with any such individual income tax act. The heads of the
several Departments of the city are hereby authorized and directed to
deduct, withhold and collect such tax from the wages of such
employees, in accordance with any wage bracket table specifically
authorized by any individual income tax act or amendment of the
Internal Revenue Code. The tax so deducted and withheld shall be paid
to the City Treasurer by warrant.
B. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to open a special
account to be designated as "City of Scranton, Pennsylvania, Current
United States Tax Fund" in one (1) of the legally designated
depositories and to deposit therein all warrants for such current tax
withheld and collected from the employees of the several city
Departments. Such fund shall be drawn upon only by a proper city
warrant for the payment to the United States Government of the
current tax withheld and collected from the employees of the several
city Departments, as required by any individual income tax act or
§ 53-6 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS § 53-7
53:147
§ 53-8. Deductions for Lackawanna United Fund.
§ 53-9. Deductions for Lackawanna Industrial Fund Enterprises.
amendment or regulations made in accordance therewith or pursuant
thereto.
C. The officials of the several Departments of the city are authorized and
directed to keep the records necessary to make, issue, file and furnish
such returns, statements, receipts, etc., as may be required by any such
act or regulations made in accordance therewith or pursuant thereto,
for the employees in their respective Departments.
A. There shall be withheld and collected once each month from the wages
and salaries of each and every employee of the city who subscribes by
authorization, a sum equal to one-twelfth (1/12) of his or her authorized
contribution to the Lackawanna United Fund. Such period shall run
from January 1 to December 31 of each year.
B. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to open a special
account to be known as "City of Scranton Lackawanna United Fund" in
one (1) of the legal designated depositories and to deposit in such fund
all moneys withheld and collected from the employees of the city
pursuant to this section.
C. The City Treasurer shall pay such sums as are in the fund once a month
during the period of withholding and collection to the Treasurer of the
Lackawanna United Fund and receive his receipt for such sums.
D. Such deductions shall not be made unless a written authorization
stating the amount of the contribution and the period of withholding
and collecting the same shall be signed by the employee and left with
the City Controller prior to the withholding and collection.
A. There shall be withheld and collected once a month from the wages and
salaries of employees of the city a sum of money from his or her monthly
wages as authorized by the employee on a written notice signed by such
employee. The deductions shall be made in strict pursuance of the
written authorization and if the written authorization is withdrawn, no
further deductions shall be made. The deductions shall represent
voluntary contributions to the Lackawanna Industrial Fund Enterprises
(LIFE).
B. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to open a special
account to be known as "City of Scranton LIFE Fund" in one (1) of the
legal designated depositories and to deposit in such fund all moneys
withheld and collected from the employees of the city pursuant to this
section.
C. The City Treasurer shall pay such sums as are in the fund once a month
during the period of withholding and collection to the treasurer of the
§ 53-7 SCRANTON CODE § 53-9
53:148
§ 53-10. Direct payments of deductions authorized.
Direct payments by the city to the authority or the organization respectively
concerned may be made directly by city warrant drawn upon the fund
which is bearing the charge for the employee's wage involved. Such direct
payment shall be made whenever, at the discretion of the City Controller
and the City Treasurer, it may be deemed convenient and desirable without
an intervening accumulation thereof in any special account or fund,
notwithstanding provisions in any ordinance prior hereto which direct the
establishment of such special accounts or funds, namely §§ 53-3B, 53-4B,
53-5B, 53-6B, 53-7B, 53-8B, and 53-9B.
Lackawanna Industrial Fund Enterprises (LIFE), and receive his receipt
for such sums.
D. Such deductions shall not be made unless a written authorization
stating the amount of the contribution and the period of withholding
and collecting the same shall be signed by the employee and left with
the City Controller prior to the withholding and collection.
§ 53-9 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS § 53-10
53:149
Chapter 59
FIRE, BUREAU OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulance and emergency services — See Ch.
12.
Firemen pension — See Ch. 99.
§ 59-1. Compulsory retirement of firemen.
There shall be compulsory retirement of each regular and reserve fireman
in the service of the Bureau of Fire, Department of Public Safety, who shall
have reached the age of sixty-five (65) years.
§ 59-2. Reduction or increase in number of employees. [Amended
by Ord. No. 10-1980]
A. If for any reasons of economy or lack of funds it becomes necessary for
the city to reduce the number of employees of its Bureau of Fire, then
the city shall follow the following procedure:
(1) If there are any employees in the Bureau of Fire who have reached
the age of sixty-five (65) and are eligible for retirement under the
terms of the Fire Pension Fund of the city then such reduction in
number shall be made by retirement on pension of all the oldest in
age.
(2) If the number of employees in the Bureau of Fire who have reached
the age of sixty-five (65) and are eligible for retirement under the
terms of the Fire Pension Fund of the city is insufficient to effect the
reduction in number desired by the city, then the reduction shall be
effective by suspending the last person or persons, starting with
probationers, that have been appointed. Such removal shall be
accomplished by suspending in numerical order, commencing with
the last person appointed, all recent appointees until such
reduction has been accomplished.
B. Whenever the number of employees in the Bureau of Fire shall be again
increased in number, or if any vacancies may occur, the employees
suspended under the terms of this section shall be reinstated to their
former class, before any new appointees are appointed, in the reverse
order of which they were suspended.
§ 53-10 SCRANTON CODE § 59-2
59:150
Chapter 65
FUNDS AND TRUSTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 6.
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 18.
Bonds — See Ch. 24.
Employee benefit — See Ch. 53.
Reimbursements — See Ch. 111.
§ 59-2 FUNDS AND TRUSTS § 59-2
65:151

ARTICLE I
Revenue Sharing Trust
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Sec. 2-119, of the 1979 Code]
§ 65-1. Establishment.
A. A trust fund is hereby established in which all revenue sharing
payments will be deposited and accounted for.
B. All funds received by the city as its payment from revenue sharing shall
be accounted for and expended in accordance with all rules and
regulations of Public Law 92-512 adopted by the 92nd Congress H.R.
14370, Oct. 20, 1972, known as "Fiscal Assistance to State and Local
Governments."
C. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to establish a
special account or accounts for any funds furnished to the city by the
United States Government as its payment from revenue sharing.
§ 65-1 FUNDS AND TRUSTS § 65-1
65:153

ARTICLE II
Sinking Fund
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 2, Div. 4, of the 1979 Code]
§ 65-2. Commission established; charge of Sinking Fund.
The Sinking Fund Commission shall consist of five (5) persons. All moneys
applicable to the Sinking Fund shall be under the charge of the Commission.
§ 65-3. Quorum to transact business.
A majority of the members of the Sinking Fund Commission shall constitute
a quorum and no business shall be transacted without a quorum being
present.
§ 65-4. Officers and term.
The officers of the Sinking Fund Commission shall be a President and
Secretary, who shall serve for one (1) year and shall be elected at the
commencement of the fiscal year.
§ 65-5. Powers and duties of President.
It shall be the duty of the President to preside at all meetings and conduct
under the instructions of the Sinking Fund Commission, all negotiations
for the purchase of bonds for the Sinking Fund. However, his power to
purchase bonds shall only be exercised by authority of the Commission
given at a meeting duly called.
§ 65-6. Duties of Secretary; meetings.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep correct minutes of the
proceedings of the Sinking Fund Commission. The Commission shall hold
meetings as from time to time shall be deemed necessary.
§ 65-7. Statements from City Treasurer.
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to furnish to the Sinking Fund
Commission, from time to time as he may be called upon, statements of the
condition of each fund, the amounts invested, the bonds therein, and the
balance on hand.
§ 65-8. Deposit of moneys.
All moneys belonging to the Sinking Fund shall, under the instructions
of the Sinking Fund Commission, be deposited at interest by the City
Treasurer, separate and apart from all other moneys in his custody, in
such banks, saving institutions or trust companies of the city as shall be
designated by the Commission.
§ 65-2 FUNDS AND TRUSTS § 65-9
65:155
§ 65-9. Information from depositories.
The Sinking Fund Commission shall from time to time ascertain from the
several depositories of their funds, the amounts of such deposits and
interest allowed thereon. The several depositories are hereby authorized to
give the Commission, or its duly authorized member, all information bearing
on the subject.
§ 65-10. Verification of bonds.
It shall be the duty of the Sinking Fund Commission to check up and verify
the bonds in its possession, from time to time, as it may deem proper and
necessary.
§ 65-11. Deferring purchase of bonds.
At any time when the Sinking Fund Commission, on account of
accumulation of cash in the Sinking Fund, may desire to purchase bonds,
it shall ascertain the price at which such bonds can be purchased. If the
bonds will not net to the city in interest as much as it received from
the depositories of such cash, the Commission shall be relieved from the
necessity of purchasing bonds, and the cash may remain on deposit at
interest until such time as bonds can be purchased at an advantage.
§ 65-12. Countersigning checks; cancellation of bonds, coupons.
All checks drawn by the City Treasurer on the Sinking Fund shall be
countersigned by the President of the Sinking Fund Commission. All bonds
or coupons paid by the City Treasurer shall be immediately turned over
to the Commission for cancellation and the Commissioners shall be held
under no liability on account of such bonds or coupons until they are in their
possession.
§ 65-13. Custody of bonds; nonliability of commissioners.
The City Treasurer is hereby made custodian of the bonds held by the
Sinking Fund subject to examination by the Sinking Fund Commissioners
whenever they may so desire. The Commissioners are hereby relieved from
any liability on account of abstraction, loss or misuse of such bonds when
not in their possession, and they are further relieved from liability for any
loss caused by embezzlement or illegal use of the money belonging to the
Sinking Fund.
§ 65-9 SCRANTON CODE § 65-13
65:156
ARTICLE III
Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Fund
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Sec. 2-120 of the 1979 Code]
§ 65-14. Fund established.
A. The City Controller shall set up a special account in the Department of
the Treasury, to be designated the "Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Fund."
B. All funds received by the city for the Alcoholism and Drug Abuse
Council of Northeastern Pennsylvania shall be deposited by the
Treasurer and records kept and paid in the City Controller's office to
the aforementioned Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Fund of the
Department of City Treasury.
§ 65-14 FUNDS AND TRUSTS § 65-14
65:157

ARTICLE IV
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted as Ord. No. 56-1981 (Sec. 2-121 of the 1979 Code)]
§ 65-15. Authorization to participate.
The City of Scranton is hereby authorized to participate in the Local
Government Investment Trust and to invest such funds as may seem proper
and fit with the Local Government Investment Trust. The Mayor and other
appropriate officials are authorized to execute any agreements and/or
instruments necessary to implement the Local Government Investment
Trust.
§ 65-15 FUNDS AND TRUSTS § 65-15
65:159
Chapter 76
LIBRARY
§ 76-1. Acceptance of real estate for free public library; Albright
Memorial Building.
The city hereby accepts the conveyance and donation of real estate for the
establishment of a free public library, for the use and benefit of the citizens
and residents of the city. The building shall be called the "Albright Memorial
Building," in memory of Joseph J. Albright and Elizabeth Albright, his wife.
§ 76-2. Board of Trustees.
The library placed under § 76-1 shall be reasonably maintained, shall be
managed and controlled by a Board consisting of sixteen (16) trustees, of
whom the Mayor of the city shall be ex officio one (1), and fifteen (15) shall
be selected and appointed as follows: five (5) thereof shall be nominated
by the Mayor, one (1) each from the clergymen or pastors, residents of the
city of the following religious denominations, to wit, Episcopalian, Roman
Catholic, Methodist, Baptist and Presbyterian, which nominations shall be
confirmed by the Council, four (4) thereof [no more than two (2) of whom
shall be of the same political party] shall be nominated by the Mayor from
the citizens at large and confirmed by the Council; three (3) thereof shall
be appointed by the Chamber of Commerce of the city and three (3) thereof
shall be appointed by the President Judge of the County Court of Common
Pleas from the members of the bar of such court. The fifteen (15) members
shall be divided into five (5) classes of three (3) members each in such
manner that the terms of three (3) members shall expire each year, and they
shall hold their full terms for five (5) years, the respective terms to be at
first fixed at the first organization of the Board by drawing lots. Vacancies
occurring for any cause shall be filled for the unexpired term by nomination
and appointment from the same class by the respective bodies and persons
above designated. In case any vacancy cannot be filled in the manner thus
indicated, then the Board may fill such vacancy. The Board of Trustees
shall, annually, make report to the Council of the condition, expenditures
and necessities of the library and property, real and personal, connected
therewith.
Chapter 82
OATHS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Listing of Departments — See Ch. 6.
§ 65-15 SCRANTON CODE § 76-2
76:160
ARTICLE I
Department Heads
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Sec. 2-19 of the 1979 Code]
§ 82-1. Oath of Department head.
The head of each Department, after being appointed as required by law,
shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation presented by the
Constitution of Pennsylvania which shall be filed with the Mayor.
§ 82-1 OATHS § 82-1
82:161
Chapter 88
ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF
§ 88-1. Printing of ordinances.
All ordinances or resolutions which shall require printing may be prepared
by the City Clerk using any type of printing which may be done by a
typewriter or other instrument and on any type of paper in any size being
suitable by the City Clerk. Copies of such ordinances may be prepared by
any reproduction method commercially available and found suitable to the
City Clerk.
Chapter 94
PARKING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking garages and lots — See Ch. 328. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 439.
§ 94-1. Extension of term. [Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No.
39-2016]
The City of Scranton declares the need, in the interest of health, safety, and
general welfare of the public, for the extension of the term of existence of
the Authority and, pursuant to the Enabling Act, does hereby extend said
term of existence to 50 years from the date of enactment of this chapter.
§ 94-2. Filing of copies.
The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to publish, in the manner
prescribed by the Parking Authority Law,19 a notice of the enactment of
this chapter and of the city's intention to file a certified copy hereof and
of the proofs of such publication with the Secretary of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and, thereafter to file such certified copy hereof and such
proofs of publication with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, all as provided in the Parking Authority Law.
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 341 et seq.
§ 82-1 SCRANTON CODE § 94-2
88:162
Chapter 99
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Employee benefits — See Ch. 57.
Bureau of Fire — See Ch. 59.
Funds and trusts — See Ch. 65.
Bureau of Police — See Ch. 105.
§ 94-2 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 94-2
88:163

Part 1
Nonuniformed Employees
ARTICLE I
Nonuniformed Employees
[Adopted 9-29-1976 as Ch. 12, Art. II, of the 1979 Code]
§ 99-1. Establishment of fund.
There is hereby created and established a pension fund for the pensioning
of employees of the City, which shall be known as the "Pension Fund of the
City of Scranton."
§ 99-2. Beneficiaries; deduction of dues.
The beneficiaries of the pension fund shall be those persons designated in
the Act of May 28, 1915 (53 P.S. § 23561 et seq.), as amended, and they shall
pay such dues and receive such pensions as are provided for in such Act.
Dues shall be deducted from the regular monthly or semimonthly payrolls
of such employees.
§ 99-3. Investments by Board.
The moneys of the pension fund shall be invested in such securities as the
Pension Board shall from time to time designate and approve.
§ 99-4. Annual appropriations.
Council shall annually set aside and appropriate out of all taxes or income
of the City to the Pension Board a sum sufficient to maintain the pensions or
compensations due under this Article and the Act of May 28, 1915 (53 P.S.
§ 23561 et seq.), as amended.
§ 99-5. Application to persons employed.
This Article shall apply to all persons employed in any capacity by or holding
positions under the City, except laborers employed at a per diem wage,
with whom it shall be optional whether they shall make payments into the
pension fund and receive the benefits thereof, and except also all of the
members or employees of the Bureau of Fire and the Bureau of Police.
§ 99-6. Optional with laborers.
Laborers employed at a per diem wage for the Department of Public Works,
City of Scranton, or any other laborer employed by the Department of Public
Works who, pursuant to the collective bargaining agreement between the
Department of Public Works and the City of Scranton20 is permitted to join
the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers (I.A.M.)
20.Editor's Note: The collective bargaining agreement is on file in the City offices.
§ 99-1 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-6
88:165
Pension Fund for the Department of Public Works, then said laborer is
prohibited from being a member of both the City employees' pension fund
and the I.A.M. pension fund. Said laborer shall be permitted to be a member
of only one pension fund governing the course of employment with the City
of Scranton.
§ 99-7. Application to employees of collector of taxes.
A. Pursuant to the authority conferred by Act 501, approved July 3, 1947,
P.L. 1232 (53 P.S. § 30786), this section is hereby enacted.
B. All persons now or hereafter employed in the office of the collector of
taxes shall be permitted to join the pension fund of the City for City
employees as outlined by this Article. Such persons now or hereafter
employed in the office of the collector of taxes shall join the City
pension fund subject to the terms of this section and subject to this
Article, its amendments and supplements, and the rules of the pension
fund.
C. Council shall annually set aside and appropriate out of all taxes or
income of the City to the pension fund a sum sufficient to build up 1/2 of
the reserves necessary for the payment of the City's annuity of such
employees of the tax collector upon retirement.
D. This section shall not become effective until such time as the school
district of the City has duly adopted a resolution whereby the school
district will pay from time to time 1/2 of the moneys required to build up
the reserves necessary for the payment of the City's annuity of such
employees of the office of the collector of taxes upon retirement as
provided by Act 501, approved July 3, 1947, P.L. 1232 (53 P.S. § 30786).
E. The Treasurer and the Secretary of the pension fund shall maintain
separate records of funds received from or on account of the employees
of the Office of the Collector of Taxes and shall keep separate records of
the pensions paid to such employees.
F. All employees of the Office of the Collector of Taxes shall register with
the Secretary of the pension fund upon entering the employ of such
office.
G. All persons employed in the office of the collector of taxes shall make
payments into the pension fund of all sums accrued at the rate
established since the date of employment. Such arrearages accrued
with interest thereon 60 days after the date of approval of this section
and the adoption of a resolution by the school district of the City, if not
previously paid, shall be deducted out of the first moneys hereafter
payable by way of pension to any person otherwise entitled to receive
the same.
H. The pension paid to all employees of the Office of the Collector of Taxes
shall be at the rate and under the same terms and conditions as are now
§ 99-6 SCRANTON CODE § 99-7
88:166
§ 99-8. Application to employees of public library.
§ 99-9. Employees' contributions; payroll deductions. [Amended by
Ord. No. 76-1994]
The City employees, including all employees of the Office of the Collector
of Taxes, and all employees of the public library, and contributing members
after May 7, 1965, shall pay into the pension fund, or have deducted from
their salaries or wages, an amount equal to 3% of their monthly salaries or
wages; in no event, however, paying at a rate greater than $24 a month. The
City Controller is hereby authorized to make payroll deductions accordingly,
and in accordance with Act 38, approved May 7, 1965 (53 P.S. § 30591 et
seq.).
§ 99-10. Payment of arrearages.
All persons originally employed prior to May 28, 1915, may make payment
into the pension fund of all sums accrued at the rate established since
such date, and all persons originally employed subsequent to May 28,
1915, may make payment into the fund of all sums accrued at the rate
paid to the employees of the City who are members of the City pension
fund.
A. Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Act of May 28, 1915, P.L. 596
(53 P.S. § 23561 et seq.), this section is hereby enacted.
B. All persons now or hereafter employed by the public library shall be
permitted to join the pension fund for City employees as outlined by this
Article . Such persons now or hereafter employed by the public library
shall join the City pension fund subject to the terms of this section and
this Article, its amendments, supplements, and the rules of the pension
fund.
C. The Treasurer and the Secretary of the fund shall maintain separate
records of funds received from and on account of the employees of the
public library and shall keep separate records of the pensions paid to
such employees.
D. All employees of the public library shall register with the Secretary of
the pension fund upon entering the employ of the library.
E. All persons employed by the public library shall make payments into the
pension fund of all the sums accrued at the rate established. Such
arrearages accrued with interest thereon, 60 days after the date of
approval of this section, if not previously paid, shall be deducted out of
the first moneys hereafter payable by way of pension to any person
otherwise entitled to receive the same.
F. The pension paid to all employees of the public library shall be at the
rate and under the same terms and conditions as are now paid to the
employees of the City who are members of the City pension fund.
§ 99-7 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-10
88:167
established since the date of employment. Such arrearages accrued with
interest thereon, commencing 60 days after the date of the approval of the
ordinance from which this section was derived, if not previously paid, shall
be deducted out of the first moneys hereafter payable by way of pension to
any person otherwise entitled to receive the same.
§ 99-11. Amount of monthly benefits to vested persons; disability
benefit. [Amended by Ord. No. 76-1994; 4-5-1999 by Ord. No.
42-1999]
§ 99-12. Pension Board created.
The pension fund shall be controlled, administered and distributed by a
Board, which is hereby created, to be known as the "Pension Board of the
City of Scranton."
§ 99-13. Composition of Board.
The Pension Board shall consist of the Mayor, City Controller, President of
City Council and two employees to be chosen by the employees contributing
to such pension fund.
§ 99-14. Powers and duties.
The Pension Board shall perform such duties as are imposed upon it by
this Article and the Act of Assembly entitled "An Act requiring cities of the
second class to establish a pension fund for employees of said cities and
regulating the administration and the payment of such pensions," approved
May 28, 1915, P.L. 596 (53 P.S. § 23561 et seq.), and shall have the power
A. Under authority of Act 84 of 1987,21 the amount of monthly benefits to
vested persons otherwise eligible for the same from the municipal
pension fund shall not exceed $600 per month, for those members
vested and otherwise eligible with 20 years of service; $650 for those
members vested and otherwise eligible with 20 years of service; $650
for those members vested and otherwise eligible with 21 and 30 years
of service; $700 per month for those members vested and otherwise
eligible with 31 years of service or more years of service.
B. A disability benefit is provided for a member after 10 years of service
and before attaining the age of 55 years of age, and if accepted must
pay an additional 10 years after the first 10 years is paid out. The
benefit is set at $600 per month, for those members vested and
otherwise eligible with 20 years of service; $650 for those members
vested and otherwise eligible with 20 years of service; $650 for those
members vested and otherwise eligible with 21 and 30 years of service;
$700 per month for those members vested and otherwise eligible with
31 years of service or more years of service.
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 30592.
§ 99-10 SCRANTON CODE § 99-14
88:168
to make such reasonable rules governing the pension fund as it may deem
necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Article and such act.
§ 99-15. Maintenance and expenses.
Council shall provide the Pension Board with proper quarters for the
transaction of its business and appropriate annually sufficient funds for its
maintenance and incidental expenses.
§ 99-16. Officers.
The officers of the Pension Board shall consist of a President who shall be
one of the members of the Board and who shall be chosen annually by the
Board, a Treasurer who shall be the City Treasurer and a Secretary who
shall be appointed by the Board.
§ 99-17. Duties of President.
The President shall preside at all meetings of the Pension Board, shall
sign all checks for payment authorized by the Board and certified by the
Secretary and shall perform such other duties as the Board may assign to
him.
§ 99-18. Duties and bond of Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall receive from the Secretary all moneys due the pension
fund, giving the Secretary a receipt therefor and shall deposit the same in a
bank or banks designated by the Pension Board. He shall pay out all moneys
in his hands upon checks signed by the President and Secretary and shall
furnish a surety company bond in such sum as the Board may require, the
premium thereon to be paid by the Board.
§ 99-19. Duties and bond of Secretary.
The Secretary of the Pension Board shall conduct the office and business of
the Board subject to the general direction of the Board. He shall receive all
moneys due the fund and shall turn over same to the Treasurer, taking his
receipt therefor. He shall certify for payment by the Treasurer all checks
authorized by the Board. He shall keep the minutes of the meetings of
the Board, conduct the correspondence and keep the records and seal of
the Board. He shall install and maintain a system of records or accounts
showing the monthly payments of each employee to the pension fund,
the total payments made monthly to the fund by the employees in each
division, bureau and department, the receipts from all sources and all
moneys expended by the Board. The Secretary shall secure and install all
proper and necessary equipment, books, ledgers, records, index systems
and printed forms needed in the conduct of the business of the Board.
He shall compile a full and complete record of the services of all persons
subject to the provisions of this Article, showing in detail all of the following
facts concerning each employee: age; original date of employment; all
different positions held; rate of pay with all increases and decreases from
§ 99-14 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-19
88:169
time to time; all interruptions in the continuity of service by reason of
resignations, dismissals and leaves of absence without pay; and promotions,
demotions and transfers from one department or bureau to another. The
Secretary shall make a monthly report to the Board of all receipts,
expenditures and balances. He shall furnish a surety company bond in an
amount sufficient to cover funds entrusted to him, to be fixed by the Board,
premium thereon to be paid by the Board.
§ 99-20. Compensation of officers.
The Secretary of the Pension Board shall receive a salary at the rate
established by Council. The other officers shall serve without pay.
§ 99-21. Election of members.
The two members of the Pension Board to be chosen by the employees
contributing to the pension fund shall be chosen as follows: within 30
days after the approval of this section any such contributing employee may
be nominated, in writing, over the signature of five of such contributing
members, all nominations to be handed to the Mayor. The Mayor shall then
cause an announcement to be posted in the main corridor of City hall,
naming all such nominees and fixing the time and place for the election,
which shall be held within the following week. The election shall be
conducted by the Mayor, the president of Council and the City Controller,
or by substitutes chosen by them respectively. The polls shall be opened
for one hour and the voting shall be by written secret ballot, but no ballot
shall be counted for any person not duly nominated as aforesaid. The two
nominees receiving the highest vote shall be declared elected and shall
serve as members of the Board for the period of three years, and until their
successors are duly elected and qualified.
§ 99-19 SCRANTON CODE § 99-21
88:170
ARTICLE II
Revised Benefit Plan For Nonuniformed Employees
[Adopted as Ord. No. 151-1987 (Ch. 12, Art. II, Div. 3, of the 1979
Code)]
§ 99-22. Membership.
§ 99-23. Age and service retirement requirements.
Every member who shall have served continuously for a period of 15 years,
periods of suspension and absence excluded, having attained the age of 55
and contributed to the pension fund for 20 years shall be eligible to retire.
§ 99-24. Age and service retirement benefit.
The monthly pension benefit is to be set at 70% of the average monthly
salary calculated over the last 60 months of employment, not to exceed
$250 per month.
§ 99-25. Cost of living increases.
There shall not be a cost of living increase for any type of retirement.
§ 99-26. Service increments.
There shall not be a service increment for any type of retirement.
§ 99-27. Lump sum death benefits.
There shall not be any lump sum death benefit.
§ 99-28. Vesting.
A member shall be vested for a benefit after 15 years of continuous service,
periods of suspension and absence excluded.
§ 99-29. Disability benefits. [Amended 4-5-1999 by Ord. No.
43-1999]
A disability benefit is provided for a member after 10 years of service and
before attaining the age of 55, and if accepted must pay an additional 10
years after the first 10 years is paid out. The benefit is set at $550 per
month, for those members vested and otherwise eligible with 20 years of
service; $600 for those members vested and otherwise eligible with 21
A. On or after July 1, 1987, any individual who becomes a member of the
nonuniform pension fund shall be governed by the provisions of this
article.
B. Prior to July 1, 1987, any member of the nonuniform pension fund is
eligible to be governed by the provisions of this article.
§ 99-22 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-29
88:171
and 30 years of service; $650 per month for those members vested and
otherwise eligible with 31 years of service or more years of service.
§ 99-30. Survivor benefits.
There shall not be a survivor benefit.
§ 99-31. Contributions.
Each member shall contribute 3% of pay to the nonuniform pension fund,
but not more than $6 per month.
§ 99-31.1. Late fee. [Added 5-10-1995 by Ord. No. 56-1995]
A 6% late fee on pension contributors who are 60 days or more in arrears
on contributions to the Nonuniform Municipal Pension Fund is hereby set
forth.
§ 99-32. Administration.
The administration of the nonuniform revised pension plan shall be the
same as the previously adopted nonuniform pension plan.
§ 99-32.1. Early retirement benefit. [Added 5-7-1999 by Ord. No.
73-1999]
A. The revised Benefit Pension Plan for Nonuniform Employees will
provide eligibility for an immediate early retirement, provided that the
plan member has attained the age of 55, completed 10 years of service
and has contributed to the plan for 20 years. Members are vested in
their accrued early retirement benefit upon completion of 10 years of
service. The date of employment termination further reduces the
benefit by 0.5% for each month the early retirement precedes the
normal retirement date.
B. This section shall become effective immediately upon approval. This
section applies only to current and active employees of the City of
Scranton as of December 31, 1998. Former employees, who were not
employed as of December 31, 1998, as a nonuniform employee of the
City of Scranton, and who will not be in the future so employed, are not
eligible for the early retirement benefit. [Amended 6-14-1999 by
Ord. No. 79-1999]
§ 99-29 SCRANTON CODE § 99-32.1
88:172
Part 2
Police Pension
ARTICLE III
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 12, Art. III, Divs. 1, 2 and 3 of the 1979
Code]
§ 99-33. Fund created; sources.
By virtue of the authority vested in Council and the Mayor by Act of
Assembly, approved March 7, 1901, P.L. 20 (3 P.S. § 23641 et seq.), as
amended, there is hereby created a fund which shall be known as the "Police
Pension Fund of Scranton," by municipal appropriation, and including all
bequests, legacies, gifts or donations made to the Bureau of Police for the
use and benefits of its members and from all fines and pecuniary penalties
imposed on members of the Bureau by trial courts or the Director of the
Department of Public Safety and all unclaimed moneys derived from the
sale of unclaimed articles in possession of the Bureau.
§ 99-34. Council appropriations; contribution by members.
One and one-half percent (1 1/2%) of all City taxes collected by the City,
other than taxes levied to pay interest on or extinguish the debt of the City
or any part thereof, shall annually be paid over by the City Treasurer to the
organization or association constituting or having charge of the distribution
of the Police Pension Fund. For the further support and increase of the
Police Pension Fund all regular, salaried, uniformed police officers of the
City and all regular salaried detectives attached to the Bureau of Police
shall pay the Treasurer of the commission having charge of such fund, on
or before the fifth day of each month, 1% of the fixed salary of such person
for the preceding month. On or after July 1, 1978, all of the aforementioned
personnel shall contribute 2% of the fixed salary and longevity of said officer
or detective for the preceding month. Effective on July 1, 1979, all regular,
salaried, uniformed police officers of the City and all regular, salaried
detectives of the Bureau of Police of the City shall pay the Treasurer of the
Commission having charge of the finances of said fund, on or before the
fifth of each month through payroll deduction, 3% of the fixed salary and
longevity of said officer or detective for the preceding month. All payments
made hereto shall be by payroll deduction.
§ 99-35. Rules and regulations.
All police pensions shall be subject to the rules and regulations which make
up this Article, which rules and regulations shall govern the granting of
pensions and the organization and conduct of the Police Pension Fund and
Commission.
§ 99-33 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-36
88:173
§ 99-36. Members.
The Police Pension Fund shall be solely for the pension of the regularly fully
paid uniformed force of the Bureau of Police and for the regular salaried
detectives attached to the Bureau of Police.
§ 99-37. Retirement Board.
A Retirement Board, consisting of three members who shall be duly
qualified practicing physicians, one of whom shall be the Director of the
Office of Public Health, if such Director is a physician, shall be appointed
by the Police Commission to determine the evidence of the disability of any
applicant for pension. The expense of the Retirement Board shall be paid
from the Police Pension Fund.
§ 99-38. Membership in Police Pension Association.
A. Anyone who is eligible for membership in the Police Pension Association
shall be allowed 90 days from the date on which he became eligible in
which to make application for admission to membership, without
payment of an entrance fee, by furnishing a certificate, from the
Director of the Office of Public Health, provided that he is a duly
licensed physician and if he is not a physician, then by a medical
examiner to be named by the Police Pension Commission, that he is in
good physical condition, provided that he has not received, while in the
actual discharge of his duty during the before mentioned 90 days, any
injury which has incapacitated him or might in the future incapacitate
him from discharging his duty or from any disease contracted prior to
his becoming eligible for membership and thus entitle him to a pension
by reason of injuries received while in the actual discharge of his duty.
An applicant for membership, who has permitted more than 90 days to
elapse before applying for admission to the Association, shall attach to
his application a certificate that he is in good physical condition, from
the physician of the Bureau of Police or from a medical examiner to be
named by the Police Pension Commission. He shall also pay $10 as an
entrance fee.
B. An applicant shall, if admitted to membership, present his birth
certificate before the Police Pension Commission, and if it be found that
he is over the legal maximum age of eligibility required by the civil
service laws, or if he is unable to present his birth certificate, he will
have automatically waived all pension rights until such evidence
showing his age at the time of becoming eligible is produced during his
probationary period as a police officer. Until this evidence is produced
to the satisfaction of the Police Pension Commission he shall not be
required to contribute in any manner to the Police Pension Fund.
C. An applicant shall, if admitted to membership in the association, pay all
of the dues which have become payable since he has become eligible for
membership, but the Police Pension Commission may permit such dues
to be paid in installments.
§ 99-36 SCRANTON CODE § 99-38
88:174
§ 99-39. Disposition of rewards and gifts to members.
All rewards or gifts that may be paid to any member of the Bureau of Police
for his services, except where Council allows him to retain the same, shall
be paid to the Treasurer of the Police Pension Fund.
§ 99-40. Audits; expenditures.
D. Upon appointment as regular policeman, after working full-time as a
reserve patrolman in the Bureau of Police, such person may, upon his
request for entrance into the Police Pension Fund, make application to
the Police Pension Association for time so served as reserve patrolman
prior to his promotion to regular policeman. In such event, the
Association shall compute such reserve time and reserve pay and the
contribution at 1% necessary to be paid to the fund for such reserve
time, together with interest at the rate of 4% thereon. Such
computation and contribution shall be verified by the Police Pension
Commission and the applicant shall make such verified contribution to
the fund within, but no longer than, six months from date of approval by
the Police Pension Association. Such reserve time may be requested
only at the time of application to the fund and not thereafter.
E. Every regular policeman or officer now a member of the Police Pension
Fund, who has served full-time as a reserve patrolman prior to his
promotion to regular policeman, may, within 90 days from date of final
approval of this subsection, make application to the Police Pension
Association for time so served as reserve patrolman prior to such
promotion. The association shall compute such reserve time and
reserve pay, and the contribution at 1% necessary to be paid to the fund
for such reserve time, together with interest at the rate of 4% thereon.
Such computation and contribution shall be certified by the Police
Pension Commission, and the applicant shall make such verified
contribution to the fund within, but no longer than, six months from
date of approval by the Police Pension Association. When payment has
been made in full of the contribution so computed, with interest, such
member of the fund shall be entitled to recompute his term of service in
the Bureau of Police and have it recorded on the records of the Police
Pension Association and the Police Pension Commission.
A. An audit of the books and records of the Police Pension Commission
may be had at any time by a regular, certified public accountant, and
the expense of such audit may be paid from the funds in the hands of
the Police Pension Commission. Such auditor shall be selected by the
Policemen's Pension Association.
B. The Police Pension Commission is hereby authorized to make
expenditures for the purpose of protecting the investments of the
association, to provide for audits and to meet the expense of a Board of
inquiry appointed to investigate applications for pensions because of
physical disability.
§ 99-38 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-41
88:175
§ 99-41. Receipt of pension benefits generally.
§ 99-42. Compulsory retirement age; benefits received; time
service. [Amended by Ord. No. 25-1984]
A. On and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section
was derived, all policemen, detectives and officers who have proper
civil service certification and who are retired from duty from the
Bureau of Police shall receive a pension at the rate of one-half (1/2) of
the salary currently paid in the highest paid classification for the grade
held by the employee at the time of his retirement. Retired members of
the Police Department shall in addition receive an increase in the
retirement allowance equal to one-half (1/2) of the salary increase
allowed active members as and when such increases are established for
active members.
B. Upon the completion of 25 years of continuous regular service in the
Bureau of Police and similar continuous membership in the Police
Pension Fund any policeman or detective may be allowed to retire upon
his own request, but such member shall not be involuntarily retired,
except for inability to perform his regularly assigned duties. When such
member has completed 25 years of service and has attained the age of
62 years, it shall be optional with the administration to continue such
police officer in service or to retire him. After such period of 25 years of
continuous service the pension rights of a member of the Bureau of
Police shall not be placed in jeopardy, nor his pension refused upon
dismissal from the service for any cause whatsoever.
C. No member of the Bureau of Police shall be retired on full pension until
he has served twelve and one-half (12 1/2) years of full and continuous
service as a member of the Bureau, unless he has been disabled in the
actual performance of his duty as a police officer or detective. Should
any member apply for or ask retirement prior to service of twelve and
one-half (12 1/2) years of full and continuous service for disability
acquired through an ailment or injury not caused in the actual
performance of his duty, he shall be retired on a pension equaling 4% of
his latest ranking salary, provided that he has served in such rank for a
period of one full year, for each year since his appointment as a regular
officer of the Bureau of Police. Provided, further, that whenever any
patrolman, detective or officer is pensioned as a result of a disability
and thereafter enters into any business or employment for which he
shall receive compensation, he shall receive a pension in such amount
that when added to the compensation he receives from such business or
employment, shall not exceed the salary received by him as a member
of the Bureau of Police prior to his retirement. In no event, however,
shall such pension be more than one-half (1/2) the monthly salary
received by such patrolman, detective or officer at the time of his
retirement.
§ 99-41 SCRANTON CODE § 99-42
88:176
§ 99-43. Refund of contribution. [Amended by Ord. No. 82-1987]
§ 99-44. Suspension of benefits during reemployment.
When any police officer or detective is pensioned, and thereafter enters
the service of the City in any capacity with compensation, the pension of
such person shall be suspended during his term of such service. Upon the
termination of such service the pension payments shall be resumed.
§ 99-45. Revocation of benefits.
If any member of the Police Pension Association shall be awarded a pension
and shall thereafter be convicted of a felony or shall become an habitual
A. There shall be compulsory retirement of each regular and reserve
policeman in the service of the Bureau of Police, Department of Public
Safety, who shall have reached the age of 70 years.
B. Any member of the Bureau of Police who shall be required to retire
because he has attained the age of 70 years but who has not completed
the time service that is called for in this Article shall be entitled to a
pension which is to be calculated by multiplying 2% times the number
of years served, but in no event to exceed 50% of the salary received at
retirement time and increments thereafter as provided by other
ordinances. The benefits of this section shall be applicable to all
members of the Bureau of Police who have been retired at age 70 but
who have not qualified for a pension.
A. When any member of the Police Pension Fund leaves the Bureau of
Police prior to qualifying for pensions benefits, he or she is entitled to a
refund of the total amount of contribution to the pension fund and the
spouses pension fund.
B. When any member of the Police Pension Fund who is not a member of
the spouse's pension fund shall die while on active service, his spouse,
or if no spouse, his designated beneficiary or estate, shall receive a
lump sum for the total amount of their contribution to the pension fund.
C. When any member of the Police Pension Fund retires and is not a
member of the spouse's pension fund or at the time of his or her death
there exists a balance from the amount contributed by the fund to the
date of his or her death which is less than the total amount that they
had contributed then the existing balance will be paid in a lump sum to
his spouse and if no spouse, his designated beneficiary or estate.
D. When returning contributions from either the pension fund and/or the
spouse's pension fund, no interest is included on the contributions, but
the refund will be the actual contribution to either fund. Said interest
assists in the payment for benefits including disability provisions and
the return of interest on the contributions would necessitate additional
contributions from its members.
§ 99-42 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-45
88:177
drunkard or shall cease to care for and support his wife and family, then
the Police Pension Commission shall have the power, by two-thirds vote,
to revoke the pension or to suspend the payments thereof or to direct the
payment of the pension to the family of such pensioner.
§ 99-46. Benefits received while receiving disability benefits from
other sources. [Added by Ord. No. 53-1981]
Whenever any patrolman, detective or officer receives or is entitled to
receive, for and during his period of disability, compensation from the
treasury of the City, workmen's compensation benefits or payments in the
nature of workmen's compensation benefits from any source, such disability
retirement benefits shall be reduced by the amount and for the period such
other compensation is paid or payable even though all or part of the amount
so payable may be wholly or partially commuted.
§ 99-47. Police Pension Commission; composition; terms.
A. Said Police Pension Fund shall be under the care and control of a
Commission which shall be known as the "Police Pension Commission,"
and shall consist of seven persons, two of the members of said
Commission shall be active members of the Bureau of Police and shall
be chosen by the Mayor from a list of five names suggested and
recommended to him at a general meeting of the Bureau of Police, two
shall be appointed from the citizens at large, two shall be appointed
from those who are retired police officers of the City and the seventh
member shall be the City Controller for the City. The two members of
the Bureau of Police and the citizens who are members of the
Commission and the two members from the ranks of the retired
members of the Bureau of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor. The
membership of the City Controller for the City on this Commission shall
be concurrent with the tenure of office as City controller. The terms of
the present members of this Commission with the exception only of the
City Controller shall continue until their term expires, and all
appointments shall be for a term of five years. The appointment of two
members from the ranks of the retired members of the Bureau of Police
shall be for a term of five years from date of approval of this section.
Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by the Mayor by
appointment for the unexpired term. The Mayor may remove members
of this Commission for cause. [Amended by Ord. No. 45-1993]
B. Organization. Immediately upon its appointment the Police Pension
Commission shall meet and organize by selecting one of its members as
President, one as Secretary and one as Treasurer, it may select a
corporate trustee, which shall be a bank or trust company situate in the
City and which is authorized to conduct bank or trust business. If a
corporate trustee is selected, the corporate trustee shall have no vote in
the affairs of the Commission.
§ 99-45 SCRANTON CODE § 99-47
88:178
§ 99-48. Spouses of police officers pension; withdrawal of
contributions.
C. Business. The Police Pension Commission shall keep full and accurate
accounts of all its transactions. It shall have full power to make rules for
the transaction of its business, the investment of its money in legal
investments, the application of its funds, its time and place of meeting,
etc., subject to the special provisions and regulations in this Article or
in such ordinances as may hereafter be passed relating thereto. The
Commission shall meet at least once a month at a stated time at such
time as it may designate for the transaction of such business as may
properly come before it. All meetings shall be open to the public. A
majority of the Commission shall have power to transact business. All
incidental expenditures necessary to the transaction of the business of
the Commission shall be provided for by a City appropriation.
A. Election.
(1) Any member of the police pension or retirement fund who is
married and who elects, in writing, to be governed by the
provisions of the Act of 1965, P.L. 835 (53 P.S. § 30510.1), etc., and
who retires under the provisions of the law regulating the
retirement of police officers therein and ordinances of the City
heretofore adopted and adopted pursuant thereto (specifically
Article III of this chapter) shall, at the time of his retirement,
receive the pension so provided for during his lifetime and a
pension after his death, payable to his surviving spouse at the time
of retirement, equal to 50% of his pension at the time of retirement
and thereafter the spouse shall receive an increase in pension in an
amount equal to 25% of any increase granted to active members of
the police force of the same rank as the deceased spouse when he
retires from active service, provided that such person so retiring
shall have been married to his spouse not fewer than five years
prior to the date of retirement and the spouse is dependent upon
such deceased employee at the time of his death.
(2) The pension to be paid to such surviving spouse shall begin on the
first day of the month in which the death of the deceased spouse
occurs and shall continue to and terminate upon the death of such
surviving spouse, unless such surviving spouse shall remarry, in
which event the payment of the survivor's pension shall thereupon
be terminated.
(3) The word "pension" as used in this section shall be construed to
mean the sum of the pension, plus the amount of service increment,
if any, to which the married person retiring shall be entitled.
(4) When any surviving spouse receives payments under the provisions
of this section, such surviving spouse shall not be entitled to any
withdrawal of contributions made into the police pension or
retirement fund by the deceased employee, nor shall the children,
§ 99-47 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-48
88:179
parents or estate of the deceased employee be entitled to a refund
of the contributions.
B. Conditions precedent; payments; withdrawal of contributions.
(1) A surviving spouse of any active member of the police pension or
retirement fund who, at the time of his death, was in active service
with the City and had elected to be governed by the provisions of
this article shall be entitled to survivorship benefits equal to 50% of
the pension which would have been payable to such active member
had he retired at the date of his death and thereafter shall receive
an increase in pension payments in an amount equal to 25% of the
increase granted to active members of the police force of the same
rank as the deceased spouse when he retires from active service;
provided that such employee shall have been married to his spouse
for not fewer than five years prior to the date of his death and that
the spouse was dependent upon such deceased employee at the
time of his death.
(2) Such surviving spouse shall be entitled to receive payments
commencing the first day of the month next following the death of
the deceased spouse, and such payment shall continue to and
terminate upon the death of such surviving spouse; provided,
however, that if such surviving spouse shall remarry, the payment
of the survivorship pension shall thereupon be terminated.
(3) The word "pension," as used in this section, shall be construed to
mean the sum of the pension plus the amount of service
increments, if any, to which the deceased member of the police
pension or retirement fund would have been entitled had he retired
upon the date of his death.
(4) When any surviving spouse receives payments under the provisions
of this section, such surviving spouse shall not be entitled to any
withdrawal of contributions made into the police pension or
retirement fund by the deceased employee, nor shall the estate of
the deceased be entitled to a refund of the contributions.
(5) Each surviving spouse at the time active members of the police
force receive an increase in compensation shall receive an increase
in their pension in an amount equal to 25% of the increase granted
to active members of the police force of the same rank as the
deceased spouse when he retired from active service.
C. Election to participate. Any member of the police pension or retirement
fund who has within 90 days of the effective date of the Act of 1965 (53
P.S. § 30510.1 et seq.), and any person hereafter joining the police
pension or retirement fund may within 90 days of joining the fund, elect
to be governed by the provisions of such act, provided that such
election shall be in writing and that writing shall be filed with the
Secretary of the police pension or retirement fund.
§ 99-48 SCRANTON CODE § 99-48
88:180
D. Contributions. Each member who elects to be governed under the
provisions of this article shall agree to contribute 1% of his earned
compensation in addition to all other contributions required by law and
ordinances adopted pursuant thereto.
E. Appropriations. The annual appropriation made by the Council for the
purpose of paying police pension or retirement allowances shall be
sufficient, when added to the contributions made by members during
such year, sums received from tax distributions and income from
investments, to pay in full the retirement allowances and the pensions
authorized by this article for surviving spouses payable during such
year.
§ 99-48 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-48
88:181

ARTICLE IV
Revised Benefit Plan for Policemen
[Adopted as Ord. No. 152-1987 (Ch. 12, Art. III, Div. 4, of the 1979
Code)]
§ 99-49. Membership.
§ 99-49.1. Age and service retirement requirements. [Added
3-12-2015 by Ord. No. 87-2015]
Every member who shall have served continuously for a period of 25 years,
periods of suspension and absence excluded, and having attained the age of
55 shall be eligible to retire from the said Bureau.
§ 99-50. Age and service retirement benefit.
The monthly pension benefit is to be set at 50% of the average monthly
compensation calculated over the last 36 months of employment.
"Compensation" is defined as base pay and longevity.
§ 99-51. Cost-of-living increases.
There shall not be a cost-of-living increase for those members who retire
under the provisions of § 99-50. For those members who retire under the
provisions of § 99-55, the cost-of-living increase shall amount to 25% of any
increase in salary granted to those policemen on active duty of the same
rank.
§ 99-52. Service increments.
There shall not be a service increment for any type of retirement.
§ 99-53. Lump sum death benefits.
There shall not be any lump sum death benefit.
§ 99-54. Vesting.
A member shall be vested for a benefit after 25 years of continuous service,
periods of suspension and absence excluded.
A. On or after July 1, 1987, any individual who becomes a member of the
policemen's pension fund shall be governed by the provisions of this
article.
B. Prior to July 1, 1987, any member of the policemen's pension fund is
eligible to be governed by the provisions of this article. In order to do
so, the member must notify the Secretary of the policemen's pension
fund, in writing, of his intention. Immediately after the Secretary is
notified, the member shall be governed by the provisions of this article.
§ 99-49 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-55
88:183
§ 99-55. Disability benefits.
§ 99-56. Survivor benefits.
§ 99-57. Contributions.
Each member shall contribute three and one-half percent (3 1/2%) of base
pay and longevity to the policemen's pension fund.
§ 99-58. Administration.
The administration of the policemen's revised pension plan shall be the
same as the previously adopted policemen's pension plan.
A. A service connected disability benefit is provided for a member. The
calculation of the benefit is defined as 50% of monthly salary at the time
of disability.
B. A nonservice disability benefit is also provided for. The calculation of
the benefit is defined as 4% of monthly salary at the time of disability
per year of service not to exceed 50% of monthly salary.
A. Any member who is married and who retires shall at the time of
retirement receive the pension so provided for during his lifetime and a
pension after his death, payable to his surviving spouse at the time of
retirement equal to 50% of his pension at the time of retirement and
thereafter said spouse shall receive an increase in pension in an amount
to equal 25% of any increase granted to active members of the same
rank as the deceased spouse when he retired from active service.
B. A surviving spouse of any active member who at the time of his death
was in active service with the City shall be entitled to survivorship
benefits equal to 50% of the pension which would have been payable to
such active members had he retired at the date of his death and
thereafter shall receive an increase in pension payments equal to 25%
of the increase granted to active members of the same rank as the
deceased spouse when he retired from active service.
§ 99-55 SCRANTON CODE § 99-58
88:184
Part 3
Firemen's Pension
ARTICLE V
Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 12, Art. IV, of the 1979 Code]
§ 99-59. Fund created; sources; member defined.
§ 99-60. Investment of funds; incidental expenditures.
The Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund Commission shall hold, manage,
invest and reinvest any funds received by it for the Firemen's Relief and
Pension Fund and may invest any moneys accumulating in the fund in
legal investments, as the same are or may be defined by statute; and shall
make such payments out of such fund as may be required for the purpose
of relief and pensions to or for firemen and contemplated by this Article.
All incidental expenditures, including the compensation of the Treasurer,
necessary to the transaction of the business of the Commission, shall be
provided for by appropriation by Council.
§ 99-61. Signatures for withdrawal of funds.
No moneys shall be drawn out of the funds of the Treasurer of the Firemen's
Relief and Pension Fund Commission, or on deposit to the account of the
Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund, except upon order, warrant or check
signed by both the President of the fund and an officer of the corporate
Treasurer of the fund.
§ 99-62. Account of transactions; report copies.
On or before March 1 of every year, it shall be the duty of the Treasurer
of the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund Commission to render a full and
complete account to Council of all transactions of the past year, showing all
receipts and disbursements. A copy of such account shall be filed with the
City Controller who shall audit the same and render to Council a detailed
A. By virtue of the authority vested in Council and the Mayor by Act of
Assembly approved March 7, 1901, P.L. 20, as amended,22 there is
hereby created a fund to be known as the "Firemen's Relief and Pension
Fund of Scranton," out of moneys received from Council appropriation,
from the state tax on foreign fire insurance companies or from any
other source, for the use and benefit of its firemen.
B. For the purpose of this Article, a "fireman" or "member of the Bureau of
Fire" means and includes the Fire Chief, any officer or engineer, and
any regularly appointed fireman who has satisfactorily passed his
probationary period.
22.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 22230.1.
§ 99-59 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-62
88:185
report of his examination. Council shall not appropriate any moneys to the
fund until such report has been filed and approved by Council by resolution.
Copies of such report shall be made available to all members of the Bureau
of Fire and the Pension Firemen's Organization.
§ 99-63. State tax on foreign fire insurance companies.
All moneys which the City has received or may hereafter receive as its share
of the state tax on foreign fire insurance companies shall be and hereby
are appropriated to the uses of the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund. As
soon as any such moneys are received by the City Treasurer from the state
authorities, they shall be delivered to the Treasurer of the fund.
§ 99-64. Fund raising proceeds by Bureau.
The members of the Bureau of Fire may from time to time conduct such
dance, ball, exhibition, entertainment or similar fund raising effort, the
proceeds of which shall be received by the Firemen's Relief and Pension
Fund Commission and deposited in the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund,
in the same manner as other funds received by the Commission.
§ 99-65. Other fund sources.
Any other funds received by the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund
Commission by virtue of appropriation by Council, gift, pecuniary penalties
imposed upon members of the Bureau of Fire by trial courts or Boards, or
from any other source whatsoever, shall be delivered to the Treasurer of the
fund in the same manner and used by the Commission as herein set forth.
§ 99-66. Pension account; relief account.
The Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund Commission shall maintain two
separate bank accounts:
§ 99-67. Contribution by Bureau member.
Each member of the Bureau of Fire shall pay into the Firemen's Relief and
Pension Fund a sum equal to 4% of his salary. Upon receipt thereof, the
Treasurer shall deposit the sum equaling three and one-half percent (3 1/
2%) of such salary in the pension account and the balance in the relief
account.
§ 99-68. Transfers into pension account.
When the relief account has on deposit a balance of $15,000, any amount
in excess of such deposit balance shall be transferred to and deposited in
A. The pension account, from which shall be paid all pensions.
B. The relief account, from which shall be paid all relief benefits as herein
defined.
§ 99-62 SCRANTON CODE § 99-68
88:186
the pension account by the Treasurer, upon authorization of the Firemen's
Relief and Pension Fund Commission.
§ 99-69. Membership in fund required; prerequisites.
§ 99-70. Payment of relief and accident benefits.
The moneys accumulating in the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund shall be
applied to the payment of relief benefits and to the payment of pensions as
herein set forth. Relief benefits shall be paid to a regular fireman as herein
defined, for injuries received while on duty or for sickness incurred from
exposure while in the actual discharge of duty. The payment of accident
benefits and pensions shall be authorized by the Firemen's Relief and
A. Upon appointment as a regular fireman, each person so appointed shall
be and become a member of the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund,
and shall be obligated for contributions thereto. Such appointee shall,
without payment of an entrance fee, furnish a birth certificate and a
certificate that he is in good physical condition, within 90 days of his
appointment as a regular fireman. In addition, such new regular
fireman shall, within 90 days of appointment, pay to the fund a sum
equal to two and one-half percent (2 1/2%) of his salary during the
period of his service as a reserve fireman on a regular, full-time basis.
Upon the submission of the documents and the payment so required,
the Commission shall certify the acceptance of the new regular fireman
to membership in the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund to the City
controller, who shall thereafter make all necessary deductions for
pension payments from such fireman.
B. From and after the enactment of this Article, for a period of 90 days,
every regular fireman, officer or engineer now a member of the fund
who has served full-time as a reserve fireman prior to his appointment
as regular fireman may pay to the fund a sum equal to two and one-half
percent (2 1/2%) of his full-time salary or wages as reserve fireman
during such full-time reserve status. Such full-time reserve status shall
be computed and verified by the Commission, who shall also compute
and require payment of the fireman's contributions at two and one-half
percent (2 1/2%), plus 4% interest from the date or dates when due.
Upon payment, each such fireman shall be entitled to recompute his
term of service in the Bureau of Fire, and the pension period as set forth
in § 99-76.
C. Any regular member of the Bureau of Fire who is not now a member of
the pension fund may apply for admission to the fund, attaching to such
application an entrance fee of $10, together with his birth certificate
and also a certificate, dated within five days of such application, that he
is in good physical condition, from the physician of the Bureau of Fire or
from a medical examiner to be appointed by the Firemen's Relief and
Pension Commission. All costs of such certificate shall be borne by such
applicant.
§ 99-68 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-70
88:187
Pension Commission only after the separate and careful consideration of
each application, the testimony or report of the physician of the Department
of Public Safety and after hearing all of the evidence and testimony that may
be available in each case.
§ 99-71. Benefits received while receiving disability benefits from
other sources.
Whenever any fireman or officer receives or is entitled to receive, for
and during his period of disability compensation from the treasury of City,
workmen's compensation benefits or payments in the nature of workmen's
compensation benefits from any source, such disability retirement benefits
shall be reduced by the amount and for the period such other compensation
is paid or payable even though all or part of the amount so payable may be
wholly or partially commuted.
§ 99-72. Payments upon death.
When any member of the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund shall die in
active service, or when any beneficiary or pensioner shall die before he has
received pension payments equal in amount to his total contributions to the
fund, there shall be paid from the fund a sum of money equal to all dues
paid by him into the fund without interest, reduced only by the amount
received as pension payments, to his widow, if any, or in the absence of such
widow to such person or persons as he shall have designated on a form
prepared and approved by the Commission, or in the absence of such widow
or designation, to his estate.
§ 99-73. Relief committee; composition and duty.
A relief committee shall be organized to consist of five members composed
of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire and four other members of the Bureau of
Fire to be duly elected from the Bureau of Fire. The duty of the committee
shall be to see that prompt and adequate relief shall be furnished to all
firemen injured or ill as a result of injury or exposure during actual
discharge of duty.
§ 99-74. Emergency medical attention.
A. No money shall be paid out of the relief account for medical attendance,
hospital expenses, purchase of medicines or nursing hire, nor any
indebtedness incurred under the express direction of a majority of
members of the Relief Committee. However, the Chief of the Bureau of
Fire or the Chairman of the Relief Committee shall have the right to
engage emergency medical attention for any member, officer or
engineer of the Bureau of Fire injured or sick from exposure or accident
while in the actual discharge of his duties.
B. The Fire Chief shall call a meeting of the Relief Committee as soon as
possible after any such emergency and make a report. No moneys shall
§ 99-70 SCRANTON CODE § 99-74
88:188
§ 99-75. Application for relief, continued disability.
Relief benefits shall be paid on approved application on or before the tenth
day of each month for medical and hospital attendance and medical and
nursing expense for a period of six months, providing such disability shall
continue so long. If, at the expiration of six months, the beneficiary is still
unable to report for duty he shall be examined by a medical commission
comprised of three physicians, one of whom shall be the physician of
the Department of Public Safety. Upon a majority report of the medical
commission certifying to the continuing physical disability of such fireman,
he shall be entitled to receive the same benefits during the continuance of
such disability, not exceeding an additional six months. If at the expiration
of the second six-month period, the beneficiary is still unable to report for
duty, he shall again be examined by the medical Commission and, upon a
majority report by such commission certifying to the permanent physical
disability of such fireman, he shall be retired from active service in the
Bureau of Fire with a pension to be paid out of the pension account as
hereinafter set forth. Notwithstanding that any such fireman may be so
retired from active service and placed on the pension list, he nevertheless
shall be entitled to receive accident benefits consisting of medical and
hospital attendance, medicine and nursing for such period of time as his
physical disability continues, and is so certified as continuing by the medical
commission, provided that the same shall be recommended by the Relief
Committee.
§ 99-76. Compulsory retirement age; eligibility; conditions and
service increment. [Amended by Ord. No. 26-1984]
be paid out of the relief account for any purpose other than the relief of
firemen, officers or engineers, as prescribed in this Article.
A. There shall be compulsory retirement of each regular and reserve
fireman in the service of the Bureau of Fire, Department of Public
Safety, who shall have reached the age of 70 years.
B. Every fireman who shall have served continuously for a full period of 25
years, periods of suspension and leaves of absence excluded, shall be
eligible to retire from the Bureau of Fire if he so desires, but such
member shall not be involuntarily retired until he shall have served
continuously for a full period of 25 years in the Bureau of Fire and has
reached the age of 70 years, unless for inability to continue active work.
It shall be optional with the administration, and the administration may
retire any fireman who has served continuously for a full period of 25
years, periods of suspension and leaves of absence excluded, and
reached the age of 70 years; provided, however, that involuntary
retirement is on the basis of seniority in age. However, at no time after
his 25 years of continuous service, periods of suspension and leaves of
absence excluded, will his pension rights as a member of the Bureau of
Fire be placed in jeopardy, by being dismissed from the service for any
cause whatsoever.
§ 99-74 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-76
88:189
§ 99-77. Age requirements; misrepresentations.
No person shall be accepted as a member of the Firemen's Relief and
Pension Fund as a regular full-paid uniformed member of the Bureau of
Fire who is more than 35 years of age, and no one who shall secure his
appointment as a fireman by misrepresenting his age and no one who is
over the age of 35 years when appointed shall be entitled to secure the
benefits of a voluntary retirement or pension. Where such appointment is
secured by false representations as to age and the appointee has thereafter
paid moneys into the relief and pension fund he shall only be entitled to
secure a return on any such amounts so paid in by him to the fund, less any
amounts theretofore paid out to him in the way of relief.
§ 99-78. Retirement Board; composition and duties.
C. On and after the passage of this Article, no member of the Bureau of
Fire shall be retired on a full pension until he has served at least 10
years of full and continuous service as a member, officer or engineer of
the Bureau of Fire, unless he has been disabled in the actual
performance of his duty as a member, officer or engineer of the Bureau
of Fire. Should any member, officer or engineer apply for or ask for
retirement, prior to the service of at least 10 full and continuous years,
exclusive of suspensions for disability acquired through an ailment not
caused in the actual performance of his duties, he shall be retired on a
pension equaling 5% of the salary of a first grade fireman, for each year
since his appointment as a regular fireman in the Bureau of Fire,
provided further that whenever any fireman is pensioned with less than
25 years of service as a result of a disability and thereafter enters into
any business or employment for which he shall receive compensation,
then he shall receive a pension in such amount that when added to the
compensation he received from such business or employment, shall not
exceed a comparable salary received by an active member of the Fire
Department in the same grade which the retiree was in at the time of
the retirement.
D. From and after January 1, 1965, every fireman, who has completed his
25 years of service and is otherwise entitled to pension, shall also be
entitled to the payment of a service increment, which shall be the sum
obtained by computing the number of whole years after the completion
of 25 years of service in the Bureau of Fire and multiplying the number
of years so computed by 1% of the pension to which he is otherwise
entitled. Such increment shall be payable only in multiples of five years,
up to and including 15 years of service, and not otherwise. Any member
of the fund at the time of passage of this Article who shall have more
than 25 years of service applicable to service increments shall be
considered to be entitled only to such 25 years and no more. In
computing such service increment, no employment shall be included
after the member has reached the age of 70 years.
§ 99-76 SCRANTON CODE § 99-78
88:190
§ 99-79. Minimum pension of retired members.
A. A Retirement Board consisting of three members, who shall be duly
qualified and practicing physicians, one of whom shall be the Director
of Public Health of the City if he be a physician, one of whom shall be
duly appointed by the Firemen's Relief and Pension Commission, and
one of whom shall be the family physician of the fireman involved, shall
act in either of the two hereinafter cited cases:
(1) In the case of a fireman being involuntarily retired by the
administration on the grounds of disability.
(2) In the case of a fireman making a request of application for pension
to the Pension Commission on the status of disability, and he has
not served continuously for a period of 25 years.
B. In either case, at the request of either or both parties, the Board shall
act. The expense of the retirement Board shall be paid by the Firemen's
Relief and Pension Fund.
A. On and after the passage of this Article, members of the Bureau of Fire
who have proper civil service certification and who are retired from
duty from the Bureau of Fire as hereinabove set forth shall receive a
pension equal to one-half of the monthly salary received at the time of
retirement, but in no event in an amount
B. All presently retired firemen who were eligible to receive a pension
equal to 50% of their salary at the time of retirement and are presently
receiving a pension of less than $4,000 per annum shall have their
respective pensions increased so that they shall receive a minimum of
$4,000 per annum. This is a cost of living increase and Council shall
make a separate appropriation annually to the Firemen's Relief and
Pension Fund. This increase is retroactive to January 1, 1976.
C. Since February 23, 1977, all firemen who have proper civil service
certification and who have retired since January 1, 1975, and who will
retire from the Bureau of Fire hereafter, shall be entitled to and shall
receive a pension at the rate of one-half of the salary currently paid in
the classification for the grade held by the employee at the time of his
retirement. In addition, the members of the Bureau of Fire who have
retired since January 1, 1975, and who will retire thereafter shall in
addition receive an increase in retirement allowance equal to one-half
of the salary increase granted active members of the Bureau of Fire as
and when such increases are granted for active members in the annual
budget ordinance adopted by the Council. These rights are not vested
as originally established under this Article, but are subject to change
from arbitration and/or legislation by Council. The Council shall make a
separate appropriation annually to cover the increase granted by this
subsection.
§ 99-78 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-79
88:191
§ 99-80. Pension suspended for compensated City service;
resumption.
When any fireman is pensioned and thereafter enters the service of the
City in any capacity with compensation the pension of such person shall
be suspended during his term of service. Upon termination of such
compensated service the pension payments shall be resumed on request of
the pensioner.
§ 99-81. Benefits for surviving spouses.
D. Commencing January 1, 1978, all members of the Bureau of Fire who
have proper civil service certification and who retired prior to January
1, 1975, shall receive increments to their pension amounting to 50% of
any increase in salary granted to those firemen on active duty. The
increase granted shall be in addition to the increase granted under this
Article, and is considered a cost of living increase. The Council shall
make a separate appropriation annually to cover the cost of the
increase granted by this paragraph as well as any increase granted by
Ord. No. 6-1977. The rights granted hereunder shall not be vested
rights as originally established under this Article, but shall be subject to
change by the Council.
A. Election to participate. Any member of the firemen's pension or
retirement fund who has within 90 days of the effective date of the
ordinance from which this Article was derived and any person hereafter
joining the firemen's pension or retirement fund may within 90 days of
joining the fund elect to be governed by the provisions of this Article,
provided that such election shall be in writing and that writing shall be
filed with the Secretary of the Firemen's Pension or Retirement
Fund.Page 27
B. Contribution by members. Each member who elects to be governed
under the provisions of this Article shall agree to contribute 1% of his
earned compensation in addition to all other contributions required by
law and ordinances adopted pursuant thereto.
C. Appropriations by City. The annual appropriation made by the Council
for the purpose of paying firemen's pension or retirement allowances
shall be sufficient, when added to the contributions made by members
during such year, sums received from tax distributions and income from
investments, to pay in full the retirement allowances and the pensions
authorized by this Article for surviving spouses payable during such
year.
D. Benefits to surviving spouse of retired fireman.
(1) Any member of the Firemen's Pension and Retirement Fund, who is
married and so elects, in writing, and who retires under the
supervision of the law and ordinances regulating their retirement
in the City heretofore adopted, shall at the time of his retirement,
§ 99-79 SCRANTON CODE § 99-81
88:192
receive the pension so provided for during his lifetime and a
pension after his death, payable to his surviving spouse at the time
of retirement, equal to 50% of his pension at the time of retirement
and thereafter the spouse shall receive an increase in pension in
an amount equal to 25% of any increase granted to active members
of the Fire Department of the same rank as the deceased spouse
when he retires from active service, provided that such person so
retiring shall have been married to his spouse not fewer than five
years prior to the date of retirement and the spouse is dependent
upon such deceased employee at the time of his death.
(2) The pension to be paid to such surviving spouse shall begin on the
first day of the month in which the death of the deceased spouse
occurs and shall continue to and terminate upon the death of such
surviving spouse, unless such surviving spouse shall remarry, in
which event the payment of the survivor's pension shall thereupon
be terminated.
(3) The word "pension" as used in this section shall be construed to
mean the sum of the pension, plus the amount of service increment,
if any, to which the married person retiring shall be entitled.
(4) When any surviving spouse receives payments under the provisions
of this section, such surviving spouse shall not be entitled to any
withdrawal of contributions made into the firemen's pension or
retirement fund by the deceased employee, nor shall the children,
parents or estate of the deceased employee be entitled to a refund
of the contributions.
E. Benefits to surviving spouse of active fireman.
(1) A surviving spouse of any active member of the firemen's pension
or retirement fund who, at the time of his death was in active
service with the City and has elected to be governed by the
provisions of this Article, shall be entitled to survivorship benefits
equal to 50% of the pension which would have been payable to such
active member had he retired at the date of his death and
thereafter shall receive an increase in pension payments in an
amount equal to 25% of the increase granted to active members of
the Fire Department of the same rank as the deceased spouse when
he retires from active service, provided that such employee shall
have been married to his spouse for not fewer than five years prior
to the date of his death and that the spouse was dependent upon
such deceased employee at the time of his death.
(2) Such surviving spouse shall be entitled to receive payments
commencing the first day of the month next following the death of
the deceased spouse and such payment shall continue to and
terminate upon the death of such surviving spouse; provided,
however, that in the event that such surviving spouse shall remarry,
§ 99-81 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-81
88:193
§ 99-82. Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund Commission.
the payment of the survivorship pension shall thereupon be
terminated.
(3) The word "pension" as used in this section shall be construed to
mean the sum of the pension, plus the amount of service
increments, if any, to which the deceased member of the firemen's
pension or retirement fund would have been entitled had he retired
upon the date of his death.
(4) When any surviving spouse receives payments under the provisions
of this section, such surviving spouse shall not be entitled to any
withdrawal of contributions made into the firemen's pension or
retirement fund by the deceased employees, nor shall the estate of
the deceased be entitled to a refund of the contributions.
(5) Each surviving spouse at the time active members of the Fire
Department receive an increase in compensation shall receive an
increase in their pension in an amount equal to 25% of the increase
granted to active members of the Fire Department of the same rank
as the deceased spouse when he retires from active service.
A. Administration. [Amended 2-3-2003 by Ord. No. 114-2003]
(1) The Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund shall be under the care,
control and supervision of the Commission known as the
"Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund Commission," and shall consist
of 16 persons. Three of such members shall be active members of
the Bureau of Fire (Chief excepted), to be elected by the active
members of the fund at a general meeting of the Bureau of Fire.
Two of the members shall be a member of the Pension Firemen's
Association to be selected by the Mayor from a list of three names
selected by the body, approved by the members of the Bureau of
Fire, and recommended to the Mayor. One of the members shall be
a citizen at large holding no position in municipal government to be
selected by the Mayor. One member shall consist of an officer of the
corporate Treasurer of the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund who
shall vote only on financial matters. One member shall consist of
the City Controller during his/her time in office. One member shall
consist of the Public Safety Director during his/her time in that
position. One member shall consist of the Chief of the Bureau of
Fire during his/her time in that position. One member shall consist
of the City Business Administrator during his/her time in that
position. One member shall consist of the Human Resources
Director during his/her time in that position. One member shall
consist of the City Treasurer during his/her time in that office. The
final three members shall be citizens at large to be appointed by
the Mayor.
§ 99-81 SCRANTON CODE § 99-82
88:194
(2) The terms of the original appointees of the Firemen's Relief and
Pension Fund Commission hereunder shall be from one to five
years to be determined by lot at the reorganization of the
Commission after enactment of this section. The citizens at will also
serve terms of one to five years following their appointment. The
following positions: City Controller, the Public Safety Director, the
Chief of the Bureau of Fire, the Business Administrator, the Human
Resources Director, the City Treasurer and the corporate Treasurer
shall serve indefinite terms on the Commission. Thereafter, each
subsequent appointment by the Mayor, or each election by the
members of the Bureau of Fire, shall be for a term of five years, or
for the balance of an unexpired term in the event of vacancy, and
each successor shall be classified and selected in the same manner
as his predecessor. The officer of the corporate Treasurer shall
serve at the pleasure of the Treasurer and the Mayor.
B. Officers. Immediately upon its appointment, or as new members are
appointed, the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund Commission shall
organize or reorganize by electing one of its members as president and
one as Secretary, and a corporate Treasurer which shall be a bank or
trust company located in the City. Such Treasurer shall not be required
to give bond and shall be compensated as determined and designated
by Council.
C. Meetings. The Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund Commission shall
meet at least once each month at such stated times as it may designate,
for the transaction of all business as may properly come before it. A
majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
§ 99-82 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-82
88:195

ARTICLE VI
Revised Benefit Plan for Firemen
[Adopted as Ord. No. 153-1987 (Ch. 12, Art. IV, Div. 4, of the 1979
Code)]
§ 99-83. Membership.
§ 99-84. Age and service retirement requirements.
Every member who shall have served continuously for a period of 25 years,
periods of suspension and absence excluded, and having attained the age of
55 shall be eligible to retire from said Bureau.
§ 99-85. Age and service retirement benefit.
The monthly pension benefit is to be set at 50% of the average monthly
compensation calculated over the last 36 months of employment.
Compensation is defined as base pay and longevity.
§ 99-86. Cost of living increases.
There shall not be a cost of living increase for those members who retire
under the provisions of § 12-84. For those members who retire under the
provisions of § 12-90, the cost of living increase shall amount to 25% of any
increase in salary granted to those firemen on active duty of the same rank.
§ 99-87. Service increment.
There shall not be a service increment for any type of retirement.
§ 99-88. Lump sum death benefits.
There shall not be any lump sum death benefit.
§ 99-89. Vesting.
A member shall be vested for a benefit after 25 years of continuous service,
periods of suspension and absence excluded.
A. On or after July 1, 1987, any individual who becomes a member of the
firemen's pension fund shall be governed by the provisions of this
Article.
B. Prior to July 1, 1987, any member of the firemen's pension fund is
eligible to be governed by the provisions of this Article. In order to do
so, the member must notify the Secretary of the firemen's pension fund,
in writing, of his intention. Immediately after the Secretary is notified,
the member shall be governed by the provisions of this Article.
§ 99-83 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-90
88:197
§ 99-90. Disability benefits.
A disability benefit is provided for a member regardless of service. For nonservice
related disability the benefit shall be 5% of salary per year of service
up to a maximum of 50%. For a service connected disability the benefit shall
be the normal retirement benefit as per this Article. This amendment shall
apply to any employee who has received a disability benefit pursuant to the
pension plan otherwise described in this Article.
§ 99-91. Survivor benefits.
§ 99-92. Contributions.
Each member shall contribute three and one-half percent (3 1/2%) of base
pay and longevity to the firemen's pension fund.
§ 99-93. Administration.
The administration of the firemen's revised pension plan shall be the same
as the previously adopted firemen's pension plan.
A. Any member who is married and who retires shall, at the time of
retirement, receive the pension so provided for during his lifetime and a
pension after his death, payable to his surviving spouse at the time of
retirement equal to 50% of his pension at the time of retirement and
thereafter said spouse shall receive an increase in pension in an amount
to equal 25% of any increase granted to active members of the same
rank as the deceased spouse when he retired from active service.
B. A surviving spouse of any active member who at the time of his death
was in active service with the City shall be entitled to survivorship
benefits equal to 50% of the pension which would have been payable to
such active member had he retired at the date of his death and
thereafter shall receive an increase in pension payments equal to 25%
of the increase granted to active members of the same rank as the
deceased spouse when he retired from active service.
§ 99-90 SCRANTON CODE § 99-93
88:198
ARTICLE VII
Firemen's and Policemen's Widows' Pension Fund
[Adopted by Ord. No. 153-1987 (Ch. 12, Art. VI, of the 1979 Code]
§ 99-94. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Firemen's and Policemen's Widows'
Pension Fund Ordinance."
§ 99-95. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DECEASED RETIRED FIREMAN OR POLICEMAN — A deceased fireman
or policeman of the City who prior to January 1, 1975, had received or
was eligible to receive retirement benefits either for length of service
or disability in accordance with statutes, ordinances of the City or rules
and regulations of either the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund or the
Policemen's Retirement Fund.
§ 99-96. Benefits.
§ 99-97. Firemen's and Policemen's Widows' Pension Fund
Commission.
A. Each unmarried widow of a deceased retired fireman or policeman shall
be entitled to the benefits provided by this article. Eligibility for
payment of each monthly benefit shall be determined as of the first day
of each month. Death or remarriage of a widow beneficiary shall
terminate her eligibility to receive benefits. Payments of each monthly
benefit shall be made at the end of each monthly period.
B. Each widow beneficiary shall be entitled each month to monthly
benefits in the amounts as follows: effective 1-1-1998, to $250; effective
1-1-1999, to $300; effective 1-1-2000, to $350; effective 1-1-2001, to
$400; effective 1-1-2002, to $450. [Amended 12-15-1997 by Ord. No.
146-1997]
C. Each widow claiming the benefits provided herein shall make
application to the Firemen's and Policemen's Widows' Pension Fund
Commission on forms furnished by the Commission. Each widow
applicant may request, in writing, a hearing within 90 days of the
receipt by her of a notice of disallowance of her claim.
A. Created. There is hereby created a Commission to be known as the
"Firemen's and Policemen's Widows' Pension Fund Commission."
B. Composition. The Firemen's and Policemen's Widows' Pension Fund
Commission shall consist of three members. The City Treasurer, the
Director of the Department of Public Safety and the President of City
§ 99-94 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-97
88:199
Council during the terms of their respective offices shall serve ex officio
as members of the Commission.
C. Quorum. A vacancy in the Firemen's and Policemen's Widows' Pension
Fund Commission shall not impair the right of the remaining members
to exercise all the powers of the Commission, and two members of the
Commission shall at all times constitute a quorum.
D. Annual reports.
(1) The Firemen's and Policemen's Widows' Pension Fund Commission
at the end of every year shall make a report, in writing, stating in
detail the work it has done in hearing and deciding cases, and
otherwise, and it shall sign and report in full an opinion in every
case decided by it.
(2) A complete account of all its expenditures shall be prepared by the
Commission at the end of each year.
(3) The reports and accounts herein required shall be filed with the
City Clerk not later than March 31 next following the end of each
year.
E. Officers and employees. The Firemen's and Policemen's Widows'
Pension Fund Commission shall designate as its Secretary a competent
employee of the City from a list of three employees recommended by
the Mayor. The City Treasurer shall serve as Treasurer of the
Commission. The City Solicitor or an assistant designated by him shall
serve as Solicitor to the Commission. The Commission, with the consent
of the appropriate department director, may use the services of any
officer or employee of the City without thereby incurring a duty to pay
for such services. The Commission shall elect one of its members as
Chairman.
F. Hearings. The Firemen's and Policemen's Widows' Pension Fund
Commission may, by one or more of its members, prosecute any inquiry
and hold hearings necessary to the performance of its functions. A
member who participates in such an inquiry or hearing shall not be
disqualified from subsequently participating in a decision of the
Commission in the same case.
G. Funds and disbursement. The Firemen's and Policemen's Widows'
Pension Fund Commission shall have charge of such funds and their
disbursements as Council shall appropriate. The City Controller shall
audit the accounts of the Commission at least once annually and shall
make a report thereof and file it with the City Clerk.
§ 99-97 SCRANTON CODE § 99-97
88:200
Part 4
Aggregate Funds
ARTICLE VIII
Single Pension Trust Fund
[Adopted as Ord. No. 154-1987 (Ch. 12, Art. VI, of the 1979 Code)]
§ 99-98. Aggregation of trust funds.
A. The City of Scranton, has established and maintained various pension
plans for its employees and there are pension funds associated with
these pension plans. The various pension plans are the policemen's
pension plan, the firemen's pension plan, the nonuniform pension plan,
the widows of deceased retired firemen and the widows of deceased
retired policemen. The City of Scranton hereby aggregates the assets to
the credit of the various pension funds into a single pension trust fund.
Subsequent to the aggregation, the pension trust fund shall be the
funding mechanism for all pension plans connected with the
aggregation.
B. Each pension plan subject to the aggregation shall have an undivided
participation in the assets of the combined pension trust fund. For
accounting purposes, the value of the participation by each plan shall
be calculated annually. The value for the initial year following
aggregation shall be that portion, of the total value of the pension trust
fund which bears the same relationship that the value of the assets of
the pension plan as of the date of the aggregation plus the contributions
received by the pension trust fund with respect to that pension plan
since the date of aggregation and reduced by the amount of retirement
annuities and benefits paid from the pension trust fund for annuitants
and benefit recipients of that pension plan since the date of aggregation
bears to the total value of all assets transferred to the pension trust
fund as of the date of aggregation, plus the total contributions received
by the pension trust fund since the date of aggregation and reduced by
the total amount of retirement annuities and benefits paid for all
annuitants and benefit recipients since the date of aggregation.
C. The value of the participation for each year subsequent to the initial
year following aggregation shall be that portion of the total value of the
pension trust fund which bears the same relationship that the value of
the participation of the pension plan as of the close of the preceding
year, plus the contributions received by the pension trust fund with
respect to that pension plan during the year and reduced by the amount
of retirement annuities and benefits paid from the pension trust fund
for annuitants and benefit recipients of that pension plan during the
year bears to the total value of all participation in the pension trust fund
as of the close of the preceding year, plus the total contributions
received by the pension trust fund during the year and reduced by the
total amount of retirement annuities and benefits paid for all annuitants
§ 99-98 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-98
88:201
§ 99-99. Legal title to assets.
Legal title to assets in the aggregated pension trust fund should be in the
name of the Third National Bank & Trust Company of Scranton as Trustee.
§ 99-100. Investment of assets.
The assets of the aggregated pension trust fund shall be invested in
securities in compliance with the trust agreement between the City of
Scranton and the Third National Bank & Trust Company of Scranton.
§ 99-101. Investment earnings.
Investment earning shall be allocated to each associated pension plan in
proportion to the most recently determined participation value.
§ 99-102. Valuation of assets.
The valuation of assets shall be pursuant to the provisions of Section 202
(e)(1) of Act 205 of 198423 and any applicable rules and regulations issued
by the Public Employee Retirement Study Commission.
§ 99-103. Management of the pension trust. [Amended 2-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 113-2003]
The aggregated pension trust fund shall be managed by a Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees shall be named the City of Scranton Composite
Pension Board. The Board shall consist of 15 members as follows:
and benefits paid for all annuitants and benefit recipients during the
year.
A. One member elected from the present Firemen's Pension Board and one
member elected within the Bureau of Fire at large and contributing into
the pension fund.
B. One member elected from the present Police Pension Board and one
member elected within the Police Department at large and contributing
to the pension fund.
C. One member elected from the present Municipal Pension Board and
one member elected at large from all contributing municipal
employees.
D. By virtue of the office they hold, the remaining Board members shall
consist of the Mayor, City Controller, the President of City Council, the
Business Administrator, the Human Resources Director, the Public
Safety Director, the City Treasurer, the Police Chief and the Fire Chief.
In each case, the role may be filled by the office holder or his/her
designee.
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.1 et seq.
§ 99-98 SCRANTON CODE § 99-103
88:202
Chapter 105
POLICE, BUREAU OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 6.
Ambulance and emergency services — See Ch.
12.
Bureau of Fire — See Ch. 59.
Police pension — See Ch. 99.
§ 99-103 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 99-103
88:203

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 26 of the 1979 Code]
§ 105-1. Manual of the Bureau of Police Rules and Regulations;
changes to Manual.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized to
issue and promulgate a "Manual of the Bureau of Police Rules and
Regulations," as more particularly set forth herein and which Manual is
made a part hereof as though fully set forth at this point. This Manual,
upon adoption, shall regulate the administration of the Bureau of Police;
provided, however, that the Director of the Department of Public Safety is
authorized, in his discretion, to vary the terms of the regulations herein
contained should, in his judgment, the same be necessary; and further
provided that notice of changes shall be made by posting the same on a
bulletin board provided for all police.
§ 105-2. Payment for off-duty court appearances. [Amended by Ord.
Nos. 19-1979; 18-1990]
§ 105-3. Reduction or increase in number of employees. [Amended
by Ord. No. 9-1980]
A. Police officers shall be paid an amount of $25 at any court appearances
required during the off-duty hours of said police officers.
B. This section shall be retroactive to December 1, 1977.
A. If, for any reasons of economy or lack of funds, it becomes necessary for
the City to reduce the number of employees of its Bureau of Police, then
the City shall follow the following procedure:
(1) If there are any employees in the Bureau of Police who have
reached the age of 65 and are eligible for retirement under the
terms of the Police Pension Fund24 of the City, then such reduction
in number shall be made by retirement on pension of all the oldest
in age.
(2) If the number of employees in the Bureau of Police who have
reached the age of 65 and are eligible for retirement under the
terms of the police pension fund of the City is insufficient to effect
the reduction in number desired by the City, then the reduction
shall be effective by suspending the last person or persons, starting
with probationers that have been appointed. Such removal shall be
accomplished by suspending in numerical order, commencing with
the last person appointed, all recent appointees until such
reduction has been accomplished.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Pensions, Part 2.
§ 105-1 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 105-3
88:205
B. Whenever the number of employees in the Bureau of Police shall be
again increased in number, or if any vacancies may occur, the
employees suspended under the terms of this section shall be
reinstated to their former class before any new appointees are
appointed, in the reverse order of which they were suspended.
§ 105-3 SCRANTON CODE § 105-3
88:206
ARTICLE II
Extra-Duty Work Performed by Police Officers
[Adopted 7-9-1997 by Ord. No. 49-199725]
§ 105-4. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number
include the singular number; words in the singular shall include the plural;
and words in the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
CITY — The City of Scranton.
EXTRA-DUTY DETAIL — Any assignment of police officers that has been
requested by a private citizen or organization for the purpose of
maintaining public order, supervision of persons attending an activity or
traffic control and pedestrian safety.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Police.
§ 105-5. Police services supplied.
A. Where, in the conduct or operation of supermarkets, shopping centers,
private parking areas, tournaments, concerts, exhibitions and other
events or public assemblages, there are assembled large numbers of
persons, the Superintendent may, upon request by any person and
payment to the City of the sums hereinafter specified, supply the
number of police officers he deems necessary to properly supervise and
police said activity in order to maintain public order, the safe and
speedy conduct of traffic on the highways and in, into and out of
parking areas and for the protection of property and the supervision of
persons, customers and patrons attending said activity.
B. Any person requesting the services as described in Subsection A shall
provide the following information at least five days before an event is
scheduled to be conducted:
(1) The date services shall be required;
(2) The anticipated hours of operation;
(3) The type of event being conducted; and
(4) The number of people expected to attend, where applicable.
25.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 7-19-1997, and said veto was
overridden by the City Council 7-23-1997 by a vote of five to zero.
§ 105-4 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 105-6
88:207
§ 105-6. Terms and conditions of payment for services.
Any persons requesting services provided for herein shall pay the City the
base pay per hour of a second-year patrolman's pay (currently $15.54 per
hour) plus an administrative fee of $5 an hour, regardless of the rank of the
police officer providing the services. Said payment shall be made prior to
the time the police services are required. Payment shall be made payable
to the City of Scranton and be forwarded to the City Treasurer's office.
Payment shall not be made to any individual police officer.
§ 105-7. Assignment of police officers.
A. The Superintendent shall keep an accurate record of all regular and
other police officers who desire to participate in extra-duty detail in
addition to their regular duty. The Superintendent shall assign this
police extra-duty detail to those officers who desire this additional
service in an equitable manner.
B. Extra-duty detail shall not interfere with regular-duty performance. No
officer shall be permitted to work more than 16 consecutive hours at
any time. Said 16 hours include both regular-duty and extra-duty hours.
C. Police officers shall comply with all Bureau rules and regulations while
engaged in any extra-duty assignments.
D. Police officers shall not engage in extra-duty police-related employment
that involves selling alcohol in public bars. This does not preclude
police-related employment in an establishment that serves alcoholic
beverages.
E. No police officer shall station himself at, by or near any area in which a
public event or private event is to be conducted for the purpose of
providing security services, crowd control, traffic control or pedestrian
safety unless he has been directed to do so by the Superintendent of
Police.
F. Restrictions; uniform.
(1) Police officers may engage in off-duty employment, provided that:
(a) It is of a non-police nature in which vested police powers are
not a condition of employment;
(b) The work provides no real or implied enforcement service to
the employer; and
(c) The work is not performed during assigned hours of duty.
(2) Police officers shall not wear a Scranton City police officer's
uniform, or any part thereof, while engaged in the off-duty
employment referred to in this subsection.
§ 105-6 SCRANTON CODE § 105-7
88:208
§ 105-8. Coordination with licensing bureaus within City.
Prior to assigning police officers to extra-duty assignments, the
Superintendent shall determine whether all necessary City permits have
been obtained for the activity which shall be held. No police officers shall be
assigned to any activity for which proper permits have not been obtained.
§ 105-9. Failure to comply with regulations.
If any person shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions
of this article, or any rules or regulations, or any reasonable orders or
directions of a City representative in reference thereto, the City may refuse
to issue further permits to such person until such conditions or orders are
complied with.
§ 105-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of no
less than $200 and no more than $600 and, in default of payment, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
G. Police officers may not engage in off-duty employment which presents a
potential conflict of interest between the duties of a police officer and
the duties for the off-duty employer. Examples of potential conflict of
interest employment include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Any employment in which police authority might tend to be used to
collect money or merchandise for private purposes.
(2) Personnel investigations for the private sector or any employment
which might require the police officer to have access to police
information, files, records or services as a condition of
employment, whether explicit or implied.
(3) Employment which assists, in any manner, in the case preparation
in any criminal or civil action or proceeding.
(4) Employment for a business experiencing a labor strike or a labor
group that is on strike.
§ 105-7 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 105-10
88:209

ARTICLE III
Police Chaplain
[Adopted 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 106-2015]
§ 105-11. Position created.
The position of Police Chaplain for the City of Scranton Police Department is
hereby created as follows. The position will be a volunteer position with no
salary and/or benefits. The position of Chaplain shall be under the control
of the Chief of Police.
§ 105-12. Qualifications.
Any person or persons appointed as Chaplain shall have undergone
background investigations. Chaplains shall receive Police Chaplain training/
certification and shall receive certified Police Chaplain credentials in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the City of Scranton Police
Department.
§ 105-13. Duties of Police Chaplain.
The duties of Police Chaplain shall include, but not be limited to, assisting
the City of Scranton Police Department in death notifications; providing
comfort to victims, families and officers at traumatic incidents; giving
confidential counsel to Police Department personnel; providing a moral/
ethical foundation to police personnel; providing referral and resource
assistance as requested; and providing pastoral functions at special events
and ceremonies or other religious events as requested. He/she may assist
with critical incident stress debriefings; serve as a liaison with other local
clergy; serve as a liaison with police families in the event of a line-of-duty
injury or death; and any other duties that may be assigned by the Chief of
Police.
§ 105-14. Rank and salary.
Any person appointed as Chaplain shall serve in that capacity without rank
or salary.
§ 105-15. Term of office.
A person appointed as Chaplain shall serve for a period of one year from the
date of appointment and shall continue to serve in that capacity until he/she
is either terminated or reappointed with the recommendation of the Chief
of Police.
§ 105-16. Appointment.
The Chief of Police may recommend to the Mayor persons that he/she
believes meet the qualifications of Police Chaplain as well as the rules
and regulations of the City of Scranton Police Department with reference
to Chaplains, if any. All applicants for the position of Chaplain shall be
§ 105-11 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 105-16
88:211
reviewed by the Chief of Police, Senior Police Chaplain and Chaplain liaison
to determine their qualifications in accordance with this article, and said
reviewers shall make recommendations to the Mayor regarding the
appointment as Chaplain. The Mayor shall appoint Chaplains in accordance
with this article with the advice and consent of City Council.
§ 105-17. Nonestablishment of religion.
The creation of the Police Chaplain position and the Police Chaplain
program is in no way a recognition, establishment or promotion by the City
of Scranton of any particular religion or religious sect. No officer, employee
of the Police Department, or a member of the public will be mandated or
required to participate in the Chaplain program or to avail themselves of the
Police Chaplain's services, as the same will operate on a strictly voluntary
basis.
§ 105-16 SCRANTON CODE § 105-17
88:212
Chapter 108
PROPERTY DISPOSAL
§ 105-17 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 105-17
88:213

ARTICLE I
Disposal of City-Owned Personal Property
[Adopted 7-27-2006 by Ord. No. 44-2006]
§ 108-1. Schedule for disposal of property.
The City of Scranton may dispose of its excess personal property, including
vehicles and equipment, pursuant to the following schedule:
§ 108-2. Sealed quotes in excess of $20,000.
If sealed quotes are obtained and the bids are returned for an amount in
excess of $20,000, the bids may not be accepted and the bid must be redone
using the formal bidding process.
A. Personal property valued between $0 up to $20,000 may only be
disposed of by obtaining at least three sealed quotes. Those sealed
quotes must be sent to the office of the City Controller in the same
manner as used when goods are purchased.
B. Personal property valued at $20,000 and up may only be disposed of
pursuant to a formal bid, advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation, and opened at a formal bid opening by the City Controller.
C. In lieu of Subsection A or B above, the City may offer such property for
sale by public auction service available on the internet. [Added
5-8-2014 by Ord. No. 16-2014]
§ 108-1 ORDINANCES, PRINTING OF § 108-2
88:215
Chapter 111
REIMBURSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bonds — See Ch. 24. Funds and trusts — See Ch. 65.
§ 111-1. Certification of reimbursement; reexpenditure.
It is hereby ordained by Council that on receipt of reimbursing money
paid into the City Treasury, the City Treasurer on notice from the Director
of any city Department from whose appropriations such money has been
expended, shall certify to the City Controller the sum of such reimbursing
money. Upon approval by the City Controller of the accounting in such
case, he shall add the amount of the reimbursing sum to the appropriation
account originally involved, and it shall be subject to reexpenditure for the
purposes of such appropriation.
§ 111-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply both to funds of the general city
accounts and to special funds such as those which are the proceeds of
bond issues, or other specially established funds; but as to general city
budget accounts of any current year, no sum which shall be constituted of
reimbursement of expenditure that was made out of closed appropriation
accounts of a prior year shall be applicable as a reappropriation to the
budget of the current year.
§ 111-3. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be held to permit reappropriation of moneys
received as earnings or rentals of city property or facilities; provided,
however, that should the appropriation for the upkeep and improvement
of Nay Aug Park26 in any year be an amount less than a sum sufficient to
include all revenue derived from concessions granted by the city for the
use of facilities of that portion of the park conveyed to the city by the
Lackawanna Iron and Coal Company, then the excess of such revenue in any
year over the amount of the appropriation shall be reappropriated to the
upkeep of the park.
Chapter 117
SIGNATURE STAMP
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 332, Art. II, Nay Aug Park.
§ 108-2 SCRANTON CODE § 117-1
111:216
§ 117-1. Use of signature stamp.
The Mayor and City Treasurer may sign all city warrants and checks with
a stamp to be adopted by them, which stamp shall be a facsimile of their
signatures, or by an automatic signing device containing their signatures.
All such city warrants and checks, when signed by such automatic signing
device, shall be accepted by the City Controller, City Treasurer and all other
persons and acted upon the same as if signed by the Mayor and Treasurer
in ink and in their own proper handwriting.
Chapter 123
SOLICITOR
§ 123-1. Disqualification of Solicitor.
In all matters wherein the City Solicitor, by reason of having acted as
counsel or attorney for clients, having interests adverse to the interest of
the city prior to his appointment as City Solicitor or by reason of personal
relationship or otherwise, considers himself disqualified to represent the
city's interest in a particular matter, he shall so notify an assistant City
Solicitor who shall thereupon assume and perform all of the duties of the
City Solicitor in connection with such matter.
Chapter 129
SPECIAL ACCOUNTS
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 140
ADVERTISING AND BILL POSTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 305.
§ 117-1 SOLICITOR § 123-1
123:217

ARTICLE I
Billposting
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 3, Art. I, of the 1979 Code]
§ 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BILLPOSTERS — All persons engaged in the business or occupation of
posting, by tacking, posting, painting, demonstrating or otherwise, or
distributing upon the streets any advertising matter, bills, posters, pictures
or any other thing, matter or device whatsoever, advertising the business of
any firm or corporation, whether that of merchant, manufacturer, publisher
or person engaged in any business or industrial pursuit or of any operas,
theaters, shows, circuses or other exhibitions; provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to the painting of
store, office or other signs by sign painters or to the posting of legal notices
by public officers or attorneys in the manner and in the places prescribed
by law or individuals who are in the business of distributing circulars,
almanacs or business cards who place them inside of the doors of dwellings
or buildings within the city limits.
§ 140-2. Permit required.
§ 140-3. Consent required for posting in public places.
No person shall paint, print, post or in any way affix any picture, bill
or advertising matter of any kind upon any post, hydrant, curb, sidewalk
or other public improvement in any public ground or street, nor upon
any bridge, or part of the same, nor upon public buildings, structures or
erections of any kind belonging to the city, nor upon any mast or pole in
any street or alley erected or used for supporting or conducting any wire or
cable or incidental thereto, nor upon any tree, lamppost or any structure or
erection of any kind within the limits of any public street or ground in the
city, whether or not the permission therefor has been granted by the owner
thereof, unless express consent therefor shall have been first granted by the
\Director of the Department of Public Safety.
A. No person shall be permitted to distribute or circulate printed matter of
any character within the city limits before having first registered with
the Director of Community Development and upon payment of five
dollars ($5.). The Director will issue a permit good for one (1) year to be
used only by the person named and transferable only on written
authority of the Director.
B. Any person detected by any police officer or other official violating this
section is to be arrested and disposed of as provided for other similar
violations.
§ 140-1 ADVERTISING AND BILL POSTING § 140-4
140:219
§ 140-4. Consent for posting on private property.
No person shall paint, print, post or in any way affix any picture, bill or
advertising matter of any kind upon any post, fence, billboard, signboard or
upon any building or erection or structure of any kind, unless the building
or object upon which the same may be placed is the property or under the
control of the person so doing, or unless the consent of the owner or the
person in control thereof has been obtained.
§ 140-5. Refusing to leave.
Any billposter who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by
another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by
the owner or occupant of such premises or his agent, to leave the same and
not return to such premises shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 140-6. Prohibited where properly posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed
on such premises a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers
or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any
manner that the occupants of such premises do not wish to have their right
of privacy disturbed or to have any handbills left upon such premises.
§ 140-7. Littering prohibited.27
§ 140-8. Obscene matter prohibited.
No billposter or other person shall post or affix any bill or advertisement
containing pictures, illustrations or printed matter of any obscene or
immoral character.
§ 140-9. License required.
No person shall engage in or carry on the business or occupation of
billposting in the city without having first been licensed to carry on such
business in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
A. No person shall loosely scatter or throw any bills or other advertising
matter on the surface of any of the public streets or ways or in the
public grounds nor within the yards of private residences.
B. No billposter or other person shall scatter, daub or leave any paste, glue
or other like substance used for affixing bills upon any public sidewalk
or pavement, nor scatter or throw any old bills or waste material
removed from billboards on the surface of any public street or way, nor
on the surface of any private ground.
27.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 305, Littering.
§ 140-4 SCRANTON CODE § 140-10
140:220
§ 140-10. Application; fee; bond. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-1992]
Any person desiring to engage in the business of billposter within said
city shall make application, in writing, to the Director of the Department
of Community Development of said city for a license so to do and file
such application with said Director. The Director may thereupon grant such
license and direct that the same be issued to the applicant upon his paying
to the City Treasurer the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.) and
filing with the Director the Treasurer's receipt therefore, and upon the
further condition that the applicant shall file with the City Solicitor a bond
in favor of the City of Scranton, with surety to be approved by the City
Solicitor, in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.), conditioned
that the licensee will conform to all ordinances regulating the business of
billposters and protect and save harmless said City of Scranton from any
and all damages resulting from the erection and construction of any and all
billboards. The license shall be signed by the Director of the Department of
Community Development.
§ 140-11. Expiration. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-1992]
The license shall expire on the first Monday of April thereafter.
§ 140-10 ADVERTISING AND BILL POSTING § 140-11
140:221
Chapter 146
AIR POLLUTION
§ 146-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Scranton Air Pollution
Control Ordinance of 1970."
§ 146-2. Policy.
Whereas pollution of the air by open burning and otherwise is detrimental
to the health, comfort, living conditions, welfare and safety of the citizens
of the city, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to safeguard its
citizens from air pollution.
§ 146-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
respectively ascribed to them:
AIR CONTAMINATION SOURCE -- — Any source from or by reason of which
there is emitted into the outdoor atmosphere smoke or odors, regardless
of who the person may be who owns or operates the building, premises
or other property in or on which such source is located or the facility,
equipment or other property by which the emission is caused or from which
the emission comes.
FLUE -- — Any duct, passage, stack, chimney or conduit permitting air
contaminants to be emitted into the open air.
FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT -- — Any furnace or other device, excluding
incinerators, in which fuel is burned for the production of steam, hot water
or hot air and from which products of combustion are the sole stack effluent.
GARBAGE -- — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR -- — Any device specifically designed for the destruction by
burning of refuse, sewage sludge or other combustible waste material.
ODOR -- — That property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPEN BURNING -- — Any unclosed fire wherein products of combustion are
emitted to the open air, and are not directed thereto through a flue.
REFUSE -- — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART -- — The Ringelmann scale for grading the
density of smoke published by the United States Bureau of Mines or any
chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of smoke density
approved by the City Council the equivalent of the Ringelmann scale.
§ 140-11 SCRANTON CODE § 146-3
146:222
RUBBISH -- — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, tree leaves, yard trimmings,
furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS -- — Salvaging or reclaiming of any product or
material, including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers
or drums.
SMOKE -- — Extremely small solid particles produced by incomplete
combustion of organic substances and includes, but is not limited to fly
ash, cinders, tarry matter, unburned gases, soot or carbon and gaseous
combustion products.
TRADE WASTE -- — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste materials; provided, however, that trade waste
shall not include any coal refuse associated with the mining or preparation
of coal.
§ 146-4. Air Pollution Control Officer.
A. Authorized position. The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint or
designate the Air Pollution Control Officer together with such assistants
as may be deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter
and shall provide funds for the salary and expenses of the Air Pollution
Control Officer. The Air Pollution Control Officer shall be in the Office of
Health and directly responsible to the Director of the Office of Health.
B. Qualifications. Where such competence is required the Air Pollution
Control Officer shall be qualified by technical training and practical
experience in the theory and practice of the construction and operation
of fuel-burning equipment and incinerators. The Air Pollution Control
Officer shall be capable of accurately and reliably reading the
Ringelmann Smoke Chart. Other qualifications and experience as
established by the city shall be based upon the level of experience
required to enforce this chapter.
C. Duties. The Air Pollution Control Officer shall have the powers and
duties to:
(1) Enforce the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
contained therein.
(2) Receive and initiate complaints of violations of the regulations of
this chapter.
(3) Enter and inspect any building, property, premise or place for the
purpose of investigating an actual or suspected source of air
pollution or for the purpose of ascertaining the compliance or
noncompliance with any regulation of this chapter.
§ 146-3 AIR POLLUTION § 146-4
146:223
§ 146-5. Emission regulation.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any fuel-burning
equipment or incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
shade No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the outdoor
atmosphere. EXCEPTION: Smoke emitted during the cleaning of a fire box
or the building of a new fire may be darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart for a period or periods aggregating not more than six (6)
minutes in any sixty (60) consecutive minutes.
§ 146-6. Open burning prohibited.
No person shall conduct a salvage operation or destroy refuse by open
burning.
§ 146-7. Offensive odors prohibited.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of any noxious
or offensive odor from an air contamination source.
§ 146-8. Interference with control officer; right of entry.
No person shall in any manner hinder, delay, obstruct, resist, prevent or
in any way interfere with the Air Pollution Control Officer or his assistants
in the performance of their duties under this chapter, or refuse such
personnel, after proper identification, entrance at reasonable hours to any
premises.
§ 146-9. Compliance with abatement notice; application for
extension.
No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any written abatement
notice served on such person, either personally or by registered or certified
mail issued by the Air Pollution Control Officer. Such notice shall set forth
a violation of this chapter and a time within which the violation is to
be abated. Any person receiving such abatement notice may obtain an
extension of time to comply therewith by making application to and
obtaining the approval of the Director of the Office of Health.
(4) Have access to and require information pertinent to any matter
under investigation.
(5) Send written notice of any violation of this chapter to the person
responsible for the violation.
(6) File a written report of the violation of any regulation of this
chapter with the Director of the Office of Health.
(7) Institute prosecution for violation of the regulations of this chapter.
(8) Render assistance and technical advice as needed to any persons
engaged in operations which may cause air pollution.
§ 146-4 SCRANTON CODE § 146-10
146:224
§ 146-10. Abatement of violations.
The Air Pollution Control Officer may institute an action in equity for an
injunction to restrain continuous violations of this chapter if the Control
Officer has issued an abatement notice which is being violated and which is
not then the subject of judicial review.
§ 146-11. Violations and penalties.
Prosecutions under this chapter shall be instituted by the Air Pollution
Control Officer and shall be prosecuted in the name of the city. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be punished as provided in § 1-16.
Chapter 152
ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243. Noise — See Ch. 317.
§ 152-1. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in
the plural include the singular number; words in the singular shall include
the plural; and words in the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
ALARM — Communication to the Police Department or Fire Department
indicating that a crime or other emergency situation warranting immediate
action by the Police Department or Fire Department has occurred or is
occurring.
ALARM DEVICE — Any device designated to automatically transmit an
alarm by wire, telephone, radio or other means:
CITY — The City of Scranton.
A. Directly to the Police Department or Fire Department;
To a person who is instructed to notify the Police Department or Fire
Department of the alarm; or
B.
To activate a bell or sounding device to be heard outside the building
which is intended to alert the Police or Fire Department or others to
the existence of a crime or other emergency situation warranting police
action and/or Fire Department action.
C.
§ 146-10 AIR POLLUTION § 152-1
146:225
ENTITY — An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated association
or other similar entity.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm device by inadvertence,
negligence, or intentional or unintentional acts, to which the Scranton
Police Department or Scranton Fire Department responds, including alarms
caused by malfunction of the alarm device.
§ 152-2. False alarms.
A. Any entity causing false alarm(s) for any reason shall pay to the City a
charge for each and every false alarm to which the Police Department
or Fire Department responds, in each calendar year, pursuant to
§ 152-3 below.
B. False alarm totals; notification of charges.
(1) False alarm totals shall be calculated within 15 days of the end of
each month by the Scranton Fire Department. Those totals shall be
forwarded to the City Treasurer to be processed into bills. The
entity should receive written notice of billing at the last known
address by regular mail within 30 days of the monthly cycle. Within
60 days of January 1, a bill shall be sent to all entities reflecting any
unpaid balances due from the preceding year. Failure by the
Scranton Fire Department to mail notice of assessment of a false
alarm charge within one year from the date of occurrence of the
false alarm shall preclude the Scranton Fire Department from
assessing a false alarm charge.
(2) When a false alarm occurs, the Scranton Police Department, within
10 days from the date of a false alarm, shall notify the entity owning
the property at which the alarm device sounded or the entity
causing said alarm that a false alarm charge is due and the amount
thereof. Said notice shall be in writing and mailed to said entity at
its last known address by regular mail. Failure by the Scranton
Police Department to mail notice of assessment of a false alarm
charge within one year from the date of occurrence of the false
alarm shall preclude the Scranton Police Department from
assessing a false alarm charge.
C. A false alarm charge shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer's
office 30 days from the date of the mailing of the notice of the
assessment of the charge. The City Treasurer shall submit a report to
the Business Administrator on the first day of each month including, but
not limited to, the following information:
(1) The name of the entity which has been assessed a false alarm
charge;
(2) The address of the property to which the Police Department of Fire
Department responded;
§ 152-1 SCRANTON CODE § 152-2
146:226
§ 152-3. Service charges.
Should any alarm device described in the above sections cause a false alarm
during any calendar year to date, then a graduated service charge shall be
levied against the entity pursuant to Subsection A if levied by the Scranton
Fire Department and pursuant to Subsection B if levied by the Scranton
Police Department, as follows:
§ 152-4. Exceptions.
The following shall not be considered false alarms:
(3) The date upon which said response was made;
(4) The amount of the false alarm charges outstanding as of the last
day of the preceding month;
(5) Any payment made on the account and the date of said payment;
and
(6) A list of delinquent names.
D. Failure of an entity causing a false alarm to pay a false alarm charge on
or before the date due shall constitute a violation of this chapter and
shall subject said entity to the penalties set forth in § 152-6 hereof. The
Scranton Police Department or Scranton Fire Department shall be
responsible for filing the appropriate legal complaint with the District
Judge within whose jurisdiction the property is located.
A. Fire Department levied service charges:
(1) First and second false alarms: no charge.
(2) Third and fourth false alarms: $250 each.
(3) Fifth false alarm: $500.
(4) Sixth and subsequent false alarms: $1,000 each.
B. Police Department levied service charges:
(1) First and second false alarms: no charge.
(2) Third and fourth false alarms: $100 each.
(3) Fifth false alarm: $250.
(4) Sixth and subsequent false alarms: $500 each.
A. Alarms caused by the testing, failure or repair of telephone lines. The
entity shall be responsible for notifying its alarm company prior to
testing.
B. Alarms caused by an act of God, such as earthquakes, flood, windstorm,
thunder or lightning.
§ 152-2 AIR POLLUTION § 152-5
146:227
§ 152-5. Administration and enforcement.
The City of Scranton, through the Police Department or Fire Department
or their respective designees, shall have the responsibility and authority to
assess the fees as herein provided.
§ 152-6. Violations and penalties.
Any entity which shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this chapter or of any regulation or requirement pursuant
hereto and authorized hereby shall, upon conviction thereof, be ordered
to pay a fine of $300 and, in default of payment of fines and costs, be
imprisoned not more than 90 days. Each day's violation shall constitute a
separate offense. Should the City be required to institute collection and/
or legal proceedings against an entity for failure or refusal to pay service
charges hereunder, said entity will be responsible for all of the City's costs
associated with said collection and/or legal proceedings, including, but not
limited to, the City's reasonable attorneys' fees.
§ 152-7. Appeals.
Any entity against which a service charge has been levied by the Scranton
Police Department or the Scranton Fire Department shall have 30 calendar
days from the date of issuance to appeal said service charge, in writing, by
submitting said written appeal request to the Director of the Department
of Licensing, Inspections and Permits. The Director of the Department of
L.I.P.S. shall have 30 calendar days from receipt of said appeal request to
investigate and render a decision in writing to the entity. The decision on
said appeal request shall be at the sole discretion of the Director of L.I.P.S.
and shall be final and binding.
Chapter 158
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 332.
§ 158-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, organization or
other similar entity.
§ 152-5 SCRANTON CODE § 158-2
158:228
§ 158-2. Consumption.
No person shall drink or consume liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic
beverages in or upon any public sidewalk, street, lane, parking lot, park or
recreation area or other public property within the City of Scranton or in
any vehicle upon such area within the City of Scranton except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 158-3. Possession.
No person shall have, possess, carry or transport liquor, wine, beer or other
alcoholic beverage in an open bottle or other open container upon any of
the aforesaid public areas or in any vehicle upon such area within the City
of Scranton except as hereinafter provided.
§ 158-4. Discarding containers.
No person shall discard alcoholic or other beverage containers upon any
public sidewalk, street, lane, parking lot, park or recreation area or other
public property within the City of Scranton, except in approved receptacles
or containers for said purpose.
§ 158-5. Permit required.
If any person desires to possess, distribute or consume alcoholic beverages
on public property in the City of Scranton, said person must apply to
the Director of the Department of Public Safety, or his duly authorized
representative, for a permit therefor not less than three (3) days prior to the
date of the scheduled event for which the permit is requested. No fee shall
be charged for said permit granted; however, a permit shall be issued only
upon the following conditions:
A. Such person must provide the Director of the Department of Public
Safety with a copy of a permit declaring they will adhere to the rules
and regulations of the state Liquor Control Board.
B. Such person must agree, in writing, to assume full responsibility for
supervision of the event and the conduct of the group or individuals
benefiting from such permit, and to properly clean up and restore the
premises, after use, to its prior condition.
C. Such person must agree, in writing, that adequate precautions shall be
taken to ensure that minors or intoxicated persons will not be served or
allowed to consume alcoholic beverages at the permitted event.
D. No alcoholic beverage shall be distributed or consumed other than on
the specific premises described in the permit and only during the time
therein stated.
E. No permit shall be issued to any person who has failed on a previous
occasion to comply with the provisions for the granting of a permit.
§ 158-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 158-6
158:229
§ 158-6. Violations and penalties.
Upon conviction for violation of the provisions of this chapter, any such
person shall be subject to a fine, the maximum of which shall be three
hundred dollars ($300.), or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days,
or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 164
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bowling alleys — See Ch. 181. Pool rooms and billiard rooms — See Ch. 354.
§ 158-6 SCRANTON CODE § 158-6
164:230
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 164-1. Cleaning and disinfection required.
No person or any agent, managing officer or employee shall operate or
permit to be operated any theater, moving-picture show or other place of
public amusement or recreation where the public congregates, unless the
same be cleaned daily and disinfected at least once each week, and at such
other time as may be required, with a disinfectant and in a manner to be
approved by the Office of Public Health.
§ 164-1 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-1
164:231

ARTICLE II
Theaters, Circuses and Shows
§ 164-2. Permit required.
No person shall conduct any meeting where an admission is charged or
exhibit any shows in theaters, public halls or other buildings or conduct
any fair or other exhibition or entertainment within the city without first
obtaining a permit from the Director of the Department of Public Safety to
conduct the same.
§ 164-3. Fees; exemptions. [Amended by Ord. No. 7-1987; amended
11-6-1996 by Ord. No. 124-1996]
§ 164-4. Annual licenses in lieu of permits. [Amended by Ord. No.
7-1987]
A. For each circus under canvas, exclusive of side shows, the permit fee
for the first day thereof where the admission fee is fifty cents ($0.50) or
more shall be the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.); and for each
subsequent day there shall be required a fee of thirty dollars ($30.).
B. For all other shows, exhibits, spectacles, entertainment and other
public amusement other than those of an amateur character, the permit
fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.) for each day of performance,
unless the same shall be conducted in an annually licensed hall, theater
or motion picture house.
C. No license fee shall be required or shall be charged for any church fair,
exhibition or spectacle or show or other event where the proceeds of
such fair, exhibition, spectacle, show or event are devoted to charitable
purposes. [Added 11-6-1996 by Ord. No. 124-1996]
A. Persons conducting shows, exhibits, spectacles, entertainment and
other public amusements may, in their discretion take out an annual
license for such hall, theater or motion picture house, paying therefor
an annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.). Upon the payment
of such fee and the issuance of the required license, the various shows
and exhibits shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this
Article which would otherwise apply.
B. Annual licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be issued for the
calendar year or part thereof remaining in the year during which
applied for and issued. Where application for a license is made after the
beginning of a calendar year, the entire annual license fee shall be
payable and the same shall not be prorated.
§ 164-2 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-5
164:233
§ 164-5. Moral standard.
No person shall perform or exhibit any play, circus, show, spectacle or
theatrical entertainment unless the same be of decent and moral tendency
and character.
§ 164-6. Inspections.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall cause annual
inspections and other scheduled or unscheduled inspections of licensed
theaters, public halls and other buildings and premises to be made as
he deems necessary to assure that they are constructed, maintained and
operated so as to avoid and prevent any reasonably forseeable risk of
harm to persons employed in or using and patronizing such premises.
The premises shall include but shall not be limited to public walks and
passageways appertaining thereto.
§ 164-7. Revocation of permits and licenses.
In all cases where the Director of the Department of Public Safety shall be
satisfied that any license or permit previously issued under this Article was
improperly issued or has been or is being improperly used he shall have the
power to revoke the same.
§ 164-5 SCRANTON CODE § 164-7
164:234
ARTICLE III
Automatic Phonographic Music Machines
§ 164-8. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC PHONOGRAPHIC MUSIC MACHINE (MECHANICAL
AMUSEMENT DEVICE) — A machine or device on which phonographic
recorded music can be played automatically upon depositing a coin therein.
§ 164-9. Exceptions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to homes, churches or to
welfare, social, patriotic, educational or charitable organizations.
§ 164-10. License required. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-1983]
Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or organization
displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any automatic
phonographic music machine as herein defined shall be required to obtain
a license from the City of Scranton upon application and payment of the
appropriate license fee.
§ 164-11. Application.
Application for such license shall be made to the Director of the Department
of Public Safety upon a form provided by the city for that purpose. The
application for such license shall include the following information:
§ 164-12. Fee. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 5-1983; 184-1994; 10-9-1996
by Ord. No. 112-1996]
A. Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
B. Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.7
C. Description of machine to be covered by the license, name of
manufacturer and serial number.
D. Prior convictions of applicant, if any.
A. Every person before being granted a license shall pay the following
annual license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for
operation a mechanical amusement device as herein defined:
(1) Pinball Machine (per machine): fifty dollars ($50.).
(2) Pool Table (per table): thirty dollars ($30.).
(3) Juke Box (per machine): thirty dollars ($30.).
§ 164-8 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-12
164:235
§ 164-13. Tag.
A metal tag, bearing the license number, shall be obtained from the Director
of the Department of Public Safety and securely attached to the licensed
machine under this Article.
§ 164-14. Posting; transferability. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-1983]
The license or licenses herein provided shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. Such license may be
transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon
application to the Director to such effect and the giving of a description
and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one
(1) machine shall be operated under one (1) license and the applicant or
licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine
displayed or operated by him. If the licensee shall move his place of
business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred
to such new location upon application to the Director giving the street and
number of the new location.
§ 164-15. Revocation.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety may for cause, and after a
hearing, revoke any licenses issued under this Article.
§ 164-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-1983;
10-9-1996 by Ord. No. 112-1996]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
no less than two hundred dollars ($200.) and not more than six hundred
dollars ($600.) for each violation, or shall be imprisoned for a term not to
(4) Shuffle Board (per machine): thirty dollars ($30.).
(5) Bowling Machine (per machine): thirty dollars ($30.).
(6) Electronic Dart Machine (per machine): thirty dollars ($30.).
(7) Fooz Ball (per machine): thirty dollars ($30.).
(8) Mechanical Amusement (per machine), horse ride, car ride, etc.:
thirty dollars ($30.).
(9) Video amusement (per machine): thirty dollars ($30.).
(10) Electronic amusement (per machine): one hundred dollars ($100.).
(11) All other categories (per machine): thirty dollars ($30.).
B. Each license shall be for a period of one year.
§ 164-12 SCRANTON CODE § 164-16
164:236
exceed thirty (30) days or both. Every day that a violation of the ordinance
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 164-16 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-16
164:237

ARTICLE IV
Pinball Machines
§ 164-17. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PINBALL MACHINE (MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE) — A machine
activated by insertion of a single coin and employing a plunger which
propels a ball over the surface of this machine and which is used solely
for recreation or amusement purposes, and not for giving prizes, rewards,
merchandise or money.
§ 164-18. Exceptions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to homes, churches or to
welfare, social, patriotic, educational or charitable organizations.
§ 164-19. License required. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-1983]
Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or organization
displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical
amusement device as herein defined shall be required to obtain a license
from the City of Scranton upon application and payment of the appropriate
license fee.
§ 164-20. Application. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-1983]
Application for such license shall be made to the Director of the Department
of Public Safety upon a form provided by the city for that purpose. The
application for such license shall include the following information:
§ 164-21. Fee. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 5-1983; 184-1994; 10-9-1996
by Ord. No. 112-1996]
Every person, before being granted a license, shall pay the following annual
license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation a
mechanical amusement device as herein defined: one hundred dollars
($100.) per machine. Each license shall be for a period of one (1) year.
A. Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
B. Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
C. Description of machine to be covered by the license, name of
manufacturer and serial number.
D. Prior convictions of applicant, if any.
§ 164-17 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-22
164:239
§ 164-22. Seal to be attached to machine.
A seal bearing the same number as the license issued under this Article
shall be obtained from the Director of Community Development and
securely attached to the licensed machine.
§ 164-23. Posting; transferability. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-1983]
The license or licenses herein provided shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. Such license may be
transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon
application to the Director to such effect and the giving of a description
and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one
(1) machine shall be operated under one (1) license and the applicant or
licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine
displayed or operated by him. If the licensee shall move his place of
business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred
to such new location upon application to the Director giving the street and
number of the new location.
§ 164-24. Revocation.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety, for cause and after a
hearing, may revoke any license issued pursuant to this Article.
§ 164-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-1983;
10-9-1996 by Ord. No. 112-1996]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
no less than two hundred dollars ($200.) and not more than six hundred
dollars ($600.) for each violation, or shall be imprisoned for a term not to
exceed thirty (30) days or both. Every day that a violation of the ordinance
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 164-22 SCRANTON CODE § 164-25
164:240
ARTICLE V
Shuffleboards
§ 164-26. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SHUFFLEBOARD — A game in which counters, weights or pieces are
slid over a smooth surface towards marks or compartments and used for
recreation or amusement purposes.
§ 164-27. Exceptions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to homes, churches or to
welfare, patriotic, educational or charitable organizations.
§ 164-28. License required.
No person shall keep, maintain or operate any shuffleboard which is held
out to the public in any business establishment or in any public place
without first obtaining a license for each machine from the Department of
Public Safety.
§ 164-29. Application.
Licenses for the keeping, maintenance or operation of a shuffleboard shall
be secured upon application to the Department of Public Safety upon a
form furnished by the city. The application shall contain the following
information:
§ 164-30. Fee. [Amended 10-9-1996 by Ord. No. 112-1996]
The amount to be paid for a license to operate or maintain a shuffleboard
shall be for each shuffleboard the sum of thirty dollars ($30.) per year, from
January 1 of each year or any fractional part of a year.
A. Name of applicant.
B. Residence of applicant.
C. Birthplace and birthdate.
D. Place where the licensed business is to be conducted.
E. How long a resident of the city.
F. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States.
G. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime.
§ 164-26 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-31
164:241
§ 164-31. Transferability.
No license issued under this Article shall be transferable from one
shuffleboard to another, nor from one location to another, without
permission of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 164-32. Revocation.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety may, for cause and after a
hearing, revoke any license issued under this Article.
§ 164-31 SCRANTON CODE § 164-32
164:242
ARTICLE VI
Performers and Entertainers
§ 164-33. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERFORMERS and ENTERTAINERS — Any persons or group of persons,
any individual, partnership, firm, association, sporting teams, musical
groups, bands, theatrical cast, dancing groups, recital groups or paid
lecturers and speakers or other performers and entertainers.
§ 164-34. Permit required; fee. [Amended by Ord. No. 8-1987]
§ 164-35. Annual license in lieu of a permit; fee. [Amended by Ord.
No. 8-1987]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or entertain within the
city without having first obtained a permit from the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
B. The permit fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.) per day for each
day that the performance and entertainment is conducted as described
herein.
A. In lieu of obtaining a permit under § 164-34, a person or group may take
out an annual license for performance or entertainment, paying
therefor an annual license fee in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.). Upon the payment of such annual license fee and issuance of
the license, the licensee shall be exempt from the permit requirements
of this Article which would otherwise apply.
B. Annual licenses issued as provided herein shall be issued for the
calendar year or part thereof remaining in the year during which
applied for and issued. Where application for license is made after the
beginning of a calendar year, the entire annual license fee shall be
payable and the same not be prorated.
§ 164-33 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-35
164:243

ARTICLE VII
Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
§ 164-36. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any amusement machine or
device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object,
for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee
is charged. The term does not include vending machines in which are not
incorporated gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any
coin-operated mechanical musical devices or pinball machines.
OPERATOR — Any person who sets up for operation by another or leases
or distributes for the purpose of operation by another, any device as herein
defined, whether such setting up for operation, leasing or distributing be for
a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived
from such device, or otherwise.
PROPRIETOR — Any person who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor has
under his or its control any establishment, place or premises in or at which
such device is placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose
of use or play.
§ 164-37. Exemptions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to homes, churches, welfare
organizations, social organizations, patriotic organizations, educational
organizations or charitable organizations.
§ 164-38. Permit required.
No person shall engage in the business of an operator or proprietor of
coin-operated amusement devices without first having obtained the proper
license therefor under this Article.
§ 164-39. Application.
A. Application for a license under this Article shall be filed, in writing, with
the Director of the Department of Public Safety, on a form to be
provided by the city, and shall specify:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their
addresses.
(2) The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices
are to be operated, together with the character of the business as
carried on at such place.
§ 164-36 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-39
164:245
§ 164-40. Operator's fee. [Amended 10-9-1996 by Ord. No.
112-1996]
The license fee for the operator of each machine for the period commencing
January 1 of each year or any fractional part thereof shall be thirty dollars
($30.) per machine.
§ 164-41. Proprietor's fee. [Amended 10-9-1996 by Ord. No.
112-1996]
The license fee for each proprietor shall be thirty dollars ($30.) per year
for each device used or played or exhibited for use or play. All proprietor's
license fees shall be payable annually in advance, provided that where
application is made after the expiration of any portion of any license year
a license may be issued for the remainder thereof upon payment of a
proportionate part of the annual fee. In no case shall any portion of such
license fee be repaid to the licensee.
§ 164-42. Investigation; issuance or denial.
Application for a license under this Article shall be first referred by the
Director of the Department of Public Safety to the Director of the
Department of Community Development who shall make or cause to be
made such investigation as they deem necessary. If the application is
approved by the Director of the Department of Public Safety, the license
shall be issued and fee collected by the Director of the Department of
Community Development. If the license is denied the fee shall be returned
to the applicant.
§ 164-43. Term.
All licenses under this Article shall expire on December 31 of the year of
their issuance.
§ 164-44. Posting.
The license obtained under this Article shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the establishment of the licensee.
(3) The trade name and general description of the device to be
licensed, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number and,
if the applicant is a proprietor, the number of devices to be
licensed.
(4) The name and address of the operator of the device, if other than
the proprietor.
B. The proper license fee shall accompany the application.
§ 164-39 SCRANTON CODE § 164-45
164:246
§ 164-45. Transferability.
The license obtained under this Article shall be nonassignable and
nontransferable and in the case of a proprietor shall apply only to the
premises for which such license is issued.
§ 164-46. Seal attached to machine.
A seal bearing the same number as the license shall be obtained from the
Director of Public Safety and securely attached to the licensed machine
under this Article. No license or seal shall be transferable from one machine
to another, nor from one location to another location without permission of
the Department of Public Safety.
§ 164-45 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-46
164:247

ARTICLE VIII
Mechanical Shuffleboard
§ 164-47. Definitions; word usage.
For the purposes of this Article the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein;
CITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Safety.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE (SHUFFLEBOARD) — Any machine,
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be
operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 164-48. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-9-1996 by Ord. No.
112-1996]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
no less than two hundred dollars ($200.) and not more than six hundred
dollars ($600.) for each violation, or shall be imprisoned for a term not to
exceed thirty (30) days or both. Every day that a violation of the ordinance
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 164-49. License required.
Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or organization
displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical
shuffleboard device as herein defined shall be required to obtain a license
from the City of Scranton upon application and payment of the appropriate
license fee.
§ 164-50. Application.
Application for such license shall be made to the Director of the Department
of Public Safety upon a form provided by the city for that purpose. The
application for such license shall include the following information:
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future. Words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
B. Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
§ 164-47 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-50
164:249
§ 164-51. Fee. [Amended by Ord. No. 184-1994; 10-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 112-1996]
Every person, before being granted a license shall pay the following annual
license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation a
mechanical amusement device as herein defined: thirty dollars ($30.) per
machine. Each license shall be for a period of one (1) year.
§ 164-52. Posting; transferability.
The license or licenses herein provided shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. Such license may be
transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon
application to the Director to such effect and the giving of a description
and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one (1)
machine shall be operated under one (1) license and the applicant or license
shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine displayed
or operated by him. If the licensee shall move his place of business to
another location within the city, the license may be transferred to such new
location upon application to the Director giving the street and number of
the new location.
C. Description of machine to be covered by the license, name of
manufacturer and serial number.
D. Prior convictions of applicant, if any.
§ 164-50 SCRANTON CODE § 164-52
164:250
ARTICLE IX
Mechanical Bowling
[Added by Ord. No. 5-1983]
§ 164-53. Definitions; word usage.
§ 164-54. License required.
Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or organization
displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical
bowling device, as herein defined, shall be required to obtain a license
from the City of Scranton upon application and payment of the appropriate
license fee.
§ 164-55. Application.
Application for such license shall be made to the Director of the Department
of Public Safety upon a form provided by the city for that purpose. The
application for such license shall include the following information:
A. For the purposes of this Article the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Safety.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE (BOWLING) — Any machine,
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be
operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future. Words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
B. Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
C. Description of machine to be covered by the license, name of
manufacturer and serial number.
D. Prior convictions of applicant, if any.
§ 164-53 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-56
164:251
§ 164-56. Fee. [Amended by Ord. No. 184-1994; 10-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 112-1996]
Every person, before being granted a license shall pay the following annual
license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation a
mechanical amusement device as herein defined: thirty dollars ($30.) per
machine. Each license shall be for a period of one (1) year.
§ 164-57. Posting; transferability.
The license or licenses herein provided shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. Such license may be
transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon
application to the Director to such effect and the giving of a description
and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one
(1) machine shall be operated under one (1) license and the applicant or
licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine
displayed or operated by him. If the licensee shall move his place of
business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred
to such new location upon application to the Director giving the street and
number of the new location.
§ 164-58. Penalty for violation.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article, in addition to
the revocation of his or its license, shall, upon summary conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days.
§ 164-56 SCRANTON CODE § 164-58
164:252
ARTICLE X
Electronic and Video Machines
[Added by Ord. No. 5-1983]
§ 164-59. Definitions.
§ 164-60. License required.
Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or organization
displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical
amusement device (electronic or video machine), as herein defined, shall be
required to obtain a license from the City of Scranton upon application and
payment of the appropriate license fee.
§ 164-61. Application.
Application for such license shall be made to the Director of the Department
of Public Safety upon a form provided by the city for that purpose. The
application for such license shall include the following information:
A. For the purposes of this Article the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Safety.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE (ELECTRONIC AND VIDEO
MACHINES) — Any machine, which upon the insertion of a coin, slug,
token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use
as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a
score.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future. Words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
B. Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
C. Description of machine to be covered by the license, name of
manufacturer and serial number.
D. Prior convictions of applicant, if any.
§ 164-59 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-62
164:253
§ 164-62. Fee. [Amended by Ord. No. 184-1994; 10-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 112-1996]
Every person, before being granted a license, shall pay the following annual
license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation a
mechanical amusement device as herein defined: one hundred dollars
($100.) per machine. Each license shall be for a period of one (1) year.
§ 164-63. Posting; transferability.
The license or licenses herein provided shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. Such license may be
transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon
application to the Director to such effect and the giving of a description
and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one
(1) machine shall be operated under one (1) license and the applicant or
licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine
displayed or operated by him. If the licensee shall move his place of
business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred
to such new location upon application to the Director giving the street and
number of the new location.
§ 164-64. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-9-1996 by Ord. No.
112-1996]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
no less than two hundred dollars ($200.) and not more than six hundred
dollars ($600.) for each violation, or shall be imprisoned for a term not to
exceed thirty (30) days or both. Every day that a violation of the ordinance
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 164-62 SCRANTON CODE § 164-64
164:254
Chapter 169
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 317. Parks and recreation — See Ch. 332.
§ 164-64 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 164-64
164:255

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 169-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — When not upon the enclosure or under and in the actual
control of the owner.
§ 169-2. Pound and poundmaster authorized.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized to
provide and establish a pound at such place within the City as he may deem
best, wherein all animals at large or without a license as required may be
impounded. The Director may employ a person to serve as poundmaster in
each year, to take charge of such pound, and to apprehend or impound all
animals subject to impounding as provided in this chapter.
§ 169-3. Livestock and cats prohibited at large; impoundment.
§ 169-4. Temporary quarantine of dogs and cats; authorized
disposal.
A. No person, whether as owner or harborer, shall cause or permit any
horse, mare, gelding, mule, ox, cow, bull, goat, sheep, hog or cat to run
at large upon the streets, avenues, courts, public grounds or
unenclosed land within the City.
B. Any such animal running at large shall be considered a public and
common nuisance, and it shall be the duty of any police officer to seize
and take to the City pound every animal so found running at large. If,
after four days' public notice, no person shall come forward to claim the
same and pay the fine and all costs and charges attending the keeping
and seizing of such animal, it shall be sold at public sale by the City
poundmaster, and the proceeds from such sale shall be paid to the City
Treasurer for the use of the City.
A. The Director of the Office of Public Health is hereby authorized to
designate a period, not exceeding six months in any one year, as a
quarantine during which period the following regulations shall apply to
dogs and cats:
(1) Any dog, male or female, found running at large in the City, unless
licensed, muzzled and inoculated, shall be deemed to be a public
nuisance.
(2) Any cat, male or female, found running at large in the City shall be
deemed to be a public nuisance.
§ 169-1 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 169-4
164:257
§ 169-5. Sale or display of baby chicks and ducklings.
§ 169-6. Proximity of fowl to dwellings.
The Director of the Office of Public Health is authorized to notify all persons
who shall keep or maintain chickens, ducks, geese, guinea fowl, turkeys,
pigeons or other domestic fowl within the limits of the City which are
confined or nesting in a space within 15 feet from any dwelling to remove
the same within 48 hours after receipt of notice. However, the Director,
before issuing such notice, may require the filing of a written complaint
in such form as he may prescribe signed by the owner or occupant of the
dwelling affected.
§ 169-7. Permit to keep cows or bulls.
§ 169-8. Transporting dead animals.
No person shall remove dead animals or convey the same through any of the
streets, courts, lanes or alleys of the City, except in covered vehicles, which
shall be constructed in such manner as to prevent a nuisance.
§ 169-9. Animal control generally. [Added by Ord. No. 49-1980]
B. Any police officer in the City, under orders of the Director of the
Department of Public Safety, cooperating with the Office of Public
Health, is hereby authorized and empowered, within the quarantine
period as designated by the Director of the Office of Public Health, to
shoot or otherwise kill any such dog or cat found running at large in the
City.
A. No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or display live baby chicks,
ducklings or other fowl which have been dyed, colored or otherwise
treated so as to impart to them an artificial color.
B. No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or display live baby chicks,
ducklings or other fowl in any quantity less than six.
A. No person shall, within the City, keep any cow or bull unless such
person shall first have obtained a written permit for the keeping of the
same from the Director of the Office of Public Health.
B. The Director is hereby authorized to issue permits for the keeping of
cows or bulls within the City when, in his opinion, it will not be injurious
or dangerous to the health of the neighborhood in which it is proposed
to keep such animals, and to withhold such permits and to revoke any
permit previously granted when, in his opinion, the keeping of such
animals in the place proposed or in any place where such animals have
been previously kept would be injurious or dangerous to the health of
the neighborhood.
§ 169-4 SCRANTON CODE § 169-9
164:258
A. Definitions. The following terms, whenever used in this section, shall
have the meanings indicated in this subsection, except where the
context indicates a different meaning:
AT LARGE — Any dog or other animal when it is off the property of its
owner and not restrained by a competent person.
DOG — Any member of the canine genus.
EUTHANIZE — To put to death in a humane manner.
IMPOUND — To apprehend, catch, trap, net, or, if necessary, to kill any
animal by the local Police Department or authorized local agency.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firms or corporations
owning, keeping or harboring a dog or dogs or other animals.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation or
association.
RESTRAINT — Occurs when a dog or other animal is controlled by a
leash or chain, not exceeding six feet in length, and where such chain
or leash shall prevent such dog or other animal from terrorizing or
attacking persons using sidewalks, etc.
B. Running at large. It shall be the duty of every police officer or
authorized agency to seize and detain any dog or dogs which are
running at large, either upon the public streets or highways of the City
of Scranton, or upon the property of other than the owner of such dogs
and not restrained by the owner or keeper.
C. Harboring a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any
dog or dogs, cats or other animals which, by frequent howling, barking,
baying, yelping or screeching, shall disturb the peace of the
neighborhood or constitute a health hazard to the citizens of the City of
Scranton.
D. Notice of apprehension. Whenever a dog or other animal has been
apprehended in accordance with Subsections B and C herein, the police
or other authorized agency shall notify the owner or owners of such dog
or other animal of said apprehension, notifying said owner or owners
that they have violated the provisions of this section, and issue a
warning for the first offense; after the first offense warning, said police
officer may issue a citation to such person, charging the violation of the
summary offense as an alternative to filing an ordinance complaint.
E. Removal of wastes. It shall be the duty of each dog owner to remove any
feces left by his or her dog or any other animal on any sidewalk, gutter,
street, public yards, private yards or other public area. For purposes of
Subsection E, a citation may be issued by sanitation officers and by
police officers to such animal owner charging them with a summary
offense and fined as outlined in Subsection G. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a guide dog accompanied by a blind person.
§ 169-9 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 169-9
164:259
F. Plea of defendant. The defendant shall, within 10 days of issuance of a
citation, either (1) plead not guilty by appearing before the District
Magistrate of the City of Scranton, entering his plea and posting such
security for his appearance at trial as the issuing authority shall
require, or (2) notify the District Magistrate of the City of Scranton, in
writing, of his plea, and forward a sum equal to the fine and costs
specified in the citation, or (3) plead guilty, by forwarding to the District
Magistrate of the City of Scranton, an amount equal to the fine and
costs when specified in the citation; or a notice that failure to respond
to citation as herein provided in the time specified shall result in the
issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the defendant.
G. Fine and penalties. An owner of a dog violating any provision of this
section shall pay a fine of not more than $100 or, in default of payment
thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding 24
hours.
§ 169-9 SCRANTON CODE § 169-9
164:260
ARTICLE II
Dogs
§ 169-10. Running at large prohibited.
No person being the owner or custodian of a dog shall allow the same to run
at large within the limits of the City.
§ 169-11. Vicious dogs; liability of owner; destruction on sight.
Any person keeping, harboring or maintaining a vicious dog which shall
have bitten or attempted to bite any human being shall be held liable and
responsible for all damages therefrom. Upon complaint being made, after
investigation by the Superintendent of Police, such dog may be killed upon
sight wherever it may be found, dwelling houses excepted.
§ 169-12. Dogs bitten by rabid animals to be killed.
Any dog which may have been or is bitten by any rabid dog or other
rabid animal shall forthwith be killed and disposed of so as to prevent any
nuisance therefrom. It shall be the duty of police officers to enforce the
provisions of this section.
§ 169-13. Fund for treatment of hydrophobia from convictions.
Upon conviction for any violation of this chapter, 1/2 of any fine imposed
shall be paid to the City Treasurer for the creation of a fund for the
treatment for the prevention of hydrophobia. It shall be the duty of the City
Treasurer to make monthly reports to the City Controller of the moneys
so received. The fund shall be immediately available and is hereby
appropriated to assist in defraying the expenses for treatment and
prevention of hydrophobia of any person who may be bitten by any dog
within the limits of the City.
§ 169-14. At large with a license.
Any dog bearing a proper license tag so seized and detained for running at
large shall be properly kept and fed. Notice, either personal or by registered
mail, shall be given to the person in whose name the license was procured,
or his agent, to claim such dog within five days from receipt of such notice.
The owner of the dog so detained shall pay $2 for each day the dog is so
detained to cover the reasonable expenses of such detention, under the
provisions of this article, before the dog is returned.
§ 169-15. At large without a license.
Any dog seized and detained for running at large which does not bear a
proper license tag shall be kept and fed for three days, and the owner of
the dog, who shall identify himself, shall pay $2 for each day the dog is
detained to cover the reasonable expenses of such detention before the dog
is returned.
§ 169-10 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 169-16
164:261
§ 169-16. Disposal upon failure to redeem.
If, after 10 days from receipt of notice in the case of licensed dogs and five
days after seizure in the case of unlicensed dogs, such dog has not been
claimed or redeemed, the designated officer shall dispose of such dog by
sale or destruction by some humane manner.
§ 169-17. Costs of detention levied against owner.
Sale or destruction of a dog under § 169-16 shall not relieve the owner
of such dog from liability for expenses incurred by reason of the dog's
detention, and the City shall levy against such owner and collect by
whatever means are necessary at the rate prescribed in §§ 169-14 and
169-15 for each day of detention, which shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
§ 169-18. License required.
No person shall have, keep, maintain or harbor any dog within the limits of
the City without first having obtained a license from the City Treasurer.
§ 169-19. Exception for kennel license. [Amended by Ord. No.
177-1994]
Any person who keeps or maintains a kennel may, in lieu of the license
for each dog, obtain a kennel license. Such license shall be issued by the
Director of the Department of Community Development, in such form as he
shall adopt, and shall entitle the holder to keep any number of dogs over six
months in age until the first day of May next succeeding. The fee to be paid
for such annual license shall be $30 for a kennel of 10 dogs or fewer, and
$60 for a kennel of more than 10 dogs.
§ 169-20. Application to stray kennel dogs.
No dog kept in a kennel shall be permitted to stray or to be taken from the
kennel, except by leash or in a crate. In case such dog shall stray or be taken
from the kennel in any other way, such dog shall be subject to the license
under the terms of this article.
§ 169-21. Issuing authority; fees; exemptions. [Amended by Ord.
Nos. 69-1984; 177-1994]
A. The Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits shall issue to
such persons as may apply a license to have, keep, possess, maintain
and harbor dogs within the City limits. Dog license fees shall increase to
$35 for each dog, and senior citizens (65+) fees shall be $20 for each
dog. Such license shall continue in force from January 1 through
December 31 of that year. No one license shall permit the keeping or
maintaining of more than one such animal. Each license shall contain
the name and residence of the owner, breed, sex, age, marks and other
points of identification of the animal for which such license is issued.
Each licensed animal shall have and continuously wear around its neck
§ 169-16 SCRANTON CODE § 169-21
164:262
§ 169-22. Tag.
Each licensed dog shall have, and continuously wear around its neck, a
collar with a metal tag or plate, having thereon the number of the license
granted for such animal, which metal tag or plate shall be furnished to the
applicant by the Department of Community Development.
§ 169-23. Record of issuance.
The City Treasurer shall keep a full and complete record of every dog
license issued, showing the name and residence of the person to whom such
license was issued, the description and kind, together with all marks of
identification, of the animal for which such license is issued and the City
license number.
§ 169-24. Removal of tag.
No person, except the owner, shall remove from the neck of any dog the
metal tag or plate specified in this article.
§ 169-25. Complaints; apprehension.
§ 169-26. Prima facie evidence of violation.
Any person who keeps, maintains or possesses any unlicensed dog shall be
deemed the owner thereof and subject to a penalty. Any dog found without
a collar with a metal tag or plate, which shall be furnished to the
applicant by the Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits.
[Amended 12-18-2014 by Ord. No. 67-201428]
B. Persons who are legally blind and require the services of a Seeing-Eye
dog shall be exempt from payment of the annual license fee.
C. Prior to the issuance of the annual license, all persons shall be required
to provide proof that the licensed animal has been properly inoculated
as required by law and, in particular, proof of inoculation for rabies.
Such proofs of inoculation shall be in a form subject to the approval of
the Department of Community Development.
A. Any person may make complaint at the police station of other persons
keeping or maintaining any unlicensed dogs. It shall be the duty of the
police officer in charge to immediately investigate the same and, if the
complaint is found correct, to apprehend and impound such dog or
cause the same to be done.
B. All dogs liable to impounding under this article shall, upon
apprehension, be delivered to the poundmaster or City pound as soon
as possible.
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 1-1-2015.
§ 169-21 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 169-26
164:263
the metal tag or plate attached to its collar as required in this article shall
be deemed prima-facie unlicensed.
§ 169-26 SCRANTON CODE § 169-26
164:264
Chapter 172
ARCADES AND MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and entertainments — See Ch.
164.
Bowling alleys — See Ch. 181.
Dance halls — See Ch. 209.
Gambling — See Ch. 263.
Pool rooms — See Ch. 354.
§ 172-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Mechanical
Amusement Device and Arcade Licensing Ordinance of the City of Scranton,
Pennsylvania."
§ 172-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future. Words in the plural number inclhde the singular number. And
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — An indoor commercial use with four or more
electronic machines for amusement or entertainment, with such machines
activated by the use of tokens or coins.
APPLICANT — Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation, association,
or other legal entity which is the real party in interest for a license under
the term of this chapter.
CITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Department of Permits, Licensing and
Inspection.
LICENSED PREMISES — All public and nonpublic areas of an amusement
arcade which operates under a license granted pursuant to this chapter,
including the interior of the arcade as well as the exterior areas, entrances,
sidewalk and parking lots.
LICENSEE — Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation, association,
or other legal entity which operates or is otherwise the real party in interest
in an amusement arcade and which receives a license under the terms of
this chapter.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any electronic machine which,
upon insertion of a coin, token, slug, plate or disc, or other form of payment,
may be operated by the public to provide use as a game, contest or
§ 169-26 ARCADES AND MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT § 172-2
172:265
amusement, whether or not registering a score thereon, including but not
limited to video games and other devices which utilize a visual display
screen.
PERSON — Any person, firm, par4nership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 172-3. License required.
Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or organization
displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical
amusement device or arcade as herein defined shall be required to obtain
a license from the City of Scranton upon application and payment of the
appropriate license fee. Application for such license shall be made to the
Director of the Department of Permits, Licensing and Inspection upon a
form provided by the City for that purpose.
§ 172-4. License application.
§ 172-5. License fees.
A. The application for a mechanical amusement device as herein defined
shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant and age, date and place of birth.
(2) Place where machine or device into be displayed or operated and
the business conducted at that place.
(3) Description of machine to be covered by the license, name of
manufacturer, and serial number.
(4) Prior convictions of applicant, if any, which includes pleas.
B. The application for an amusement arcade as herein defined shall
include the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Name and address of the owner of the premises of the amusement
arcade.
(3) Number and type of amusement devices.
(4) Zoning district.
(5) Written approval by the Zoning Officer.
A. Every person before being granted a license shall pay the following
annual license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for
operation a mechanical amusement device or arcade as herein defined.
Each license shall be for a period of one year and shall be paid on or
before January 31 of each year.
§ 172-2 SCRANTON CODE § 172-5
172:266
§ 172-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be liable for a civil fine of no less than $200 and not more
than $600 for each violation or shall be imprisoned for a term not to exceed
30 days, or both. Every day that a violation of the chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense with a separate fine.
(1) Pinball machine (per machine): $50.
(2) Pool table (per table): $50.
(3) Juke box (per machine): $50.
(4) Shuffle board (per machine): $50.
(5) Bowling machine (per machine): $50.
(6) Electronic dart machine (per machine): $50.
(7) Foos ball (per machine): $50.
(8) Mechanical amusement/(horse ride, car ride, etc.) (per machine):
$50.
(9) Video amusement (per machine): $50.
(10) Lawful video gaming machines: $150.
(11) All other categories (per machine): $50.
(12) Amusement arcade license:
(a) With four to six amusement devices: $100.
(b) With seven to 13 amusement devices: $200.
(c) With 13 or more: $300.
B. The license or licenses herein provided shall be posted permanently
and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises
wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. Such
license may be transferred from one machine or device to another
similar machine upon application to the Department of Permits,
Licensing and Inspections to such effect and the giving of a description
and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one
machine shall be operated under one license and the applicant or
licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every
machine displayed or operated by him. If the licensee shall move his
place of business to another location within the City, the license may be
transferred to such new location upon application to the Director of the
Department of Permits, Licensing and Inspections giving the street and
number of the new location.
§ 172-5 ARCADES AND MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT § 172-6
172:267
Chapter 175
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 332.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 412.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 439.
§ 172-6 SCRANTON CODE § 172-6
175:268
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE -- — Every device having two (2) tandem wheels and propelled by
human power, upon which any person may ride.
§ 175-2. Applicability of other provisions.
Every person propelling or riding a bicycle upon the streets, alleys or public
places shall be subject to the provisions of all statutes of the commonwealth
and ordinances of the city applicable to the operation of any vehicle, except
those provisions with reference to equipment of vehicles and except those
provisions which, by their nature, would have no application.
§ 175-3. Sidewalk riding prohibited.
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the city.
§ 175-4. Operation near right-hand curb; riding abreast.
Bicycles shall be operated as close to the right-hand curb as conditions will
permit and not more than two (2) bicycles shall be operated abreast or side
by side.
§ 175-5. Clinging to vehicles.
No person traveling upon any bicycle shall cling to or attach himself or his
vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any roadway.
§ 175-6. Riding upon permanent seat.
The operator of a bicycle upon a street shall not carry any other person
upon the handlebar, frame or mud guard of any such vehicle, nor shall any
person so ride upon any such vehicle.
§ 175-7. Use of lamps and reflectors.
During the period from sunset to sunrise, every bicycle shall carry one (1)
lighted lamp exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of five hundred
(500) feet to the front of such bicycle, and a red reflector button or a red
light to be placed at least six (6) inches below the seat at the rear. Such
lamp or reflector shall, at all times, be unobstructed.
§ 175-8. Bicycle horn or bell required; siren prohibited.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a horn or bell in good working order
and capable of emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, for a
§ 175-1 BICYCLES § 175-8
175:269
distance of two hundred (200) feet; but no horn or warning device shall emit
an unreasonably loud or harsh sound. No bicycle shall be equipped with a
siren or whistle.
§ 175-9. Rental agencies.
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided in this
chapter, and such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment
required in this chapter.
§ 175-10. Reports by bicycle dealers.
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the Director of the Department
of Public Safety of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer within
three (3) days after the transaction, giving the name and address of the
person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such bicycle
by name or make, the frame number thereof and the number of the license
plate, if any, found thereon.
§ 175-11. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than five dollars ($5.) or suffer removal and
detention of the license plate from his bicycle for a period of not more than
thirty (30) days or suffer impounding of his bicycle for a period of not more
than thirty (30) days or any combination of these three (3) penalties.
§ 175-8 SCRANTON CODE § 175-11
175:270
ARTICLE II
Licensing
§ 175-12. License required.
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or public highway
within the city unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate
attached thereto as provided in this chapter.
§ 175-13. Application.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized to
issue, upon written application and payment of the license fee provided in
§ 175-17, Fees, bicycle licenses as provided in this chapter.
§ 175-14. Inspection prerequisite to issuance.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall cause to be inspected
each bicycle before licensing the same and shall refuse a license for any
bicycle which he determines is in an unsafe mechanical condition.
§ 175-15. Transfer of ownership.
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall
remove the license plate and shall either surrender the same to the Director
of the Department of Public Safety or may, upon proper application, have
such plate assigned to another bicycle owned by the applicant.
§ 175-16. Expiration.
Bicycle licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective for one (1)
license year only. Such license shall entitle the licensee thereunder to
operate the bicycle for which the same is issued upon all the streets, alleys
and public highways, exclusive of sidewalks, within the city for the duration
of the license. The license issued hereunder shall expire on June 30 of each
year. Licenses shall be obtained between April 1 and June 30 of each year
for the next succeeding year respectively.
§ 175-17. Fees.
The annual fee to be paid for each bicycle license shall be twenty-five cents
($0.25) and shall be paid in advance. When any license is transferred from
one person to another, a transfer fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25) shall be
paid. All fees shall be paid to the Director of the Department of Public Safety
and are hereby levied as police regulations and licensing and inspection
fees and to defray the cost of the license plates herein required.
§ 175-12 BICYCLES § 175-18
175:271
§ 175-18. Attaching plates.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall cause a license plate
to be firmly attached to the rear mud guard or frame of the bicycle for which
issued in full position as to be plainly visible from the rear.
§ 175-19. Renewal.
Upon the expiration of any bicycle license the same may be renewed upon
application and payment of the same fee as upon an original application.
§ 175-20. Revocation; hearing.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety may revoke any licenses
issued under this chapter for cause and after a hearing.
§ 175-18 SCRANTON CODE § 175-20
175:272
Chapter 181
BOWLING ALLEYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and entertainment — See Ch.
164.
Dance halls — See Ch. 209.
Pool rooms and billiard rooms — See Ch. 354.
§ 181-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOWLING ALLEY — Any single alley or lane used by the public for bowling
upon the payment of a fee.
§ 181-2. License required.
Every person shall obtain a license from the Department of Public Safety for
each and every bowling lane or alley held out to the public in any business
place within the city.
§ 181-3. Application.
Application for a license under this chapter shall be made to the
Department of Public Safety upon a form furnished by the city and shall
contain such information as may be required by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
§ 181-4. Fee. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 11-1987; 182-1994]
Every person, copartnership, association or corporation owning or
operating any bowling alley or lane within the city shall obtain a license for
each such alley or lane and shall pay the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.)
for each such lane as an annual license fee from January 1 of each year or
for any fractional part of a year.
§ 181-5. Revocation.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety may, for cause shown and
after a hearing, revoke any licenses issued under this chapter.
§ 175-20 BOWLING ALLEYS § 181-5
181:273
Chapter 187
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 152.
Contractors — See Ch. 203.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 215.
Fees for reinspections — See Ch. 226, Art. X.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
Heating and air-conditioning systems — See
Ch. 290.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 313.
Plumbing — See Ch. 345.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 360.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
423.
§ 181-5 SCRANTON CODE § 181-5
181:274
ARTICLE I
Construction Standards
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 7, Art. II, of the 1979 Code]
§ 187-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 30-1980;
93-1981; 3-1986; 79-1987; 171-1990; 148-1993; 4-26-1999 by Ord.
No. 59-1999]
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Scranton, being marked and designated as the "BOCA
National Building Code, 1999, Fourteenth Edition," as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Scranton in the State of
Pennsylvania for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, penalties, conditions and terms of
the BOCA National Building Code, 1999, Fourteenth Edition, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article,
excepting any additions and changes as set forth in this article.
§ 187-2. Purpose.
To provide for public safety, health and welfare, the BOCA National Building
Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, equipment, use and
occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings, structures and
appurtenances; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed
to prevent the use of any material or method of construction whether or
not specifically provided for it, upon presentation of plans, methods of
analysis, test date or other necessary information to the building official by
the interested person or persons, such material or method of construction
complies with the specific provisions of or conforms to the intent of this
Building Code.
§ 187-3. Amendments. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 93-1981; 16-1982;
171-1990; 148-1993; 9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 86-1998; 4-26-1999 by
Ord. No. 59-1999]
The following portions of the BOCA National Building Code, adopted by
§ 187-1, are hereby amended as follows:
A. Section 101.1. Insert the "City of Scranton" as the name of the
jurisdiction.
B. Section 107.1.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
§ 187-1 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-3
181:275
107.1.1 Repairs: Application or notice to the Code Official is required
for ordinary repairs to structures. Such repairs shall include the
cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or
cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support or the removal
or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts
of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil,
waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
C. Section 113.2.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: [Added
1-29-2008 by Ord. No. 4-200829]
113.2.1 Approved inspection agencies:
1. The code official shall accept reports of approved inspection
agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to
qualifications and reliability as stated in § 187-10.1, Requirements for
building underwriters.
2. Before any general contractor, or other person doing general
construction work for which he has received a permit, shall complete
such work, he shall make application for inspection on the form used
by the approved building underwriters inspection agency specifying
the premises wherein the installation or construction is being done,
the extent, specification and classification of such work, and pay the
fees for all inspections.
3. The building underwriters inspection agencies shall, upon receipt
of inspection application, make or cause to be made inspection of
such work and conduct such tests as may be necessary. If the work is
done in accordance with the requirement of this Building Code, the
building underwriters inspection agency shall thereupon issue the
appropriate inspection (i.e. footing, foundation, framing, etc.) or final
certificate of approval, as the case may be, to the applicant and the
building inspector.
4. When the building construction is not approved by the building
underwriter inspector or the City building inspector, such inspector
shall send a notice of noncompliance to the applicant and to the City
code official.
5. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a final certificate is
issued by the building underwriters agency and the Scranton Fire
Department Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Bureau.
D. Section 116.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: [Amended
1-29-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
29.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection C
as Subsection D and former Subsection D as Subsection F.
§ 187-3 SCRANTON CODE § 187-3
181:276
§ 187-4. Referral to Fire Prevention Bureau.
In addition to the requirements of Section 108.0 of the BOCA National
Building Code, the building official shall examine applications for permits,
same for inspection by the Fire Prevention Bureau of the city. If after
examination, the building official or the Fire Prevention Bureau finds no
objections to the same, and it appears that the proposed construction or
work will be safe and in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable
thereto, the building official shall approve such application and issue a
permit for the proposed work as soon as practicable. If objections are found,
the building official shall reject such application and note his findings in
written report, a copy of which be delivered to the applicant.
§ 187-5. Use of smoke detectors.
116.4 Violation penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or
structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code
Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provision of this
code, shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine no
less than $200 and not more than $600 for each violation, or shall be
imprisoned for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both. Every day that a
violation of the code continues shall constitute a separate offense.
E. Section 117.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: [Added
1-29-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
117.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not
less than $500 or more than $10,000.
F. Section 3408.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:
3408.2 Applicability: Structures existing prior to the effective date
of this article in which there is work involving additions, alterations or
changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements
of this section and the provisions of Sections 3403.0 through 3407.0.
The provisions in Sections 3408.2.1 through 3408.2.5 shall apply to
existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed to be,
in Use Groups A, B, E, M, R and S. These provisions shall not apply to
buildings with occupancies in Use Group H, I or an R residential care
facility.
A. All residential dwelling units, including but not limited to L-1, L-2, L-3
and L-3(a) residential dwelling units, which are to be hereafter
constructed, shall be equipped with one approved smoke detector
§ 187-3 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-5
181:277
§ 187-6. Plans to bear signature and seal of registered architect or
engineer.
When an application for a permit to erect or alter a building or structure is
made to the Bureau of Building Inspection, any plans and specifications for
such building or structure, which by the terms of Acts of Assembly approved
May 6, 1927, P.L. 820 (63 P.S. § 148 et seq.) and June 27, 1939, P.L. 1188 (63
P.S. § 21 et seq.), are required to be prepared by a registered architect or
a registered engineer and shall bear the signature and seal of a registered
architect or the signature and seal of a registered engineer.
§ 187-7. Permit fees.
The following fees shall be paid to the Superintendent of Building
Inspections upon filing of an application for a building permit and shall
apply to construction, renovations and demolition:
Cost Charge
Up to $500.00 $15.00
$500.00 to $1,000.00 $30.00
sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion for every 800 square
feet of floor space per floor.
B. All residential dwelling units, including but not limited to L-1, L-2, L-3
and L-3(a) residential dwelling units, which participate in a housing
rehabilitation program, which is funded either in whole or in part, by
federal, state or city moneys, shall be required to install one approved
smoke detector sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion for
every 800 square feet of floor space per floor.
C. All residential dwelling units, including but not limited to L-1, L-2, L-3
and L-3(a) residential dwelling units, which are hereafter purchased,
shall be equipped with one approved smoke detector sensing visible or
invisible particles of combustion for every 800 square feet of floor space
per floor.
D. All residential dwelling units, including but not limited to L-1, L-2, L-3
and L-3(a) residential dwelling units, in which over $100 of repair work
or remodeling is done, shall be equipped with one approved smoke
detector sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion, for every
800 square feet of floor space per floor.
E. The location and installation of the aforementioned smoke detecting
device shall be in a manner and location approved by the chief building
inspector or his designee.
F. The word "approved," when used in this section, shall mean a smoke
detector approved by the Underwriters' Laboratory Factory Mutual
Systems, Inc., or the Building Officers and Code Administrators
International Incorporated, commonly referred to as BOCA.
§ 187-5 SCRANTON CODE § 187-7
181:278
Cost Charge
$1,000.00 and over $30.00
Plus, per each additional thousand or
fraction thereof
$6.00
§ 187-8. Demolition.
§ 187-9. Violations and penalties.
A. The application for a demolition permit shall be on a form prescribed by
the Superintendent of Building Inspections in accordance with the fee
schedule imposed in § 187-7. At the time of securing the permit, there
shall be placed on deposit with the Superintendent of Building
Inspections the sum of $200 as a deposit to ensure that the work will be
performed in accordance with requirements of this article. The fee for a
building permit for the removal of a building or structure from $100 at
the estimated cost of moving plus, the cost of new foundations and all
work necessary to place the building or structure in its completed
condition in the location.
B. Whenever a demolition permit calls for tearing down or removal of
structures or buildings and such structures or buildings have a common
wall or a fire wall with adjacent buildings or structures the exposed
surface of such common wall or fire wall shall be resurfaced and
finished off in accordance with specifications on file with the Building
Inspectors Office. At the time of securing the permit there shall be
placed on deposit with the Superintendent of Building Inspectors a sum
of $500 as a deposit to ensure that the work be performed in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
A. Any person or member of partners or corporations who shall violate the
provisions of this article or the BOCA Basic Building Code or who shall
fail to comply with any requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair, demolish a building or structure in violation of
an approved plan or directive of the Building Official or of a permit or
certification issued under the BOCA Basic Building Code shall be guilty,
and upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $500, but not less than $10 or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days or not less than five days or both. Each day
that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the building after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as he is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $10,000 per offense.
[Amended 4-26-1999 by Ord. No. 59-1999]
§ 187-7 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-10
181:279
§ 187-10. Submission of plans to BOCA and Bureau of Licensing
and Inspections. [Added by Ord. No. 102-1980; amended
10-30-1995 by Ord. Nos. 160-1995 and 161-1995]
A. Any and all contractors, architects, architects/engineers, engineers or
homeowners who plan to construct, remodel or do any repairs to their
homes or buildings must first submit their floor plans or blueprints to
the Department of Community Development of the City of Scranton for
review and corrections. After these plans or blueprints have been
reviewed and approved by the Master Code Official/BOCA Review
Official a building permit shall be granted. No building, plumbing,
mechanical or electrical permits will be issued until the plans,
blueprints and specifications are reviewed and approved.
B. Plan review fees. All fees incurred in relationship to the plan review will
be paid by persons submitting their plans to the Department of
Community Development. No permit shall be issued until such fees are
paid. The plan review fee shall be:
(1) Residential.
(a) One- and two-family: $150.
(b) Multiple-family: $250.
(2) Commercial. Estimated construction value: building square footage
x type of construction factor x gross area modifier.
Estimated Construction
Value Fee
$1.00 to $750,000.00 0.0015 x estimated construction
value ($100.00 minimum)
$5,000,000.00 $1,125.00 + (0.0005 x value over
$750,000.00)
(3) Mechanical, plumbing and electrical.
(a) Plan review fees: per each, 25% of building review fee.
(b) Sprinkler review fee is based on the number of sprinkler heads.
For hydraulically-designed systems, multiply the fee by two.:
Number Charge
1 to 100 $125.00
101 to 200 $150.00
201 to 300 $175.00
301 to 400 $200.00
401 to 500 $250.00
501 to 750 $275.00
§ 187-10 SCRANTON CODE § 187-10
181:280
§ 187-10.1. Requirements for building underwriters. [Added
9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 86-1998; amended 1-29-2008 by Ord. No.
4-2008]
Number Charge
Over 750 $275.00, plus $0.02 per sprinkler
(4) Certificate of occupancy.
(a) The certificate of occupancy fee shall be:
[1] Residential: $150.
[2] Commercial: $250.
(b) These fees are based upon one inspection being performed per
site. Any reinspection which is necessary due to the applicant's
failure to pass the first inspection shall be an additional $50
per inspector per site visit.
(5) For all additions, renovations or repairs to existing residential
structures up to 1,000 square feet there shall be no plan review fee.
C. Violations. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this section or the codes hereby adopted, shall upon conviction thereof,
be guilty of a summary offense and shall be fined not to exceed $1,000
for any one offense, recoverable with costs, together with judgment or
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, per offense if the amount of such
fines and costs shall not be promptly paid. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. Certification. A building underwriter inspector must possess
certification in each of the following levels of BOCA examination:
building one- and two-family dwellings, building general, fire protection
general, building plan review and fire protection plan review.
Inspectors not possessing said plan review certifications shall have a
period of 18 months from the date of enactment of this article to
complete this certification process. During this grace period, an
inspector must possess building one- and two-family dwellings, building
general and fire protection general BOCA certifications in order to
perform work as an underwriter. Any person not successfully
completing certification in building and fire protection plan review at
the end of the eighteen-month grace period shall not be eligible for
licensure until successful completion of the building and fire protection
plan review test specified.
B. Insurance coverage. Any person performing work as a building
underwriter inspector shall show proof of at least:
(1) Professional liability insurance of $500,000; and
(2) Errors and omissions insurance of $500,000.
§ 187-10 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-10.1
181:281
C. Proximity. In order to facilitate efficient inspections, any person
performing work as a building underwriter inspector shall perform said
work from a fully staffed office within the City of Scranton.
D. All building underwriter inspectors need to provide a public fee
schedule detailing the charges for inspection services.
E. Any person performing work as a building underwriter inspector shall
possess a current City license. A license may be obtained by showing
proof of current BOCA certification and payment of $150 to the City
Treasurer.
F. Building underwriters shall have a minimum of 45 hours of continuing
education units (CEU) every three years.
G. Building underwriters shall not inspect any work where a permit has
not been posted.
H. Building underwriters shall not inspect any work which has been
performed by a nonlicensed contractor.
I. The building underwriters agencies shall provide the City with the
names of all qualified inspectors along with their certification of all
qualified inspectors along with their certification of the required CEU
on an annual basis.
J. The Code Official, with the approval of the Director of the Department
of Community Development, reserves the right to terminate any
building underwriter inspector or building underwriter agency for
cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant
charges by the Building Appeals Board.
K. A building underwriter inspection is not required for residential
buildings.
§ 187-10.1 SCRANTON CODE § 187-10.1
181:282
ARTICLE II
Floodplain Management
[Adopted as Ord. No. 68-1985]
§ 187-11. Applicability.
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to
flooding conditions, the following provisions shall apply to all proposed
construction or development occurring in any of the floodplain districts
designated in the Chapter 445, Zoning, as amended.
§ 187-12. Definitions.
The following are special definitions which shall be used in making
reasonable interpretations of the provisions contained in this Part 2:
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water and water vapor.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building, structure
including the placement of mobile homes.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts
specifically designated in Chapter 445, Zoning, as being inundated
primarily by the one-hundred-year flood. Included would be areas identified
as Floodway District (FW), Flood-Fringe District (FF) and General
Floodplain District (FA).
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY DISTRICT OR AREA — The channel of a river
or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas required to carry and
discharge a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude as specifically defined
in Chapter 445, Zoning.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations and the
subdivision of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the
structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOODPROOFING — Means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce
or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
MOBILE HOME — Means a transportable, single-family dwelling intended
for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly, contained in one
or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
§ 187-11 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-12
181:283
unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may be
used with or without a permanent foundation. The term does not include
recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which has
been planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes
for nontransient use.
OBSTRUCTIONS — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile
abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building,
fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or
projecting into any channel, watercourse or designated floodplain district,
which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water
either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water or
is placed where the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to
damage life and property.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR-FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1% chance of occurring each
year, although the flood may occur in any year. This is more precisely
defined/delineated in Chapter 445, Zoning.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of one and one-half (11/2) feet.
§ 187-13. Structures.
§ 187-14. Design and construction standards.
A. Residential structures. Within any designated Floodway (FW), Flood-
Fringe (FF) or General Floodplain (FA) District, the lowest floor
(including basement) of any new or improved residential structure shall
be at least one and one-half (11/2) feet above the one-hundred-yearflood
elevation.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) Within any designated Floodway (FW), Flood-Fringe (FF) or
General Floodplain (FA) District, the lowest floor (including
basement) of any new or improved nonresidential structure shall be
at least one and one-half (11/2) feet above the one-hundred-yearflood
elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed by such structure shall remain either completely or
essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
(2) Any structure, or part thereof, which will not be completely or
adequately elevated, shall be designed and constructed to be
completely or essentially dry in accordance with the standards
contained in the publication entitled "Floodproofing Regulations"
(U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972), or some other
equivalent standard for that type of construction.
§ 187-12 SCRANTON CODE § 187-14
181:284
A. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure drainage at all points along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
B. Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer
facilities and private package sewage treatment plants (including all
pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into the floodwaters. In addition, they should be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and
impairment.
C. Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
D. Streets. The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
E. Utilities. All utilities such as gaslines, electrical and telephone systems
being placed in flood-prone areas should be located, elevated (where
possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during
a flood.
F. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the building official.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water. In so doing, consideration shall be
given to their effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
H. Anchoring.
§ 187-14 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-14
181:285
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or other movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property
and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings
and other restricted sections of the watercourse.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation.
I. Floor, walls and ceilings. Where located at or below the regulatory flood
elevation:
(1) Wood flooring shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain,
without incurring structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood shall be of any exterior- or marine-grade and of a waterresistant
or waterproof variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings in nonresidential structures shall have sufficient
wet strength and be so installed as to survive inundation.
(4) Window frames, door frames, door jambs and other components
shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
J. Electrical systems.
(1) All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric air
conditioning and ventilating systems and other electrical
equipment or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above
the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation
less than three feet above the level of the one-hundred-year-flood
elevation.
(3) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
K. Plumbing.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or
apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above the
regulatory flood.
(2) No part of any on-site sewage disposal system shall be constructed
within any designated floodplain districts.
(3) Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to preclude infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
§ 187-14 SCRANTON CODE § 187-14
181:286
§ 187-15. Mobile homes and mobile home parks in the designated
floodplain districts.
(4) All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for
the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
L. Paints and adhesives. Where located at or below the regulatory flood
elevation:
(1) Adhesives shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation (i.e., marine- or water-resistant quality).
(2) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be sealed
with a marine- or water-resistant quality paint or similar product.
(3) Paints or other finishes shall be capable of surviving inundation
(i.e., marine or water-resistant quality).
M. Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or in time
of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life shall be
stored below the regulatory flood elevation.
A. All mobile homes and any additions thereto shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and
frame ties to ground anchors in accordance with the American National
Standards Institute and National Fire Protection Association Standards
as specified in the Standard for the Installation of Mobile Homes,
Including Mobile Home Park Requirements [NFPA No. 501A-1974
(ANSI A119.3-1975)], as amended, for mobile homes in hurricane zones
or other appropriate standards such as the following:
(1) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the
mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations for units 50 feet or more in length and one additional tie
per side for units less than 50 feet in length.
(2) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the mobile home,
with five additional ties per side at intermediate locations for units
50 feet or more in length and four additional ties per side for units
fewer than 50 feet in length.
(3) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds per square inch.
B. All mobile homes and any additions thereto shall also be elevated in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill, or on pilings
so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the
elevation of the regulatory flood.
§ 187-14 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-15
181:287
§ 187-16. Existing structures in designated floodplain districts.
Structures existing in any designated floodplain districts prior to the
enactment of this Article, but which are not in compliance with these
provisions, may continue to remain subject to the following:
§ 187-17. Variances.
(2) Adequate surface drainage is provided.
(3) Adequate access for a hauler is provided.
(4) Where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large enough
to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no
more than 10 feet apart; reinforcement shall be provided for pilings
that will extend for six feet or more above the ground level.
C. An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular, access and escape
routes shall be filed with the appropriate city officials for mobile home
parks and mobile home subdivisions where appropriate.
D. No mobile home shall be placed in any designated floodway district or
area.
A. Existing structures located in a designated floodway district or area
shall not be expanded or enlarged, unless the effect of the proposed
expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying improvements.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
provisions of this Article.
A. If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements stated
above would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, the city may, upon request, grant relief from
the strict application of the requirements.
B. Requests for variances to the strict application of the provisions of this
Article, may be granted by the city in accordance with the following
procedures and criteria:
(1) No variances shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any designated Floodway District (FW) that
would cause any increase in the one-hundred-year elevation.
§ 187-15 SCRANTON CODE § 187-17
181:288
§ 187-18. Plan requirements.
In addition to the permit application requirements normally required under
the City Building Code, as amended,30 the City Building Official shall require
the following specific information to be included as part of the application
for a building permit:
(2) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(3) In granting any variance, the city may attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the
objectives of this Article.
(4) Whenever a variance is granted, the city shall notify the applicant,
in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(5) In reviewing any request for a variance, the city shall consider, but
not be limited to the following that:
(a) There is good and sufficient cause.
(b) Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) The granting of the variance will not result in any unacceptable
or prohibited increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
any other applicable local or state ordinances and regulations.
(6) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the city. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to
the Federal Insurance Administration.
C. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and pressures and effects of
buoyancy of the one-hundred-year flood.
A. A plan which details the:
30.Editor's Note: See Article I, Construction Standards.
§ 187-17 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-18
181:289
§ 187-19. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for construction or development in
any designated floodplain district to be considered for approval shall be
submitted by the City Building Official to the County Conservation District
for review and comment prior to the issuance of a building permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the
City Building Official for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 187-20. Additional permits requirements.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the City Building Official
shall review the application for permit to determine if all other necessary
governmental permits such as those required by state and federal laws
have been obtained including those required by Act 537, the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act,31 the Pennsylvania Water Obstructions Act of 1913,32
and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, Section
404, 33 U.S.C. 1334. No permit shall be issued until this determination has
been made.
(1) Existing and proposed contours and/or elevation (in relation to
mean sea level, i.e., the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929)
of the ground and the lowest floor of proposed construction.
(2) One-hundred-year-flood elevations.
(3) Other associated factors such as pressures and impact forces, etc.
(4) Storage elevations.
(5) Size of the structures.
(6) Location and elevations of streets, water supply and sanitary
facilities.
(7) Soil types.
(8) Floodproofing measures including specific reference to the level of
the floodproofing in relation to the one-hundred-year flood.
B. A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact, the uplift forces and other hydrostatic,
hydrodynamic and buoyancy factors associated with the one-hundredyear
flood. Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been incorporated into the
design of the structure.
31.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
32.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 10-13-1979 by P.L. 204, No. 70. See now 32 P.S.
§ 693.1 et seq.
§ 187-18 SCRANTON CODE § 187-21
181:290
§ 187-21. Start of construction.
For purposes of implementation this Article II, construction shall be
considered to have started with the first placement of permanent
construction of the site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any
work beyond the stage of excavation. For a structure without a basement
or poured footings, the start of construction includes the first permanent
framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its pilings
or foundation or the affixing of any prefabricated structures or mobile
home to its permanent site. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation for basement,
footings, piers or foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation
of pilings under the proposed subsurface footings or the installation of
sewer, gas and water pipes or electric or other service lines from the street.
§ 187-22. Development which may endanger human life.
A. The provisions of this section shall be applicable, in addition to any
other applicable provisions of this Article, or any other ordinance, code
or regulation.
B. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,33
and the regulation adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development, as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which: will be used for the production
or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or
will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of
more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will
involve the production, storage or use of any amount of radioactive
substances; shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition
to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and
substances are considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
33.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 187-21 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-22
181:291
§ 187-23. Activities requiring special permits.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
C. Within any Floodway District (FW), any structure of the kind described
in Subsection B above shall be prohibited.
D. Structures.
(1) Where permitted within any Flood-Fringe District (FF) or General
Floodplain District (FA), any structure of the kind described in
Subsection B above, shall be:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least one and one-half (11/2) feet above the onehundred-
year flood.
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a one-hundred-year flood.
(2) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972), or with some other
equivalent watertight standard.
E. Within any General Floodplain District (FA) general floodplain area, any
structure of the kind described in Subsection B above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
F. Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements
of this section.
§ 187-22 SCRANTON CODE § 187-23
181:292
A. The provisions of this section shall be applicable, in addition to any
other applicable provisions of this Article or any other ordinance, code
or regulation.
B. Identification of activities requiring a special permit. In accordance
with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act (Act 1978-166)34
and regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development, as required by the Act, the following
obstructions and activities are permitted only by special permit, if
located partially or entirely within any identified floodplain district.
(1) The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activates:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Nursing homes.
(c) Jails or prisons.
(2) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new mobile home
park or mobile subdivision, or substantial improvement to an
existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.35
C. Application requirements. Applicants for special permits shall provide
five copies of the following items:
(1) A written request including a completed building permit
application form.
(2) A small scale, map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site
is located.
(3) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date.
(b) Topography used upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of
two feet.
(c) All property and lot lines including dimensions and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet.
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction and elevations.
34.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 423, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 187-23 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-23
181:293
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities and any other natural
and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed
activity or development.
(f) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the one-hundred-year-flood
elevations and information concerning the flow of water
including direction and velocities.
(g) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and
any other improvements.
(h) Any other information which the municipality considers
necessary for adequate review of the application.
(4) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing
the following:
(a) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings
including floor plan, sections and exterior building elevations,
as appropriate.
(b) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any
other floor.
(c) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with the one-hundred-year flood.
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
(e) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths.
(f) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades.
(g) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems and any other utilities and
facilities.
(5) The following data and documentation:
(a) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he
represents.
§ 187-23 SCRANTON CODE § 187-23
181:294
(b) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect
or landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the onehundred-
year flood.
(c) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a one-hundred-year flood,
including a statement concerning the effects such pollution
may have on human life.
(d) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on one-hundred-year-flood elevations
and flows.
(e) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the one-hundred-year-flood elevation
and the effects such materials and debris may have on onehundred-
year-flood elevations and flows.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protections' Planning Module for Land
Development.
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirement of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(h) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to a
permit for any activity regulated by the Department of
Environmental Protection under Section 302 of Act
1978-166.36
(i) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of
a one-hundred-year flood.
D. Application review procedures. Upon receipt of an application for a
special permit by the City of Scranton, the following procedures shall
apply in addition to all other applicable permit procedures which are
already established:
36.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 187-23 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-23
181:295
(1) Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the of the application and all accompanying
documentation shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and
recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the City of Scranton's Planning Commission and
engineer for review and comment.
(2) If an application is received that is incomplete, the City of Scranton
shall notify the applicant, in writing, stating in what respects the
application is deficient.
(3) If the City of Scranton decides to disapprove an application it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
(4) If the City of Scranton approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent
information, with the Department of Community and economic
Development, by registered mail, within five working days after the
date of approval.
(5) Before issuing the special permit, the City of Scranton shall allow
the Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days
after receipt of the notification by the Department to review the
application and the decision made by the City of Scranton.
(6) If the City of Scranton does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community and Economic Development during
the thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the
applicant.
(7) If the Department of Community and Economic Development
should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the City of
Scranton and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval and the City of Scranton shall not issue the special
permit.
E. Technical requirements for development requiring a special permit. In
addition to any other applicable requirements, the following provisions
shall also apply to the activities requiring a special permit. If there is
any conflict between any of the following requirements and any
otherwise applicable provision, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
(1) No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can
be determined that the structure or activity will be located,
constructed and maintained in an manner which will:
(a) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and
any occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new
structures shall be designed, located and constructed so that:
§ 187-23 SCRANTON CODE § 187-23
181:296
[1] The structure will survive inundation by waters of the onehundred-
year flood without any lateral movement or
damage to either the structure itself, or to any of its
equipment or contents below the one-hundred-year-flood
elevation.
[2] The lowest floor elevation (including basement) will be at
least one and one-half (11/2) feet above the one-hundredyear-
flood elevation.
[3] The occupants of the structures can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any
time during the one-hundred-year flood.
(b) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels of flows or debris endangering life and property.
(2) All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications,
who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the City of Scranton and the
Department of Community and Economic Development.
F. Within any floodplain district, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection B above, shall be prohibited within the area measured 50
feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
G. Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirement
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements
of this section.
§ 187-23 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-23
181:297

ARTICLE III
Handicapped Accessibility
[Adopted as Ord. No. 69-1988 (Ch. 7, Art. IX, of the 1979 Code]
§ 187-24. Adoption.
The regulations set forth in this Article III are adopted by the Council to
provide that buildings have accessible routes, usable or adaptable space
and accessible elements and facilities to make such buildings accessible and
usable by establishing a safe environment for all categories of people having
physical disabilities.
§ 187-25. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this Article III shall have
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ACCESSIBLE — Describes a building, building site or portion thereof which
complies with the specifications and standards established by the
Department of Community Development and based upon the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI), which are official federal government
standards, and that can be approached, entered and negotiated by persons
with physical handicaps.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE — A continuous unobstructed path which connects
all areas within a building and a building site that can be negotiated by a
person with a severe physical handicap, using a wheelchair and that is also
safe for and usable by people with other physical handicaps.
BUILDING — All or a portion of a facility or structure wherein specific
services are provided or activities are performed. For purposes of this
Article, when a facility or structure is used for residential purposes, as well
as nonresidential purposes, then the areas occupied for each purpose shall
be treated as separate buildings.
CONSTRUCTION COST — The total cost or estimated cost of a building,
including all labor, materials and fixed equipment at current market rates
and a reasonable allowance for overhead and profit for a building
contractor, in and excluding the cost of architectural fees, other design
consultant fees and the cost of the land. The owner or the owner's agent
shall provide the construction cost to the Department of Community
Development.
EXTERIOR ACCESSIBLE ROUTES — Includes but is not limited to parking
access aisles, curb cuts, walks, ramps and lifts.
INTERIOR ACCESSIBLE ROUTES — Includes but is not limited to corridors,
floors, ramps, elevators, lifts and clear floor space at fixtures.
PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL HANDICAPS — Individuals who have a physical
impairment, including impaired sensory or manual abilities, which results
in a functional limitation in access to and use of a building or facility.
§ 187-24 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-25
181:299
PUBLIC — Employees, visitors or any other persons who may be on the
premises for a lawful purpose.
WORTH OF THE BUILDING — The current fair market value of the building
prior to the remodeling as can be reasonably determined from an appraisal
provided by the owner or the owner's agent.
§ 187-26. Applicability.
The standards and specifications set forth in this Article III and any
regulations adopted pursuant to it shall apply to any building used by
the public that is constructed or remodeled on or after the effective date
of this Article III, including but not limited to: factories, power plants,
mercantile buildings, shopping centers, department stores, theaters, retail
stores, sports arenas, hotels, motels, office buildings, financial institutions,
hospitals, public and private institutions, convalescent and nursing homes,
schools, colleges, dormitories, auditoriums, gymnasiums, transportation
stations and terminals, warehouses, garages, theaters, motion-picture
theaters, museums, concert halls, summer stock theaters, dance halls,
banquet halls, skating rinks, armory halls, places of worship, apartment
houses, club houses, lodging houses, rooming houses and any other building
facility or complex used by the public.
§ 187-27. New buildings.
All new buildings, new construction begun on or after the effective date of
this Article III, of buildings and building sites must comply with this Article
III and be accessible to and usable by persons with physical handicaps. New
construction of buildings for which the contracts for the planning, design or
both have been awarded prior to the effective date of this Article III, shall
not be construed as having begun construction on or after the effective date
of this Article III.
§ 187-28. Existing buildings.
A. All remodeling of existing structures or buildings and building sites
begun on or after the effective date of this Article III, must comply with
this Article III and shall be accessible to and usable by persons with
physical handicaps to the degree required as follows:
(1) When the construction cost of the remodeling is less than 30% of
the worth of the building, only the remodeled area or areas shall be
accessible to and usable by persons with physical handicaps. An
accessible route to the remodeled area or areas is not required.
(2) When the construction cost of the remodeling is greater than or
equal to 30% but less than 50% of the worth of the building, the
remodeled area or areas shall be made accessible and usable by
persons with physical handicaps and an accessible route to the
remodeled area or areas shall be provided. The cost of providing an
§ 187-25 SCRANTON CODE § 187-28
181:300
§ 187-29. Exemption of certain dwellings and historical buildings.
§ 187-30. Evidence of compliance; approval required.
It shall be the duty of the owner or owner's agent of every building or
building site covered by this Article III, hereafter constructed or remodeled,
to submit to the Department of Community Development for approval
construction documents, request for variances or other data required by the
department showing compliance with the provision of this article and with
regulations adopted pursuant to it. No building or building site covered by
this Article shall be constructed or remodeled until approval has been given
by the Department of Community Development.
accessible route to the remodeled area or areas shall not be
considered when calculating the required degree of conformity.
(3) When the construction cost of the remodeling is 50% or more of the
worth of the building, the entire building and building site shall be
made accessible to and usable by persons with physical handicaps.
(4) When any series of remodeling is made to a building over any
three-year period which accumulates in a series of construction
costs which total 30% or more, but less than a 50% of the worth of
the building at the beginning of the three-year period, the
remodeled area shall be made accessible to and usable by persons
with physical handicaps and an accessible route to the areas shall
be provided. When any series of remodeling is made to a building
over any three-year period which accumulates in any series of
construction costs which total 50% or more of the worth of the
building at the beginning of the three-year period the entire
building and building site shall be made accessible to and usable by
persons with physical handicaps.
B. Remodeling of buildings and building sites for which the contracts for
planning, design or both have been awarded prior to the effective date
of this Article III, shall not be construed as having begun construction
on or after the effective date of this Article III.
A. Single-family and multifamily dwellings which are exclusively
residential and which house four or fewer families are excluded from
the requirements of this Article III.
B. Accessibility provisions which the Department of Community
Development determines cannot be accomplished without threatening
or destroying the historic significance of a building which has been
identified and classified by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission as historic are not required.
§ 187-28 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-31
181:301
§ 187-31. Waivers and variances.
The Department of Community Development may waive or grant exception
to the requirements of this Article for the construction or remodeling of
buildings, provided that such waiver would not significantly adversely affect
provisions for health, safety and security in that equally safe and proper
alternatives are prescribed, and further that such waiver or variance is
based upon a specific finding that strict compliance with the requirement:
§ 187-32. Failure to obtain approval; stop-work order.
If the owner or owner's agent of a building covered by this Article fails
to obtain approval from the Department of Community Development and
nevertheless proceeds with construction or remodeling of the building,
this shall constitute a violation of this Article III and the Department of
Community Development shall serve notice on the owner or owner's agent.
The Department of Community Development may order the owner or
owner's agent to cease all work on the building immediately. When the
Department orders all work to cease on the building, a notice shall be
placed at the building site prohibiting the continuation of work being
performed until approval is given by the Department.
§ 187-33. Notice of violation.
If a building covered by this Article III shall be constructed, remodeled or
leased in violation of any provisions of this Article III or of the regulations
promulgated under it, a written order shall be served by the Department
of Community Development upon the particular governmental agency or
private owner or the owner's agent identifying the conditions which
constitute the violation, directing their correction within reasonably and
specified time periods, and notifying the owner or owner's agent of the
appeal rights as set forth below.
§ 187-34. Appeal.
An order issued by the Department of Community Development pursuant to
this article may be appealed to the Building Board of Appeals within 30 days
of issuance. The appeal may include an application for an exception. The
A. Would create an undue economic burden.
B. Would not achieve its intended objective.
C. Would be physically or legally impossible.
D. Would be unnecessary in light of alternatives which ensure the
achievement of the intended objective or which without a loss in the
level of safety, achieve the intended objective more efficiently,
effectively or economically.
E. Would entail a change so slight as to produce a negligible additional
benefit not consistent with the purposes of this Article III.
§ 187-31 SCRANTON CODE § 187-34
181:302
board shall consider the guidelines and recommendations of Department of
Community Development and issue an adjudication in accordance with Title
2 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes (relating to Administrative Law
and Procedures).
§ 187-35. Enforcement of orders; filing complaint.
The Department of Community Development may secure enforcement of
its orders or other appropriate relief through the Courts of Common Pleas.
Enforcement of a Department of Community Development order shall be
initiated by the filing of a complaint in the appropriate court and issuance
and service of a copy of the complaint as in proceedings in equity.
§ 187-36. Violations and penalties.
A. An owner who violates a provision of this Article III or of the regulations
promulgated under it and who fails or refuses to observe orders issued
by the Department of Community Development for enforcement of this
Article III or regulations promulgated under it shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $300 for each day that the violation continues.
Prosecutions for violations of this Article or regulations of the
Department shall be in the form of summary criminal proceedings.
B. Upon conviction, after a hearing these penalties shall be imposed and
shall be final unless an appeal be taken in a manner prescribed by law.
§ 187-34 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-36
181:303

ARTICLE IV
Prepurchase Compliance Inspections
[Adopted 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 55-1999]
§ 187-37. Authorization to conduct inspections.
The Department of Community Development of the City of Scranton is
hereby authorized, but not required, to conduct prepurchase Building Code
compliance inspections, on a time-available basis as determined by the
Department Director or the Master Code Official, after the fee hereinafter
described is paid.
§ 187-38. Inspection fees.
§ 187-39. Report of inspection; liability of city.
The Department Director and Master Code Official or their designee are
authorized to submit a report to the requester, provided that no warranty
or guaranty be made by the City of Scranton or any employee thereof as
to the structural integrity of any structure, or the presence of pests, unless
actually observed. The city will indicate simply whether the property is in
compliance with BOCA Codes in effect and what would need to be done to
bring the property up to code compliance. The City of Scranton reserves all
legal rights and immunities from suit.
A. The fee for a prepurchase Building Code compliance inspection shall
be:
(1) Residential property: $250.
(2) Commercial property: $350.
B. These fees shall be paid in advance of the inspection.
§ 187-37 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-39
181:305

ARTICLE V
Requirements for Publicly Funded Residential Construction to
Allow for Accessiblity and Occupancy by Disabled Persons
§ 187-40. Statement of intent.
The provisions of this article are specifically enacted to further the policy
of the City of Scranton to provide that new single-family, duplexes and
triplexes which are constructed with public funds, as herein described, be
provided with minimal design features to provide accessibility and usability
for physically disabled people.37
§ 187-41. Applicability.
The following regulations shall be applicable to new, single-family
dwellings, duplexes, and triplexes that receive City assistance. For purposes
of this article, "City assistance" shall mean funding or assistance from the
City of Scranton, or any agent thereof, through any of the following means:
a) receipt of a building contract or similar contractual agreement involving
any City-funded program or fund; b) disbursal under City auspices of any
federal or state construction funds such as CDBG; or c) receipt of any other
funding or financial benefit from the City of Scranton or any agency thereof.
§ 187-42. Design requirements.
A. Requirement 1. Building entrances. Applicable dwelling units shall be
designed and constructed to have at least one building entrance on an
accessible route served by a ramp complying with ANSI A117.1-1986,
Section 4.8, having a maximum slope not to exceed 12 (1:12), unless it
is impractical to do so because of terrain or unusual characteristics of
the site. Such building entrance doors shall comply with ANSI A117.1,
4.13, and shall have a minimum clear opening of 32 inches. Any
entrance at the front, side or back is acceptable as long as it is served
by an accessible route such as a garage or sidewalk.
B. Requirement 2. Interior door criteria. All dwelling units, whether or not
on an accessible route, shall be designed in such a manner that all the
doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are
sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons in wheelchairs. Lever
hardware is required. Doors, except those serving closets less than 15
feet square in area, within individual dwelling units intended for user
passage must provide minimum thirty-two-inch clear opening. A twofoot-
ten-inch door or standard six-foot sliding patio door assembly is
deemed sufficient to comply with this requirement; provided, however,
compliance with ANSI Section 4.13.6 (Maneuvering Clearance at
Doors) shall not be mandatory.
C. Requirement 3. Accessible routes into and through the dwelling unit.
An accessible route shall be designed and constructed in such a manner
37.Editor's Note: See also Art. III, Handicapped Accessibility, in this chapter.
§ 187-40 BOWLING ALLEYS § 187-42
181:307
§ 187-43. Waiver of exterior disability accessibility requirements.
§ 187-44. Effect on other ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby
repealed to the extent of said conflict.
§ 187-45. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Department of
Permits, Licensing and Inspections.
that a thirty-six-inch-wide level route, except at doors, must be provided
through the main floor of the unit with ramped or beveled changes at
door thresholds.
D. Requirement 4. Wall reinforcement in bathroom. Reinforcement in the
walls shall be provided at designated locations as specified by ANSI
A117.1, Section 4 .24, Section 4.32, Figure 48 and Figure 49 so that
grab bars may be installed, if needed, at a later date without the
necessity of removing portions of the existing wall.
E. Requirement 5. Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and
other environmental controls. All applicable dwelling units shall be
designed and constructed in such a manner that all premises contain
light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other controls in
accessible locations. Controls shall meet the requirements of ANSI
A117.1, Section 4.25. Where multiple controls serve the same elements
(e.g., two remote switches for a light) only one need be accessible.
A. The requirements of § 187-42 Requirement 1 (Building entrances)
herein may be waived by the City (Department of Permits, Licensing
and Inspections) through the issuance of an "Exterior Disability
Accessibility Waiver."
B. A person requesting said waiver shall file an application for disability
accessibility waiver with the Director of the Department of Permits,
Licensing and Inspections, including all documents necessary to prove
the existence of the exemption standard herein. The application shall
demonstrate that topographical conditions on the site render it either
impossible or impracticable to comply with the provisions of said
section.
C. If the application so demonstrates, the City shall issue an exterior
disability accessibility waiver to the applicant, in writing, within 10
days of receipt of a completed application that shall become an official
component of any issued contract. The City shall retain a copy of said
waiver in the Department's official records and shall also forward a
copy of said waiver to the Director of the Department of Permits,
Licensing and Inspections at the time of issuance.
§ 187-42 SCRANTON CODE § 187-45
181:308
Chapter 193
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 187. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 412.
§ 193-1. Street numbers required.
The owners or occupants of houses, dwellings and buildings in the City of
Scranton and all persons who erect houses, residences, and other buildings
within the City of Scranton after this chapter becomes effective, are hereby
required to attach an assigned street number displayed in position easily
observed and readable from the public right-of-way or street. All numbers
shall be in arabic numerals (e.g., 1, 2, 3, etc.) at least three inches (76
millimeters) high and 1/2 inches (13 millimeters) stroke. Those owners or
occupants who already have an assigned street numbers are to continue to
use the same unless the City shall direct otherwise. Script numbering and
other forms of numbering shall not be used due to the difficulty of reading.
§ 193-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING — A residential building or unit occupied by persons other that
its owner, such as tenants.
HOUSE — A residential building or unit occupied by its owner.
OTHER BUILDINGS — Includes commercial, industrial, nonprofit, or
religious structures within the City of Scranton.
§ 193-3. Example.
The example of the BOCA Property Maintenance Code, Section 304.3,
entitled "street numbers," is hereby adopted, as an example for compliance,
and incorporated herein by references as though set forth herein at length.
§ 193-4. Designation of numbers.
The City Engineer or his designee will designate free of charge upon written
application made to him the appropriate street numbers. The City Engineer
is hereby authorized to prescribe the form of such application.
§ 193-5. Timetable for compliance.
A. The City of Scranton shall have one year from the date of approval by
the Mayor of this chapter to be in compliance with this chapter.
§ 187-45 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 193-5
193:309
§ 193-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 193-7. Enforcement.
B. All churches, synagogues and mosques shall have six months to be in
compliance from the date of such approval.
C. All buildings which shall be constructed in the City on or after the date
of such approval of this chapter shall be marked with their assigned
street number within 30 days from the date of completion thereof and
within 10 days of occupancy if a house or other dwelling.
A. Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction (except as
provided in § 193-6B), be fined not less than $100 and not more than
$300 for each such offense, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
the said payment, be imprisoned until the said fine shall be paid, not
exceeding 30 days. Each day that a structure, dwelling or house is not
numbered with a visible street number as assigned shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. If the evidence shows that a person(s) died from fire, disease or other
reason due at least in part to an inability to locate an address because
the house or other structure had not displayed its assigned street
number, the fine shall be $300 for each such offense, plus costs of
prosecution, and in default of the payment of said fine, to be imprisoned
until said fine and costs be paid, not exceeding 90 days. Each death
shall constitute a separate offense under this subsection.
C. This chapter shall not be constructed to limit or prevent the prosecution
of any violation of any BOCA code section relating to street numbering.
The City expressly reserves the right to prosecute under this chapter or
under any applicable BOCA code provision as the City Solicitor or
Assistant City Solicitor shall deem appropriate.
A. The following officials and City employees are hereby authorized to
enforce this chapter: all police officers, the Superintendent of Fire and
his Deputy, the Fire Prevention Officer and Fire Inspectors of the
Scranton Fire Department, the Master Code Official, or his Assistant,
Building Inspector and Assistant Building Inspectors of the Department
of Community Development, all Health Inspectors of the City of
Scranton, the Zoning Officer, or Assistant Zoning Officer of the City of
Scranton. It shall be the duty of every ambulance company to report a
violation of this chapter to one of the above officials, who shall
investigate and initiate prosecution, if warranted.
B. It is the intent of the governing body of the City of Scranton (Mayor and
Council) that warnings be issued for a period of 30 days after the
approval of this chapter or after any time stated for compliance,
provided that if there is a violation of § 193-6B, no warnings shall be
issued, and violations thereof shall be prosecuted.
§ 193-5 SCRANTON CODE § 193-7
193:310
Chapter 196
(RESERVED)
Chapter 198
COAL AND MINING
§ 193-7 COAL AND MINING § 193-7
198:311

ARTICLE I
Sales
§ 198-1. Size and composition standards.
No person engaged in the sale of anthracite coal to consumers shall sell
any coal to consumers within the city, unless the same shall conform to
the standards now existing for shipment of prepared anthracite coal to
tidewater, which standards are as follows:
A. Egg coal, either wet or dry, shall pass through a mesh two and threefourths
(23/4) inches square and over a two-and-one-eighth-inch square
mesh. It shall not contain more than five percent (5%) of larger sizes,
nor more than ten percent (10%) of stove coal. No more than two
percent (2%) of slate, rock and refuse shall be allowed, and no more
than two percent (2%) of bone, containing a proportion of fixed carbon
ranging between forty percent (40%) and sixty-five percent (65%) shall
be allowed.
B. Stove coal, either wet or dry, shall pass through a mesh two and oneeighth
(21/8) inches square and over a one-and-three-eighths-inch
square mesh. It shall not contain more than five percent (5%) of larger
sizes, nor more than ten percent (10%) of chestnut. No stove coal shall
be sold containing more than four percent (4%) of slate, rock and
refuse, and no more than three percent (3%) of bone, as described in
Subsection A shall be allowed.
C. Chestnut coal, when dry, shall pass through a mesh one and threeeighths
(13/8) inches square and over a three-fourths-inch square
mesh. When wet it shall pass through a mesh one and nine-sixteenths
(19/16) inches round and over a fifteen-sixteenths-inch round mesh. It
shall not contain more than five percent (5%) of larger sizes, nor more
than ten percent (10%) of pea coal, nor more than five percent (5%) of
buckwheat No. 1. It shall not contain an average of more than five
percent (5%) of bone, as described in Subsection A.
D. Pea coal, when dry, shall pass through a mesh three-fourths (3/4) inch
square and over a one-half-inch square mesh. When wet it shall pass
through a mesh fifteen-sixteenths (15/16) inch round and over a ninesixteenths-
inch round mesh. It shall not contain an objectionable
amount of larger sizes, nor more than fifteen percent (15%) of
Buckwheat No. 1, nor more than five percent (5%) of Birdseye, nor
more than ten percent (10%) of slate, rock and refuse and no undue
amount of bone.
E. Buckwheat coal, commonly called "Buckwheat No. 1," shall pass, when
dry, through a mesh one-half-inch square and over a three-eighths-inch
round mesh. When wet it shall pass through a mesh nine-sixteenthsinch
round and over a five-sixteenths-inch round mesh. It shall not
contain an objectionable amount of larger sizes, nor more than fifteen
§ 198-1 COAL AND MINING § 198-1
198:313
§ 198-2. Inspection.
It shall be the duty of the Bureau of Weights and Measures of the
Department of Public Safety to inspect prepared anthracite coal intended
for delivery to consumers within the limits of the city. The inspection may
be made as the coal is loaded from the chutes or bins onto the wagons when
the coal is in transit on the streets of the city or after or upon delivery. When
the inspector shall have found coal intended for delivery to consumer or
coal which has been delivered to the consumer to be below the standard
fixed in § 198-1, he shall immediately condemn such coal and order such
coal to be returned to the dealer. Coal, which, after inspection, shall have
been found to conform with the standard as to size and purity, shall be so
designated in a certificate which the inspector shall issue in proper form to
the person in charge of the delivery of the coal.
§ 198-3. Certificate of inspection; conditional acceptance.
Persons in charge of the delivery of prepared anthracite coal, whose
deliveries have been inspected in transit by the Bureau of Weights and
Measures, before unloading such coal, shall present to the consumer the
certificate of inspection issued by the Bureau. Coal which has not been
inspected in transit, and which is delivered to the consumer without the
certificate of inspection, may be accepted by the consumer, subject to
inspection by the Bureau. However, such consumer shall so notify the
person in charge of delivery and shall make immediate demand upon the
Bureau to have such coal inspected.
§ 198-4. Inspection of conditionally accepted coal; notice.
When such delivered coal is inspected and found to conform with the
standards fixed in § 198-1, the inspector shall notify the dealer from whom
the coal was delivered, by issuing a certificate in proper form, to this effect.
When coal so inspected is found not to conform with the standard herein
set forth, the Bureau of Weights and Measures shall issue to the consumer,
in proper form, a certificate of inspection, showing the total weight of
impurities found, based upon the average of impurities in the quantity
inspected and the total weight of undersize or oversize coal. A copy of this
certificate shall be served by mail or otherwise upon the person responsible
for its delivery, together with a demand upon the person from whom the
coal was ordered to be delivered, to replace the gross amount of impurities
percent (15%) of Birdseye, nor more than fifteen percent (15%) of slate,
rock and refuse and no undue amount of bone.
F. Birdseye coal, when dry, shall pass through a three-eighths-inch round
mesh and, when wet, through a five-sixteenths-inch round mesh and
over a three-thirty-seconds-to-one-quarter-inch mesh. It shall not
contain an objectionable amount of larger or smaller sizes of coal, dirt
or dust.
§ 198-1 SCRANTON CODE § 198-4
198:314
delivered, as shown in the certificate issued, with a like weight of inspected
and approved coal.
§ 198-5. Remedy of aggrieved consumer.
In the event of the refusal or neglect of such person to replace the
condemned coal with a like quantity of coal that will pass inspection, no
liability shall attach to the purchaser thereof to pay the same, and in case
the purchaser of such coal has paid for the same, and the seller thereof
refuses to replace the same, the purchaser may bring an action at law to
recover the amount paid.
§ 198-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person in charge of delivery of coal which has been inspected in transit,
and condemned by the Bureau of Weights and Measures, who shall violate
the order of the Bureau to return such condemned coal to the seller thereof,
or any person who causes to be delivered to consumers anthracite coal
below the standards set forth in § 198-1, or any person who orders to be
delivered to consumers within the city coal which the Bureau shall have
certified to be below the standard, and who shall refuse to replace, upon
demand, the gross weight of impurities with a like weight of inspected
and approved coal, shall be guilty of a violation of this Article and, upon
conviction, shall be punished as provided in § 1-16.
§ 198-4 COAL AND MINING § 198-6
198:315

ARTICLE II
Mining
§ 198-7. Interference with use of public ways prohibited.
No person shall recklessly, carelessly and to such an extent and in such
a manner mine, remove and carry away the anthracite coal, rock, earth
or other minerals or materials forming the natural support of the surface
of the several streets, avenues, thoroughfares, courts, alleys, places and
public highways of the city, as to threaten, endanger or interfere with the
use thereof by the public or endanger the safety of such streets, avenues,
thoroughfares, courts, alleys, places and public highways.
§ 198-8. Artificial support of public ways required.
No person shall dig, mine, remove or carry away the anthracite coal, rock,
earth or other minerals or materials forming the natural support of the
surface beneath the streets, avenues, thoroughfares, courts, alleys, places
and public highways of the city, to such an extent and in such a manner as
to thereby remove the necessary adequate support of the surface against
subsidence, without having first placed, built, erected and constructed
sufficient, adequate and permanent artificial support in place and stead
thereof to maintain, uphold and preserve the stability of the surface of such
streets, avenues, thoroughfares, courts, alleys, places and public highways.
§ 198-9. Artificial support of buildings or railway lines required.
§ 198-10. Inspection; notice to correct.
Whenever it appears upon inspection by the Bureau of Mine Inspection and
Surface Support, that the coal or natural support underlying any of the
buildings or railway lines referred to in § 198-9 has been already mined
A. No person shall so mine coal or so conduct the operation of mining as to
endanger the safety, security and lives of the people, resident or
visiting, of the city, by mining out, removing and taking away the coal or
other natural support, both vertical and lateral, necessary to uphold
and maintain any city, county, state and federal buildings, passenger
railway lines and stations, hospitals, church and school buildings,
theaters, public libraries, hotels, factories, manufacturing buildings,
museums, Y.M.C.A. and Y.W.C.A. buildings and halls in which the people
are wont to assemble regularly, or from time to time, in large numbers
or underneath any other buildings, without at the same time providing
sufficient, adequate and permanent artificial support to maintain, bear
up and keep firm and stable the surface upon which such buildings or
railway lines rest.
B. The mining and removing of the coal or natural support and the
substitution of such artificial support, shall be done upon inspection
and with the approval of the Bureau of Mine Inspection and Surface
Support.
§ 198-7 COAL AND MINING § 198-10
198:317
out, removed and taken away by any person in such manner and to such
an extent as to render the use and occupation of such buildings and lines
dangerous, then notice shall be served upon such person requiring him to
build, set up and erect suitable proper and sufficient artificial support for
the safe and permanent protection of the surface whereon such buildings
and railway lines are located. The artificial support shall be constructed
under the inspection and with the approval of the Bureau of Mine Inspection
and Surface Support.
§ 198-11. Powers and duties of Bureau.
The powers and duties of the Bureau of Mine Inspection and Surface
Support shall include the inspection, examination, the making of maps,
records and reports of the underground mine workings, at all points within
the city to meet the provisions and requirements of §§ 198-9 and 198-10.
The City Solicitor is hereby directed and required to institute such
proceedings in law or equity as may be necessary to enforce the provisions
of this Article.
§ 198-10 SCRANTON CODE § 198-11
198:318
Chapter 201
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Contractors — See Ch. 203.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 215.
Gas piping standards — See Ch. 272.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 278.
Heating and air-conditioning systems — See
Ch. 290.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 313.
Plumbing — See Ch. 345.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 360.
§ 201-1. Adoption of codes.
The City of Scranton hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the
following codes of the Uniform Construction Code.
A. Pennsylvania Construction Code Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 –
7210.1103, as may be amended from time to time.
B. Title 34, Labor and Industry, PART XIV, Uniform Construction Code,
Chapters 401 - 405, and Annex A Training and Certification, as may be
amended from time to time.
C. International Building Code, 2009 edition, Chapters 2 – 29 and 31 – 35,
as published in the 2009 International Building Code, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
D. Appendix E of the 2009 International Building Code, as published in the
2009 International Building Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
E. Appendix H of the 2009 International Building Code, as published in the
2009 International Building Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
F. Appendix J of the 2009 International Building Code, as published in the
2009 International Building Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
G. International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, as published in the 2009
International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
H. Appendix A of the 2009 International Mechanical Code, as published in
the 2009 International Mechanical Code, published by the International
Code Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
§ 198-11 COAL AND MINING § 201-1
198:319
§ 201-2. Amendments to Part XIV, Uniform Construction Code.38
As permitted under the terms of § 403.102(l), Title 34, Labor and Industry,
which permits a municipality to enact an ordinance which meets or exceeds
I. International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 edition, as published in the 2009
International Fuel Gas Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
J. Appendixes A – C, inclusive, of the 2009 International Fuel Gas Code,
published by the International Code Council, Inc., as may be amended
from time to time.
K. International Plumbing Code, 2009 edition, as published in the 2009
International Plumbing Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
L. Appendixes B – E, inclusive, of the 2009 International Plumbing Code,
as published in the 2009 International Plumbing Code, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
M. International Residential Code, 2009 edition, as published in the 2009
International Residential Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
N. Sections AE501 – AE503 and AE601 - AE605 of Appendix E of the 2009
International Residential Code, as published in the 2009 International
Residential Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as
may be amended from time to time.
O. International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, as published in
the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
P. International Existing Building Code, 2009 edition, as published in the
2009 International Existing Building Code, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
Q. National Electric Code, 2008 edition, as published in the 2008 National
Electric Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA), as may be amended from time to time.
R. International Fire Code, 2009 edition, as published in the 2009
International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council,
Inc., as may be amended from time to time.
S. International Urban-Wildland Interface Code, 2009 edition, as
published in the 2009 International Urban-Wildland Interface Code,
published by the International Code Council, Inc., as may be amended
from time to time.
38.Editor's Note: See 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405.
§ 201-1 SCRANTON CODE § 201-2
198:320
the code in certain designated sections, the City of Scranton hereby adopts
the following amendments to the codes incorporated above as follows:
A. § 403.42. Permit requirements and exemptions[(Commercial) from
§ 403.102(l)(1) above].
The following subsections shall be replaced in their entirety with the
language below:
(b) Emergency repairs or replacement of equipment may be made
without first applying for a permit if a permit application is
submitted to the Building Code Official within one business day of
the repair or replacement.
(c) A permit is required for the exceptions listed in § 403.1(b)
(relating to scope) and a permit is required for the following
construction:
(1) Building construction for the following:
(i) Fences.
(iii) Retaining walls.
(iv) Water tanks.
(v) Sidewalks and driveways.
(ix) Shade-cloth structures constructed for tents, nursery or
agricultural purposes.
(xi) Window awnings.
(xii) Window replacement with or without structural change.
(3) The following gas work:
(iv) Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating
or cooling equipment governed under the Uniform
Construction Code.
In all other respects, § 403.42 shall remain in full force and effect.
B. § 403.42a. Permit application [from § 403.102(l)(2) above].
The following subsections shall be replaced in their entirety with the
language below:
(b) A permit applicant shall submit an application to the Building
Code Official and attach construction documents, including plans
and specifications, and information concerning special inspection
and structural observation programs, Department of
Transportation highway access permits and any other data
required by the Building Code Official with the permit application.
The applicant shall submit two sets of construction documents
with his/her permit application.
(i) A permit applicant shall submit certifications required in the
International Building Code for construction in a flood hazard area
to the Building Code Official and the Zoning Officer.
§ 201-2 COAL AND MINING § 201-2
198:321
In all other respects, § 403.42a. shall remain in full force and effect.
C. § 403.43. Grant, denial and effect of permits [from § 403.102(l)(3)
above].
The following subsection shall be replace in its entirety with the
language below:
(g) A permit becomes invalid unless the authorized construction work
begins within 180 days after the permit's issuance or if the
authorized construction work permit is suspended or abandoned
for 180 days after the work has commenced. A permit holder may
submit a written request for an extension of time to commence
construction for just cause. The Building Code Official may grant
extensions of time to commence construction, which extensions
must be in writing and will be given in writing only. A permit may
not be extended beyond three years from its issue date.
In all other respects, § 403.43 shall remain in full force and effect.
D. § 403.62. Permit requirements and exemptions [(Residential) from
§ 403.102(l)(8) above].
The following subsections shall be replaced in their entirety with the
language below:
(b) Emergency repairs or replacement of equipment may be made
without first applying for a permit if a permit application is
submitted to the Building Code Official within one business day
of the repair or replacement.
(c) A permit is required for the exceptions listed in § 403.1(b)
(relating to scope), and the following construction:
(1) The following building construction, replacement or repairs:
(i) Fences.
(ii) Retaining walls.
(iii) Water tanks.
(iv) Sidewalks and driveways.
(viii) Window awnings.
(xi) Replacement of existing roofing.
(xiii) Replacement of existing siding.
(xiv) Repair or replacement of any part of a porch or stoop
regardless of, whether it structurally supports a roof
located above the porch or stoop.
(xvii) Installation of any deck, whether covered or
uncovered.
(4) The following mechanical work or equipment:
§ 201-2 SCRANTON CODE § 201-2
198:322
§ 201-3. Authority granted.
Authority is hereby granted to submit, complete and execute any and all
documents necessary to fully initiate and comply on an ongoing basis with
the Uniform Construction Codes incorporated hereby.
Chapter 203
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contracting procedures — See Ch. 41.
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 215.
Explosives and blasting agents — See Ch. 221.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
Gas piping standards — See Ch. 272.
Hazardous standards — See Ch. 278.
Heating and air-conditioning systems — See
Ch. 290.
Littering — See Ch. 305.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 313.
Plumbing — See Ch. 345.
Condemned property — See Ch. 359.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 360.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 412.
Zoning — See Ch. 445.
§ 203-1. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in
the plural number include the singular number; words in the singular shall
(iv) Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating
or cooling equipment governed under the Uniform
Construction Code.
(6) The following heating, ventilation and air-conditioning
work.
(i) Replacement of motors, pumps and fans of any
capacity.
(ii) Repair and replacement of heating, supply and
return piping and radiation elements.
(iii) Replacement of ductwork.
(iv) Replacement of air-conditioning equipment and
systems, excluding window units.
In all other respects, § 403.62 shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 201-2 COAL AND MINING § 203-1
198:323
include the plural; and words in the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter.
AGENT or RESPONSIBLE OFFICER — Any director, officer, servant,
employee or other person authorized to act in behalf of the corporation or
association and, in the case of an unincorporated association, a member of
such association.[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
APPRENTICE — A person who is engaged in learning a trade under the
direction or instruction of a master contractor or journeyman and/or who
is enrolled in the United States Department of Labor/Bureau of
Apprenticeship training program.[Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM CONTRACTOR — Any person,
partnership or corporation who offers to contract as an automatic fire
suppression system contractor with another to do automatic fire
suppression work in the City of Scranton; engages in or carries on the
business of installing, erecting, altering, extending, maintaining or
repairing foam, halogenated, wet-spray, wet-chemical extinguishing
systems or a portable fire extinguisher; and who carries on such business
as an automatic fire suppression system contractor, having the final
determination and the full responsibility for the manner in which the work
is done, for the materials used and for the selection, supervision and control
of mechanics employed on the work engaged in by said person, partnership
or corporation.
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM CONTRACTOR — Any person,
partnership or corporation who offers to contract as a fire protection
contractor with another to do fire protection work in the City of Scranton;
engages in or carries on the business of installing, erecting, altering,
extending, maintaining or repairing fire protection systems; and who
carries on such business as a fire protection contractor, having the final
determination and the full responsibility for the manner in which the work
is done, for the materials used and for the selection, supervision and control
of mechanics employed on the work engaged in by said person, partnership
or corporation.
BOARD — The Building Board of Appeals as established through Ordinance
No. 20 of 1964, Section 7.39
BUILDING, PLUMBING, MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL CODE
ADVISORY AND LICENSE BOARD (hereinafter referred to as the "Licensing
Board") — Those appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
City Council. Said Boards shall have the authority to review and approve
applicants for licensing examinations to qualified individuals.
BUREAU — The Bureau of Inspections and Licensing, Department of
Community Development of the City of Scranton.
CARPENTRY CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership, LLC or corporation
who offers to work as a carpentry contractor (after passing the proper
39.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 20-1964 is on file in the City offices.
§ 203-1 SCRANTON CODE § 203-1
198:324
examination) with another to perform rough framing, trusses, sheathing,
metal framing, paneling, trim, cabinetry, doors, windows, stairs and
incidental hardware work conforming to PA UCC standards within the
City of Scranton on residential or commercial buildings. This term shall
not include the construction of new commercial buildings, the removal or
cutting of any structural beam or bearing support on commercial buildings,
nor shall the term mean services related to any plumbing, electrical or
mechanical work in both residential or commercial buildings conforming to
UCC standards.[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
CITY — The City of Scranton.
CONTRACTOR — Any person who undertakes or offers to undertake or
agrees to perform any home improvement, property improvement or
construction.
CORPORATION — A body formed and authorized by law to act as a single
person although constituted by one or more persons and legally endowed
with various rights and duties.
DEMOLITION CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership, LLC or
corporation who offers to work as a demolition contractor (after passing the
proper examination) with another to perform the demolition and removal of
structures and buildings conforming to PA UCC standards within the City
of Scranton on residential or commercial buildings.[Added 12-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 63-2016]
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits
(LIPS).[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
DIRECTOR/BCO — The Director of Licensing, Inspections and Permits and
Building Code Official for the City of Scranton.[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016]
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR — One who shall enforce all provisions of the
Electrical Code as adopted by the City.40 Said official shall have the
administrative authority to promulgate rules and regulations which serve
to interpret or supplement the provisions of the code so long as such
rules conform to the intent of the code. Said official shall act on questions
relative to the installation, alteration, repair, maintenance or operation of
all electrical systems, fire protection signaling systems, emergency lighting,
alarm and communication systems, devices and equipment, as well as other
cases relating to electrical matters. Said official shall issue permits and
direct collection of the respective permit fees.
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership or corporation
who offers to contract as an electrical contractor with another to perform
electrical work within the City of Scranton; engages in or carries on the
business of installing, erecting, altering, extending, maintaining or
repairing electrical, communication and/or fire alarm systems; and who
carries on such business as an electrical contractor, having the final
determination and the full responsibility for the manner in which the work
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Electrical Standards.
§ 203-1 COAL AND MINING § 203-1
198:325
is done, for the materials used and for the selection, supervision and control
of electricians employed on the work engaged in by said person, partnership
or corporation.
FIRE ALARM CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership or corporation who
offers to contract as a fire alarm contractor with another to perform fire
alarm work in the City; engages in or carries on the business of installing,
erecting, altering, extending, maintaining or repairing fire alarm systems,
automatic fire detection systems under 50 volts; and who carries on such
business as a fire alarm contractor, having the final determination and
the full responsibility for the manner in which the work is completed,
for the materials used and for the selection, supervision and control of
mechanics employed on the work engaged in by said person, partnership or
corporation.
GENERAL CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership or corporation who
offers to contract as a general contractor with another to perform general
construction work in the City of Scranton; engages in the construction
and/or repairs and renovations of single- and/or multiple-family dwellings,
commercial, educational, institutional, manufacturing or industrial
buildings; and who carries on such business as a general contractor having
the final determination and the full responsibility for the manner in which
the work is done, for the materials used and for the selection, supervision
and control of subcontractors and mechanics employed on the work
engaged by said person, partnership or corporation.
HOME IMPROVEMENT — The construction, repair, replacement,
alteration, addition, remodeling, conversion, modernization, improvement
of/to any land or residential building; and shall also include the
construction, replacement, or improvement of driveways, swimming pools,
porches, garages, landscaping, fences, fallout shelters and other
improvements to structures or upon land which is adjacent to dwelling.
"Home Improvement" shall not include the sale of goods or materials by a
seller who neither arranges to perform nor performs directly or indirectly
any work or labor in connection with the installation of or application of the
goods or materials.[Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or
written, or contained in one or more documents, between a contractor and
an owner for the performance of a home improvement, and includes all
labor, services and materials to be furnished thereunder.
HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership or
corporation who offers to contract as a Home Improvement Contractor
with another to perform Home Improvement on residential buildings (oneand
two-family dwellings and townhouses) work in the city, engages in
the construction, repair, replacement, alteration, addition, remodeling,
conversion, modernization, improvement to any land or residential building,
driveway, sidewalk, porch, garage landscaping, fence and other
improvement to structures or upon land which is adjacent to a dwelling
house. Said contractor shall carry on such business as a home improvement
contractor having the final determination and the full responsibility for
§ 203-1 SCRANTON CODE § 203-1
198:326
the manner in which the work is done, for the materials used and for the
selection, supervision and control of the mechanics employed on the work
engaged in by said person, partnership or corporation. Home improvement
shall not include the construction of a new home, the demolition of a
residential structure (except those structures exempt from permit
requirements under the UCC), the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means
of egress, or re-arrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exit
requirements, nor shall a home improvement contractor, replace or relocate
any stand pipe, water supply, sewer drainage, gas, waste, vent or similar
piping, electrical wiring or mechanical.[Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016]
JOURNEYMAN — An individual who has sufficient skill and knowledge of a
trade, craft or occupation, either through formal apprenticeship or through
practical on-the-job experience, to be recognized by a state or federal
registration agency and/or an industry as being fully qualified to perform
the work of the trade, craft or occupation.
LICENSEE — Any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
MASONRY CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership or corporation who
contracts as a masonry contractor with another to perform masonry work in
the City of Scranton; engages in or carries on the business of masonry work
which involves the installation of brick, block, stone, slate, brick pavers,
precast stone, preconcrete plank or any other related masonry products;
and who carries on such business as a masonry contractor, having the
final determination and the full responsibility for the manner in which the
work is done, for the materials used and for the selection, supervision and
control of the mechanics employed on the work engaged in by said person,
partnership or corporation.
MECHANICAL INSPECTOR — One who shall enforce all provisions of the
Mechanical Code.41 Said official shall have the administrative authority to
promulgate rules and regulations which serve to interpret or supplement
the provisions of this code so long as such rules conform to the intent of
the code. Said official shall act on questions relative to the installation,
alteration, repair, maintenance or operation of all mechanical systems, fire
protection and fire suppression devices and equipment. Said official shall
issue permits and direct collection of the respective permit fees.
MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership or corporation
who offers to contract as a mechanical contractor with another to perform
mechanical work in the City of Scranton; engages in or carries on the
business of installing, erecting, altering, extending, maintaining or
repairing heating and ventilation systems, air-conditioning systems,
refrigeration systems, process piping and sheet-metal work; and who
carries on such business as a mechanical contractor, having the final
determination and the full responsibility for the manner in which the work
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 313, Mechanical Standards.
§ 203-1 COAL AND MINING § 203-1
198:327
is done, for the materials used and for the selection, supervision and control
of mechanics employed on the work engaged in by said person, partnership
or corporation.
OWNER — Any homeowner, tenant or any other person who orders,
contracts for or purchases the home improvement service of a contractor, or
the person entitled to the performance of the work of a contractor pursuant
to a home improvement contract.
PARTNERSHIP — A legal relation existing between two or more persons
contractually associated as joint principals in a business.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, trust, association,
owner, contractor, salesman or any other legal entity.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — One who enforces all provisions of the Plumbing
Code.42 Said official shall have the administrative authority to promulgate
rules and regulations which serve to interpret or supplement the provisions
of the code so long as such rules and regulations conform to the intent
of the code. Said official shall act on questions relative to the installation,
alteration, repair, maintenance or operation of all plumbing system devices
and related equipment. Said official shall issue permits and direct collection
of the respective permit fees.
PLUMBING CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership or corporation who
offers to contract as a plumbing contractor with another to perform
plumbing work in the City of Scranton; engages in or carries on the business
of plumbing or pipe-fitting work which involves the installation of or the
roughing in or openings for one or more water closets, toilets, sinks,
washtraps, washtubs, washbasins, leader connections, floor drains, septic
tanks or other item or equipment utilizing water or other liquids to carry
away waste or sewage or for any similar purpose or to repair or install water
supply pipes or to repair or install waste sewage lines; and who carries
on such business as a plumbing contractor having the final determination
and the full responsibility for the manner in which the work is done,
for the materials used and for the selection, supervision and control of
mechanics employed on the work engaged in by said person, partnership or
corporation.
PRESIDENT — The chief officer of an organization entrusted with the
direction and administration of its policies.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Also known as a private residence. Residential
building shall be defined as one- and two-family dwellings and
townhouses.[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
RESIDENTIAL CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership, LLC or
corporation who offers to work as a residential contractor (after passing
the proper examination) with another to perform electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical work conforming to PA UCC standards within the City of
Scranton on residential buildings (one- and two-family dwellings and
townhouses). The requirements for a residential contractor shall meet the
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Plumbing.
§ 203-1 SCRANTON CODE § 203-1
198:328
minimum requirements for a journeyman as defined in this chapter. The
term "home improvement" or its meaning shall not apply to a residential
contractor. Residential contractor will replace the term journeyman
contractor.[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
ROOFING CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership, LLC or corporation
who offers to work as a roofing contractor (after passing the proper
examination) with another to perform the installation, repair, and
replacement of roof coverings, including roof deck installation, roof coating,
painting, covering, and installation of nonstructural decking and siding
work conforming to PA UCC standards within the City of Scranton on
residential or commercial buildings.[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
SECURITY AND COMMUNICATION CONTRACTOR — Any person,
partnership or corporation who offers to contract as a security and
communication contractor with another to perform security and
communication work in the City of Scranton; engages in or carries on
the business of installing, erecting, altering, extending, maintaining or
repairing security systems and/or telephone systems under 50 volts; and
who carries on such business as a security and communication contractor,
having the final determination and the full responsibility for the manner
in which the work is done, for the materials used and for the selection,
supervision and control of mechanics employed on the work engaged in by
said person, partnership or corporation.
SECRETARY — An officer of a business concern who may keep records
of directors' and stock holders' meetings, stock ownership and/or help
supervise the company's legal interests.
SPECIALLY CONTRACTOR — Any person, partnership, LLC or corporation
who offers to work as a specialty contractor (after passing the proper
examination, or properly demonstrating proof of experience or receiving
a specific certification) with another to perform contracting work within
a specifically defined field conforming to PA UCC standards and related
City ordinances within the City of Scranton on residential or commercial
buildings. Said contractor's license is for work solely performed for a
specific field in building and construction. This term shall not include the
construction of new commercial buildings, the removal or cutting of any
structural beam or bearing support on commercial buildings, or the removal
or change of any required change means of egress on commercial buildings,
nor shall the term mean services related to any plumbing, electrical or
mechanical work in both residential or commercial buildings conforming to
UCC standards. A specialty contractor shall include, inter alia, accessibility
contractor, specialty roofing or hvac contractor, environmental remediation
contractor, paving contractor, etc.[Added 5-4-2017 by Ord. No. 98-2017]
THIRD PARTY AGENCY — A certified business or company outside the
City that is contracted with the City to perform specific duties.[Added
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
TREASURER — The executive financial officer of a business concern.
§ 203-1 COAL AND MINING § 203-1
198:329
VICE PRESIDENT — An officer next in rank to a president and empowered
to serve as president in that officer's absence or disability.
§ 203-2. Contractor's license.
A. A contractor's license shall be a license issued to a contractor as herein
defined, who by passing the required examination and tests has
qualified as a competent contractor. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016]
(1) In the case of a partnership, the required examination and test
shall be taken and passed by at least one partner, and the
contractor's license shall be issued to that individual as a
representative of the partnership the partner must show proof of
ownership or show proof of being an authorized agent of the
partnership, the individual is licensed, not the partnership.
(2) In the case of a corporation, the required examination and test
shall be taken and passed by at least one partner, and the
contractor's license shall be issued to that individual as a
representative of the corporation the partner must show proof of
ownership or show proof of being an authorized agent of the
corporation, the individual is licensed, not the corporation
(3) The following categories of contractors shall take a written
examination to determine the individual's qualifications on the
theory and practice of contracting work, or demonstrate proof of
experience in said field to be determined at the discretion of the
Director of LIPs, or certification in said field by the Department of
Labor and Industry or other similar certified organization
recognized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or another state.
Any person wishing to sit for an examination must possess the
practical experience and requirements, as defined by this chapter,
in order to be qualified to take the examination. Contractors
include: [Amended 5-4-2017 by Ord. No. 98-2017]
(a) General.
(b) Master plumbing.
(c) Master mechanical.
(d) Fire alarm.
(e) Automatic fire suppression.
(f) Automatic sprinkler.
(g) Masonry.
(h) Demolition.
(i) Roofing.
§ 203-1 SCRANTON CODE § 203-2
198:330
(j) Carpentry.
(k) Residential.
(l) Specialty.
(4) Alternate means for a Master Contractor license: Any licensed
journeyman for which said journeyman has held a valid continual
license for a period of eight years or more and that has the
following information in addition to the existing application
requirements shall be exempt from the requirements of taking the
masters test and shall be granted a master contactor license.
Additional requirements shall be:
(a) W-2 forms for the 10 plus years to submit as proof. In the case
where W-2 forms cannot be provided, notarized referral letters
from a licensed/master contractor(s) for whom the applicant
was employed may be a substitute.
(b) Letters of referral/recommendation by:
[1] Any master and/or licensed contractor for whom a
contractor was employed for a period of three years or
more.
[2] One authorized third party inspection agency.
[3] Five letters from customers the contractor has performed
work for.
[4] Three letters from contractors in the construction field
(separate fields preferred).
[5] One letter from licensed design professional within the
state of Pennsylvania (engineer, architect etc.).
(c) Referral letters should include but limited to: number of years
employed, extent of such experience, professionalism, quality
of work performed, reliability, and competence in the said field.
All referral/recommendation letters shall be notarized.
B. Experience and education. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
(1) Any person wishing to apply for a contractor's license, including,
but not limited to the following categories, (general construction,
residential construction, plumbing, mechanical, masonry,
demolition, roofing and carpentry) shall have had at least four
years of practical experience gained while employed in contracting
work. The applicant must produce their W-2 forms for these four
years of employment under a master and/or licensed contractor. In
the case where the W-2 forms cannot be provided with just cause,
field experience along with letters of recommendations shall be a
§ 203-2 COAL AND MINING § 203-2
198:331
substitute. Letters of recommendation shall include: two letters
from licensed contractors that they worked under, three letters
from customers that they performed work for and a letter of
recommendation from a contractor in another field. If the applicant
had only worked for one master contractor during their work
experience then one letter of recommendation shall be sufficient.
All referral/recommendation letters shall be notarized.
(2) Satisfactory completion of four years of college covering
contracting work shall be equivalent to three years of practical
experience. Proof of education must be submitted when applying.
C. Applicants for a license shall be at least 18 years old.
D. Applicants for an initial contractor's license in any field shall attain a
passing grade of 70% in such examination as the Director/BCO requires
and shall secure a license within 30 days of examination result
notification. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
E. Every apprentice shall register his or her name and address with the
Licensing, Inspections and Permits Department and must renew such
registration annually. The fees for the original registration document,
and for annual renewal of the same, shall be established by the
Director/BCO to cover the administrative costs of issuing such
documents. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
F. Subcontractors. Subcontractors working for a prime contractor shall
have a contractor's license issued by the City.
G. No license shall be transferable.
H. A single license shall not be used to qualify more than one entity to
perform contracting work within the City, i.e., an individual who
possesses a valid license shall not be permitted to perform work as a
sole proprietor and as a partner. This example used for illustrative
purposes only and is not intended to cover every situation which may
arise under this subsection.
I. An apprentice shall be supervised by a master or journeyman of the
trade. A master or journeyman may not supervise more than three
apprentices on the job site. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
J. All licensed contractors shall prominently display their license ID
number on their work vehicle. [Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
K. The Director/BCO shall have the discretion to issue a license for just
cause in the event certain required information pertaining to
contractor's licenses cannot be produced. [Added 12-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 63-2016]
§ 203-2 SCRANTON CODE § 203-3
198:332
§ 203-3. Application for license; one-time license; requirements for
different types of licenses.
A. License required. Except as otherwise specifically exempted by the
provisions of this chapter, no person shall act in the capacity of a
contractor or journeyman unless said person possesses a valid license
and is authorized to do so by a license issued in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Application for license. No license shall be issued by any Licensing
Board unless the applicant files an application setting forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) Trade name, if applicable, and business address of the applicant.
(3) Proof of the amount of any technical school training in contracting
work received by the applicant.
(4) Proof of the amount of practical experience received in contracting
work gained by the applicant.
(5) Social security number of the applicant.
(6) City, state and federal employer identification number, if any, of the
applicant's business.
(7) Any other information that the Director/BCO deems necessary to
determine the eligibility of the applicant. [Amended 12-15-2016
by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(8) Proof of general liability insurance. [Added 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016]
(9) Test results for said trade. [Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
C. One-time license. [Amended 12-18-2014 by Ord. No. 69-2014;
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) The Director/BCO may issue a onetime license to an individual not
normally doing contracting work in the City, after the applicant's
application has been reviewed by the Director/BCO. This onetime
license shall be for a specific job or construction and validity of the
onetime license will terminate upon completion of the work. Said
work shall be work which shall be permissible under on permit at
one location. Should said individual desire to obtain further work in
the City, he shall be required to fulfill all requirements as defined
by this chapter. The fee for said onetime license shall be $400 per
file of the Council No. 69, 2014.
(2) In order to be considered for a onetime license, the applicant shall
submit proof of his eligibility to the Director/BCO. Said proof shall
include, though not be limited to the following:
§ 203-3 COAL AND MINING § 203-3
198:333
(a) Valid contractor's license equivalent to that of the City issued
by another municipality to the applicant; or
(b) If not from another municipality, proof of experience in said
field. Experience shall meet the minimum requirements for a
journeyman as defined in this chapter.
D. Requirements for journeyman license.
(1) Any person applying for a journeyman license must meet the
following requirements:
(a) The applicant shall have served at least four years of
experience as an apprentice and has worked under the
direction or instruction of a master and must have completed a
United States Department of Labor/Bureau of Apprenticeship
and training registered apprenticeship program.
(b) The applicant must produce their W-2 forms for these four
years of employment under a master and/or licensed
contractor. In the case where the W-2 forms cannot be
provided with just cause, field experience along with letters of
recommendation shall be a substitute. Letters of
recommendation shall include: two letters from licensed
contractors that they worked under, three letters from
customers that they performed work for and a letter of
recommendation from a contractor in another field. If the
applicant had only worked for one master and/or licensed
contractor during their work experience then one letter of
recommendation shall be sufficient. All referral/
recommendation letters shall be notarized.
(c) Satisfactory completion of four years of college covering
contracting, plumbing, mechanical or electrical trade work
shall be equivalent to two years of practical experience. Proof
of education must be submitted when applying.
(d) After successfully passing the proper examination or the
submission of a certificate of completion or diploma from an
accredited trade school and a letter of recommendation from
the applicant's internship and employer, the applicant shall be
granted a journeyman's license.
(2) A journeyman, upon presenting his W-2 forms showing satisfactory
proof that he has been working as a journeyman for a licensed
contractor in the City of Scranton in his respective trade for at least
four years, is qualified to take the journeyman test. These four
years must be consecutive.
(3) After proper examination, a qualified applicant shall be granted a
journeyman's license.
§ 203-3 SCRANTON CODE § 203-3
198:334
(4) Any journeyman who has successfully completed a United States
Department of Labor/Bureau of Apprenticeship program is exempt
from taking the journeyman's test, provided that he show proof of
that education.
E. Requirements for master plumber license. Any person applying for a
master plumber license in the City must meet the following
requirements: [Amended 10-26-2006 by Ord. No. 52-2006;
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) After successful completion of the examination, a qualified
applicant shall be granted a master plumber license by the
Director/BCO.
(2) All applicants must show proof of property damage and public
liability insurance amounting to $500,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per occurrence.
F. Requirements for master mechanical contractor license. Any person
applying for a master mechanical contractor license in the City must
meet the following requirements: [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
(1) After successful completion of an examination, a qualified applicant
shall be granted a mechanical contactor license by the Director/
BCO.
(2) All applicants must show proof of property damage and public
liability insurance amounting to $500,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per occurrence.
G. Requirements for general contractor's license. Any person applying for
a general contractor's license in the City must meet the following
requirements: [Amended 10-26-2006 by Ord. No. 52-2006;
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) The applicant must provide a certificate from an accredited trade
school or an associate's degree in project management, applicant
must provide proof of working in the field for an amount of four
years and of the four years, must show proof of having a
supervision position on the job site for at least one year.
(2) After successful completion of examination, a qualified applicant
shall be granted a general contractor license by the Director/BCO.
(3) All applicants must show proof of property damage and public
liability insurance amounting to $500,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per occurrence.
H. Requirements for general contractor's licenses and home improvement
license. Any person applying for a general contractor's or home
improvement license in the City must meet the following requirements:
§ 203-3 COAL AND MINING § 203-3
198:335
(1) The applicant must hold a current City journeyman carpenter's
license for a period of one year before taking the masters test. This
requirement shall be waived if an applicant possesses a valid,
current, general contractor license issued by another competent
jurisdiction whose licensing standards for a general contractor are
determined to be equivalent to those used by the Bureau.
(2) After successful completion of the examination, a qualified
applicant shall be granted a masonry license by the Director/BCO.
[Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(3) All applicants must show proof of property damage and public and
liability insurance amounting to $500,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per occurrence. [Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
I. Requirements for home improvement contractors. Any person applying
for a home improvement license in the City must meet the following
requirements: [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) Must provide the Licensing, Inspections and Permits Department a
copy of the home improvement registration certificate from the
Pennsylvania Attorney General's Department.
(2) Must provide the Licensing, Inspections and Permits Department a
copy of the applicant's photo identification.
(3) Must provide the Licensing, Inspections and Permits Department a
copy of general liability insurance.
J. Requirements for demolition contractors. Any person applying for a
demolition license in the City must meet the following requirements:
[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) After successful completion of examination, a qualified applicant
shall be granted a demolition contractor license by the Director/
BCO.
(2) All applicants must show proof of property damage and public
liability insurance amounting to $500,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per occurrence.
K. Requirements for roofing contractors. Any person applying for a roofing
license in the City must meet the following requirements: [Added
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) After successful completion of examination, a qualified applicant
shall be granted a roofing contractor license by the Director/BCO.
(2) All applicants must show proof of property damage and public
liability insurance amounting to $500,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per occurrence.
§ 203-3 SCRANTON CODE § 203-3
198:336
§ 203-4. Persons presently working as journeymen. [Amended
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
Any person presently working as a journeyman in the City in the mechanical
and plumbing trades as herein defined, may make application to the
Licensing, Inspections and Permits Department within 180 days after the
passage of present amendment, and may, without being tested, be granted
a journeyman license upon presenting his W-2 forms showing satisfactory
proof that they have been working as a journeyman for a license contactor
in the City in his respective trade for at least four years prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 203-5. Exceptions to license requirements for public utility
companies.
No contractor's license shall be required by any public utility company when
acting within the scope of providing public utility services. A license will be
required when any public utility company performs work which is outside
of the scope of providing public utility services in the capacity of a private
contractor.
§ 203-6. License fees.
L. Requirements for carpentry contractors. Any person applying for a
carpentry license in the City must meet the following requirements:
[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) After successful completion of examination, a qualified applicant
shall be granted a carpentry contractor license by the Director/
BCO.
(2) All applicants must show proof of property damage and public
liability insurance amounting to $500,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per occurrence.
M. Requirements for a specialty contractor. Any person applying for a
specialty license in the City must meet the following requirements:
[Added 5-4-2017 by Ord. No. 98-2017]
(1) After successful completion of examination, an applicant properly
demonstrates proof of experience in said field, at the discretion of
the Director of LIPs, or if the applicant received and shows proof of
certification in said field from the Department of Labor and
Industry or other similar certified organization recognized by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or another state, a qualified
applicant shall be granted a specialty contractor license by the
Director/BCO.
(2) All applicants must show proof of property damage and public
liability insurance amounting to $500,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per occurrence.
§ 203-3 COAL AND MINING § 203-6
198:337
A. Examination fee. At the time of filing an application for an examination,
each applicant shall pay the sum of $150. Said sum shall be deemed to
be the cost of such examination and shall not be refunded if the
applicant shall fail to present himself for examination or to obtain a
passing grade. [Amended 12-18-2014 by Ord. No. 69-2014]
B. License fee. Before any license shall be issued to an approved applicant,
the applicant shall pay a fee, as hereinafter provided, payable to the
City of Scranton. The license fee which must be paid is as follows:
[Amended 12-18-2014 by Ord. No. 69-2014; 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016; 5-4-2017 by Ord. No. 98-2017]
Type Fee
General contractor's license $250
Master plumber license $250
Mechanical contractor's license $250
Electrical contractor's license $250
Masonry contractor's license $250
Sign contractor's license $250
False alarm contractor's license $250
Automatic fire suppression
contractor's license
$250
Automatic sprinkler contractor's
license
$250
Refrigeration contractor's license $250
Journeyman's license (annual) $50
Apprentice registration fee
(annual)
$25
Late fee $50 (if not submitted by March 31
each year)
Contractor's test $150
Journeyman's test $150
One-time license $400
Home improvement contractor's
license
$150 (effective January 1, 2017).
Demolition contractor's license $200 (effective January 1, 2017)
Roofing contractor's license $200 (effective January 1, 2017)
Carpentry contractor's license $200 (effective January 1, 2017)
Masonry contractor's license $200
Residential contractor's license $200
Specialty contractor's license $150
§ 203-6 SCRANTON CODE § 203-6
198:338
C. For contractors holding more than one license in the City of Scranton,
the fee shall be as follows: [Amended 12-18-2014 by Ord. No.
69-2014]
Number Fee
1 license $250
Second license $200
Third license $175
D. Each license shall be renewable between the first and 31st day of
December of each and every year and shall be issued for a term of one
year.
E. Each license shall continue in force only so long as the same
representative continues to be associated with the license holder.
F. When one or more licenses are issued to officers of a partnership or
corporation, only one license shall be valid during the period of time he
is an officer of that partnership or corporation. If the active license is
suspended or revoked under the provisions of this chapter, no other
license shall be made active which is held by the partnership or
corporation.
G. When a license is not renewed by the date of expiration, the Bureau will
notify the contractor by mail at his last known address that his license
has expired.
H. The license issued hereunder may be renewed without examination,
provided application for such renewal is accompanied by the renewal
fee prescribed hereinafter and submitted to the City before the
expiration of the current license. Cost of the renewal fee shall be as
follows: [Amended 12-18-2014 by Ord. No. 69-2014]
Type Fee
All contractor licenses $250
I. Inactive license.
(1) All contractors may apply for an inactive license. Any contractor
who is issued this inactive license cannot apply for any permits to
do work in the City. However, they may reactivate their license by
applying to the Bureau of Inspections and Licensing and paying the
full fee for that particular year.
(2) In order to avoid reexamination for a license, any person who
desires to maintain an inactive status must remit the following fees
to the Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits:
[Amended 12-18-2014 by Ord. No. 69-2014]
(a) All contractor's inactive licenses: $150.
§ 203-6 COAL AND MINING § 203-7
198:339
§ 203-7. Permits.
A. No person shall perform any contracting work within the City unless he
first obtains a permit from the Bureau.
B. When required. It shall be unlawful to construct, alter, repair, add to,
remove or demolish or to commence the construction, alteration, repair,
addition, removal or demolition of a building or structure or to install,
repair, alter, enlarge or replace any equipment related to the operation
of a building or structure, including gas, electric or water appliances,
heating systems, ventilating systems, air-conditioning systems,
sprinkler and refrigeration systems, power facilities, sanitation, toilet
and drainage facilities, signs and outdoor display structures, or use of
services afforded by a public utility, or any land development, grading,
excavating or blacktopping, without first filing with the Bureau an
application, in writing, and obtaining a formal permit.
C. Permit application form. An application for a building permit shall be
filed with the Bureau by the property owner or a licensed contractor
employed in his respective field by the property owner in connection
with the proposed work. An application must be signed by the property
owner or his agent, and, in the case of a permit being issued to a
licensed contractor employed by the property owner, the application
must be signed by the contractor. An application for a permit for an
electrical installation must be filed by a master electrician. An
application for a permit for a plumbing or heating installation must be
filed by a master plumber or mechanical contractor. At a minimum, the
following information must be contained on said application:
(1) The full names, addresses and contact information of the applicant
and of the owner or owners and, if the owner is a corporation, or its
authorized agent(s)/officer(s). Agents and officers must provide
valid proof that they are the responsible party/agent for the
corporation. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(2) The location and intended use of the building or structure, with a
pertinent description of the land and number of sublet, allotment,
name of owner and street, and of each of the owners of such
building, structure or premises.
(3) A description of the proposed work and such additional information
as may be required by the Director/BCO, Zoning Officer, plumbing,
mechanical and third party agency to aid said officials in their
decision to issue a permit for the proposed work. [Amended
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(4) In the event that the application is filed by the property owner's
licensed contractor employed in connection with the proposed
work, a signed contract between the owner and the contractor
employed in connection with the proposed work must accompany
said application. If the owner is a corporation, said contract must
§ 203-7 SCRANTON CODE § 203-7
198:340
be signed by one of its responsible officers and the contractor
employed in connection with the proposed work.
(5) The estimated cost to complete the proposed work, including
materials and labor. In the event that the proposed work is being
done by the owner, the cost should be as if a contractor was
performing the proposed work. If the application for a permit
should fail to give the correct estimated cost of the work for which
a permit is required, it shall be the duty of the Master Code Official
to make the estimates to the best of his ability and add to the cost of
the work to be performed.
(6) Proof of current insurance coverage provided by the applicant.
(7) The permit applicant must answer yes or no as to whether the said
property is a condemned property in the City. [Added 12-15-2016
by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(8) The permit applicant must answer whether the said property is
located within a floodplain zone in the City. [Added 12-15-2016
by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(9) The permit applicant must provide tax/map identification number.
[Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(10) The permit applicant must answer whether said work is being done
to an existing or new business. [Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
D. Issuance of the permit.
(1) Before any permit will be issued to the applicant, the following
shall be submitted to the Director/BCO. [Amended 12-15-2016
by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(a) Zoning approval.
(b) Sewer planning modules.
(c) Site plan stamped and certified by a registered surveyor.
(d) Erosion and sedimentation control plan (residential).
(e) Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control plan approved by the Lackawanna County
Conservation District (commercial only).
(f) Geotechnical report (commercial only).
(g) Drawings and specifications to include architectural,
plumbing, mechanical, sprinkler and electrical stamped and
certified by a registered professional in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 203-7 COAL AND MINING § 203-7
198:341
(h) Any other documents that Director/BCO requires for
consideration.
(i) A signed copy of the contract on which the permitted work is
being performed.
(2) Every permit shall be reviewed by the Director/BCO. No permit
shall be issued until all of the appropriate inspectors have reviewed
the permit application and approved said application. [Amended
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(3) The application and final drawings and specifications have been
reviewed and approved by the Director/BCO as showing
compliance with the applicable provisions of this article and have
been approved by any other appropriate agency as showing
compliance with any other applicable previsions of the current
Uniform Construction Code (Pa. Act 45). [Amended 12-15-2016
by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(4) All contractors shall show satisfactory proof of property damage
and public liability insurance amounting to $500,000 per person
and $1,000,000 per occurrence.
(5) It shall be that responsibility of the licensed contractor to secure
the permit. In the event that the home owner is performing the
home improvement work, the permit may be secured by said owner
or its authorized agent(s). Agents and officers must provide valid
proof that they are the responsible party for the corporation.
[Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(6) Upon the filing of a written application in such form as the
Licensing, Inspections and Permits Department shall require, and
upon payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued, one
copy thereof to be conspicuously posted upon the premises where
the work is being done, until the work done has been inspected and
approved by the Director/BCO, authorized third party inspection
agency, mechanical and plumbing inspectors and a certificate of
occupancy or release of condemnation certificate has been issued
by such officials filed with the City. [Amended 12-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 63-2016]
E. Workers' compensation insurance. Prior to issuing a building permit to
a contractor, the contractor must present one of the following:
(1) Proof of workers' compensation insurance; or
(2) An affidavit that the contractor does not employ other individuals
and is not required to carry workers' compensation insurance.
F. Posting of the permit. A true copy of the building permit shall be kept on
the site of operations, open to public inspection during the entire time
of performance of the work and until the completion of the same.
§ 203-7 SCRANTON CODE § 203-7
198:342
G. Notice of start. At least 24 hours' notice of start of work under a
building permit shall be given to the Code Official.
H. Conditions of permit.
(1) A permit shall not be issued until the fees have been paid.
(2) The permit shall be a license to proceed with the work and shall not
be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the
provisions of the code, except as specifically stipulated by
modification or legally granted variation as described in the
application.
(3) All work shall conform to the approved application and the
approved construction documents for which the permit has been
issued and any approved amendments to the approved application
or the approved construction documents.
(4) All new work shall be located strictly in accordance with the
approved site plan.
I. Conformance to Code. All work performed shall be in conformity with
the provisions of the most recently approved Uniform Construction
Code (UCC) applicable to the type of work to be performed.
Additionally, all other local, state and federal standards applicable to
the work to be performed must be strictly adhered to. The City reserves
the right to modify any standards contained in state, federal, or
Uniform Construction Code provisions. Said modifications shall be
enumerated by the Director/BCO and made available to all interested
persons by request from the Department. [Amended 12-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 63-2016]
J. Permit to erect part of a building. Nothing in these regulations shall be
construed to prevent the Code Official from issuing a permit for the
erection of any part of the building or structure, where plans and
detailed statements have been presented for the same, before the
entire plans and detailed statements of the building or structure have
been submitted, provided that a complete set of all such plans and
specifications shall be placed on file before the foundation wall is
brought to grade, or to height to receive the first tier of beams, girders
or joists; however, no permit shall be issued for erection of the
superstructure of any building above the foundation or basement wall
until all copies of approved plans and specifications and details
required by the provisions of these building regulations are placed on
file in the office of the Bureau.
K. Fee schedule for permits. [Amended 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
242-2003; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 98-2009; 12-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 68-201443]
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it become effective 1-1-2015.
§ 203-7 COAL AND MINING § 203-7
198:343
§ 203-8. Revocation of permits; expiration.
(1) The permit fee includes the state fee of $4 as per Act 45.
(2) The permit fee shall be based on the cost of proposed labor and
materials as follows. All costs are rounded off to the next higher
thousand.
Cost Fee
$1 to $300 $30
$301 to $600 $40
$601 to $1,000 $50
$1,001 to $75,000 $50 for the first $1,000 plus $15
for each additional thousand
$75,001 to $500,000 $1,185 for the first $76,000 plus
$14 for each additional
thousand
Over $500,000 $7,148 for the first $501,000
plus $13 for each additional
thousand
(3) Residential-only permit for hot-water heater: $5.
A. The Department may revoke any permit granted under this article
when: [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) Any work for which a permit is granted which is done in violation of
this chapter or work which is not in compliance with the approved
final drawings or work which is being done in an unsafe and
dangerous manner.
(2) Any condition of the permit is violated.
(3) Expiration. Every permit issued by the Director/BCO or his
authorized representatives shall expire by limitation and become
null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced
for a period of six months.
B. Expiration.
(1) Every permit issued by the Master Code Official, Director of
Community Development or their authorized representatives shall
expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or
work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any
time after the work is commenced for a period of six months.
(2) Before work can resume, a new permit shall be obtained to do so,
and the fee to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one half the
amount required for a new permit for such work, provided on
§ 203-7 SCRANTON CODE § 203-8
198:344
§ 203-9. Denial of additional permits. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016]
The Director/BCO or his authorized representative shall maintain a record
of violation notices issued to licensed contractors and corrective actions
taken. The Director/BCO or his authorized representative shall, upon
receipt of an application for a permit, determine if said contractor is in
receipt of any violation notice upon which corrective action has not been
taken. The Director/BCO or his authorized representative shall deny any
new permits to the licensed contractor until all outstanding violations of
the ordinance and any other applicable codes and ordinances have been
corrected.
§ 203-10. Work done without permit. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016]
§ 203-11. Stop-work order; fines; disputes. [Amended 12-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 63-2016]
Any person who shall perform any work in or about the structure without
first securing a permit for said work shall be issued a stop-work order and
be liable for a fine of $50 if paid within 24 hours. After 72 hours, the fine
shall be $100. If said fine is not paid within 30 days, said person shall be
liable for a fine of not more than $2,000. Each day that said violation shall
continue a separate offense and shall be liable for a fine of not more than
$1,000. Said fines are payable to the Department of Licensing, Inspections
changes have been made in the original plans and specifications
for such work; and provided further that such suspensions or
abandonment has not exceeded six months. [Amended
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(3) A permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for a one-time
extension provided he can show good and satisfactory reasons, and
beyond his control the work cannot be commenced within the sixmonth
period from the issue date. In order to renew work on a
permit after it has expired, the permittee shall pay a new full
permit fee. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
A. Licensed contractors shall not engage in any work requiring a permit
unless such permit shall have been issued by the Director/BCO, Zoning
Officer, Mechanical or Plumbing inspectors. Any licensed contractor
who shall engage in work requiring a permit shall, if such permit has
not been issued, be subject to the conditions set forth in § 203-13C in
addition to the penalties prescribed under this chapter.
B. Any unlicensed contractor who shall engage in any work for which a
permit is required and such permit has not been issued, shall not be
licensed by the Director/BCO until a period of one year has elapsed
from the date of filing of application for a license in addition to the
penalties prescribed thereafter.
§ 203-8 COAL AND MINING § 203-11
198:345
and Permits. Failure to make payment within the time frame provided, a
citation shall be filed with the Magisterial District Judge.
§ 203-12. Certificate of occupancy (CO) and temporary certificate of
occupancy (TCO).
A. Notice of violation. If the Director/BCO finds that the terms of a permit
are being violated, he shall order the whole or any part of the work
which is being done under the permit to be immediately stopped. The
stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of
the property involved, or to the person doing the work and shall state
the conditions under which the work will be permitted to resume.
B. Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than
$500 and not more than $10,000. Said fines are payable to the
Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits. Failure to make
payment within the time frame provided, a citation shall be filed with
the Magisterial District Judge.
C. Disputes.
(1) If a permit has been issued to a contractor and a dispute should
arise between the contractor and the property owner, the Director/
BCO shall make an on-site inspection of the work site and certify
that all work performed under the current permit is in compliance
with these building regulations.
(2) In the event that the inspection reveals that the work performed
under the current permit is not in compliance with these building
regulations, the Director/BCO shall notify the contractor, in
writing, to correct all violations as specified by the Director/BCO
within the period set forth, prior to the issuance of another permit.
Any person failing or refusing to make the corrections as specified
by the Director/BCO within the period set forth shall be subject to
revocation of their license and shall be liable for all fines as
hereinafter provided.
A. For any new or existing commercial or residential building or space
which requests or requires a certificate of occupancy a general
inspection shall first be performed. Upon completion of the building,
structure or space and before issuance of the certificate of occupancy, a
final inspection shall be made. When the building or structure has been
deemed to be in compliance with the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code (UCC), and all current City Zoning, Planning, and
Property Maintenance Codes and related City ordinances are in
compliance, the Director/BCO shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
§ 203-11 SCRANTON CODE § 203-12
198:346
§ 203-13. Prohibited acts.
B. The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $250 for residential
buildings and $350 for commercial buildings. Said fee shall also
comprise the inspection process related to the CO.
C. A building, structure or facility shall not be occupied or used without
first obtaining a certificate of occupancy. Any person, corporation or
other entity who shall use or occupy a building, structure, facility or
space without first obtaining a certificate of occupancy, shall be liable of
a fine of not less than $500 and no more than $10,000. Each day the
violation continues will be considered a separate offense. Said fines are
to be paid within 10 days upon notice of violation. Said fines are payable
to the Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits. Failure to
make payment within the time frame provided, a citation shall be filed
with the Magisterial District Judge.
D. The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be $150.
E. If an existing building and/or space has not changed its use
classification as per the Uniform Construction Code (UCC) and said use
only requires a change of information, a Certificate of Occupancy shall
be $50. This shall only apply when change of ownership and active
operation does not exceed 180 days since it was last occupied and
operated as such use. Building space and use classification shall require
an inspection for verification and code compliance by the Department
of Licensing, Inspections and Permits and/or other third party agency.
The above shall also apply to those applicants seeking a duplicate and/
or replacement of a certificate of occupancy.
A. The following acts are prohibited:
(1) Abandonment or willful failure to perform without jurisdiction any
home improvement contract or project engaged in or undertaken
by a contractor; or willful deviation from or disregard of plans or
specifications in any material respect without the consent of the
owner.
(2) Making any substantial misrepresentation in the procurement of a
home improvement contact, or making false promise of character
likely to influence, persuade or induce.
(3) Any fraud in the execution of or in the material alteration of any
contract, mortgage, promissory note or other document incident to
a home improvement transaction.
(4) Preparing or accepting any mortgage, promissory note or other
evidence of indebtedness upon the obligation of a home
improvement transaction with the knowledge that it recites a
greater monetary obligation than the consideration for the home
improvement work, which consideration may be a time sale price.
§ 203-12 COAL AND MINING § 203-13
198:347
§ 203-14. Grounds for refusal, revocation or suspension of licenses.
(5) Directly or indirectly publishing any advertisement relating to
home improvements which contains an assertion, representation or
statement of fact which is false, deceptive or misleading; provided
that any advertisement which is subject to and complies with the
then existing rules, regulations or guides of the Federal Trade
Commission shall not be deemed false, deceptive or misleading; or
by any means advertising or purporting to offer the general public
any home improvement work with the intent not to accept
contracts for the particular work or at the price which is advertised
or offered to the public.
(6) Willful or deliberate disregard and violation of the building laws of
this state or of this City or of the safety or labor workmen's
compensation insurance laws of this state.
(7) Doing any home improvement business with or through any person
who is subject to the licensing requirements of this chapter with
the knowledge that such person is not licensed as required.
(8) Misrepresentation of a material fact by an applicant in obtaining a
license.
(9) Failure to notify the Director/BCO of any change of control in
ownership, management or business name or location. [Amended
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(10) Conducting a home improvement business in any name other than
the one in which the contractor or salesman is licensed.
(11) Failure to comply with any order, demand or requirement lawfully
made by the Director/BCO under the authority of this chapter.
[Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
B. Violation of any of the prohibitions of this section:
(1) Shall subject any violator to whom the licensing provisions of this
chapter apply to the administrative sanctions of this chapter; and
(2) Shall subject any violator, whether or not required to be licensed by
this chapter, to criminal prosecution.
A. The Director/BCO, at his discretion shall have the power to refuse,
suspend or revoke any licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter where the Director/BCO and/or Department finds that the
licensee has violated any provisions of this chapter or is performing or
attempting to perform any act prohibited by this chapter. [Amended
12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
B. Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter upon the part of
any director, manager, partner, officer, salesman, agent or employee of
a contractor shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license of
§ 203-13 SCRANTON CODE § 203-14
198:348
§ 203-15. Procedure in case of violations; appeals.
the contractor, unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the Director/
BCO that the individuals engaged in the management of the contractor.
[Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct, or
(2) Were unable to prevent the violation.
C. On a first offense, a contractor's license shall be suspended for a period
of one to three months. On the second offense, a contractor's license
shall be suspended for a mandatory six months. A third offense shall
constitute an immediate revocation of a contractor's license.
D. The Director/BCO shall have the authority to immediately revoke a
contractor's license for just cause for what the Director/BCO considers
a severe violation of this chapter. [Added 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
63-2016]
A. Procedure in case of violations. Whenever the Director/BCO determines
that there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been a violation
of any provision on this chapter, or of any rules and regulations adopted
thereto, he shall proceed as follows: [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016]
(1) Serve notice in writing of the alleged violation which shall be
signed by the Director/BCO or his authorized representative. Said
notice shall be in writing and shall be served personal to the
responsible party, or served by registered or certified mail with a
return receipt requested or where such responsible party cannot
be found, by posting the notice in a conspicuous location on said
premises, or service may be made by publishing such notice in a
newspaper of general circulation for a period of three consecutive
days; or served by any other method authorized under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Said notice shall contain the section of the reasons why the notice
is being issued, the section of the codes and/or ordinances which
have been violated and the remedial actions required.
B. Any applicant or licensed contractor aggrieved by any decisions of the
Director/BCO, including but not limited to refusal or suspension of
license or permit, or any other repeal, may appeal from such decision to
the LIPs Board of Appeals within 10 days from the date of decision. The
forms for appeal may be obtained at the Department of Licensing,
Inspections and Permits. Upon completion, all appeal forms must be
submitted with a nonrefundable fee of $300. [Amended 12-15-2016
by Ord. No. 63-2016]
(1) Any person making an appeal to the Board of Appeals will be
notified when to appear before the Board within 30 days. The Board
§ 203-14 COAL AND MINING § 203-15
198:349
§ 203-16. Inspections. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
will hold a public hearing and upon evidence of testimony
submitted will render a decision. The Director/BCO will notify the
said party in writing of the Board's decision. Any party not in
compliance with a decision regarding extensions of time from the
Board of Appeals shall be subject to the penalties of this chapter.
Any party who seeks to reschedule or cancel an appeal hearing
must provide a seventy-two-hour notice prior to hearing date.
Failure to provide proper notice shall be deemed a violation and
subject to a late fee of $150 payable to the Department of
Licensing, Inspections and Permits. All late fees must be paid prior
to scheduling another hearing date.
(2) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Appeals,
whether or not a previous party to the decision, may appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Lackawanna County. Appeals shall be
made to the proper Court within 30 days after the filing of the
Board of Appeals decision and notification in the Department of
Licensing, Inspections and Permits to the parties of said decision.
A. The Director/BCO or his authorized representative are hereby
authorized and empowered to inspect or reinspect any and all buildings
located within the city and the materials incorporated therein,
including all installed plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
refrigeration, sprinkler systems, humidification, stokers, oil burners,
gas pumps, oil tanks, high and low pressure boilers, apparatus and
equipment, gas installations and all electrical installation for light, heat
or power for the purpose of determining the safety thereof and the
sufficiency from a fire, health or structural viewpoint. When as a result
of such inspections, any buildings or the installations therein as
enumerated above are found to be unsafe to life or property or
detrimental to health, or not in compliance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the ordinances of the city, including
the provisions of this article. The Director/BCO shall notify the person
installing, owning, using or operating them to place them in a safe and
secure condition within 48 hours or within such further time as he shall
determine to be reasonably necessary. Any person failing or refusing to
make the corrections as specified by the Director/BCO, building,
plumbing, mechanical or electrical inspector within the period set forth
shall be subject to the penalties herein provided.
B. Right of entry. The Director/BCO or his authorized representative so far
as may be necessary for the performance of their duties, shall have the
right to enter upon any building, structure, site or premises under
construction, repair, alteration, or removal of any building alleged to be
unsafe or a menace to public health or damage or menaced by fire upon
showing the credentials of their office, and any person or persons
interfering with them in the performance of such duties shall be guilty
of a summary offense. If it becomes necessary to secure a search
§ 203-15 SCRANTON CODE § 203-16
198:350
§ 203-17. (Reserved)44
§ 203-18. Waiver of liability per issuance of license.
Every contractor receiving a license will indemnify and hold harmless the
City, its officials, servants and employees of and from any and all damages
caused by any negligence in pursuing and protecting his work, or by any
unfaithful, imperfect or inadequate work done by virtue of the license issued
to him.
§ 203-19. Work done by homeowner. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016]
Any person engaged in home improvement work exclusively owned and
occupied as their residence shall be allowed to obtain a building permit
for a residential building, without being a licensed contractor, but must
meet all other requirements of the code. This provision does not pertain to
commercial buildings or to any electrical, plumbing and mechanical work.
§ 203-20. Forfeiture of license.
No person, partnership or corporation licensed under the provisions of
this chapter shall take out a permit in his (or its) name, for use by a
person, partnership or corporation not licensed or registered in the City,
to perform any work within the City. No person, partnership or corporation
licensed under this chapter shall perform any work for which that person,
partnership or corporation is not licensed for. Any person performing work
for which he is not licensed for shall forfeit any licenses which have been
granted.
§ 203-21. Certificate of insurance.
Every contractor holding a license in the City must furnish the Code Official
with satisfactory proof of property damage and public liability insurance
amounting to $500,000 per person and $1,000,000 per occurrence and
workmen's compensation insurance before any permit can be issued. Any
contractor who either cancels the above mentioned insurance policies or
is canceled by the insurance company for any reason shall notify the City
within 30 days of said cancellation.
§ 203-22. (Reserved)45
warrant to accomplish an inspection, the property owner shall
reimburse the City for all costs associated with securing said warrant.
44.Editor’s Note: Former § 203-17, Reciprocal agreement, was repealed 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016.
45.Editor’s Note: Former § 203-22, Building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical code
advisory and license board, was repealed 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016.
§ 203-16 COAL AND MINING § 203-23
198:351
§ 203-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 63-2016]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
or the codes hereby adopted, shall upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a
summary offense, and shall be subject to a fine of no less than $500 and no
more than $5,000 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, together with
judgment or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or both, per offense if the
amount of such fines and costs shall not be promptly paid. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 209
DANCE HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and entertainment — See Ch.
164.
§ 209-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANCE HALL — Any public hall, pavilion or assembly room or auditorium
which is used for dancing or other place which may on occasion be used for
dancing purposes.
§ 209-2. Supervision.
Public halls, pavilions, assembly rooms or auditoriums, as may be used for
dancing, shall be at all times under the supervision of the Department of
Public Safety.
§ 209-3. License required.
No owner or lessee of any public hall, pavilion, assembly room or
auditorium, which may be used for dancing, shall permit any dance to be
conducted in such place without first having obtained from the Department
of Public Safety a license.
§ 209-4. Application; notice in newspaper.
Before licenses shall be issued under this chapter, application, in writing,
shall be filed with the Director of the Department of Public Safety for a
period of fifteen (15) days, setting forth the intent to apply at a certain time
for the issuance of a license. A notice of such intended application shall be
published in one (1) of the daily papers of the city in two (2) issues thereof,
the cost to be borne by the applicant.
§ 203-23 SCRANTON CODE § 209-5
209:352
§ 209-5. Objections to issuance; hearing.
Any citizen may file objections to the issuance of a license under this
chapter, whereupon the Director of the Department of Public Safety shall
hear the objections and thereupon shall refuse or issue the license.
§ 209-6. Refusal for bad moral character.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Director of the Department of
Public Safety from refusing to issue a license to any person whom he knows
to be a person of bad moral character.
§ 209-7. Fee.
Each applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay the sum of twentyfive
dollars ($25.) for each license.
§ 209-8. Issuance for each place; display.
A separate license shall be issued under this chapter for each place, which
shall be conspicuously posted in the place licensed.
§ 209-9. Content.
Each license issued under this chapter shall be designated "Dance Hall
License," and shall indicate the owner or the lessee of the hall, pavilion,
assembly room or auditorium for which the same is issued, together with
the location of the same and the time for which such license is issued.
§ 209-10. Term.
Each license issued under this chapter shall be issued for one (1) year or
fractional part thereof, ending on April 30 following the date of issuance,
unless sooner revoked.
§ 209-11. Revocation.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety may at any time make
or cause to be made an investigation of the character of assemblages
gathering in places used for dancing, and the Director may, if in his opinion
such gatherings are prejudicial to the morals or good order of the
community or the participants at such dances, revoke the license and cause
such public hall, pavilion, assembly room or auditorium to be closed to
dancing.
§ 209-5 DANCE HALLS § 209-11
209:353
Chapter 212
DAY CARE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personal Care Boarding Home
Facilities — See Ch. 343.
Rooming houses — See Ch. 375.
Zoning — See Ch. 445.
§ 209-11 SCRANTON CODE § 209-11
212:354
ARTICLE I
Child Day-Care Centers
[Adopted 3-12-1999 by Ord. No. 38-1999]
§ 212-1. Definitions.
As used in article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER OR FACILITY — The premises where care is
provided at any one time to three or more children unrelated to the owner
or operator of the center or facility.
CITY — The City of Scranton.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development of the City
of Scranton.
INSPECTOR — Any person authorized by law or ordinance to inspect
buildings or systems, e.g., plumbing, electrical systems, mechanical
systems, necessary to operate or use buildings within the City of Scranton.
An inspector also includes anyone authorized by the Department of
Community Development Master Code Official to inspect buildings.
OPERATOR — The person in charge of a child day-care center or facility; it
includes a nonprofit entity and includes a corporation or partnership.
OWNER — The legal or equitable owner of property or premises used for a
child day-care center or facility within the City of Scranton.
§ 212-2. Inspection and licensing.
A. Any person or operator of a child day-care center or facility within the
City of Scranton, either within 30 days after the effective date of this
article, if operating or in existence on the day this article becomes
effective; or any person or operator wishing to establish or operate a
child day-care center or facility with the City of Scranton after the
effective date of this article, shall arrange for the inspection of said
center/facility by the City of Scranton, and obtain a license annually
from the Department of Community Development of the City of
Scranton.
B. An applicant shall complete and return to the Department forms
approved by the Department, an application for the operation of a child
day-care center/facility, stating the name, address and telephone
number of the center, the name, address and telephone number of the
operator or owner, if different from that of the center, a drawing or
picture of the building, and description thereof; the proposed capacity
of the center; the hours of proposed operation of the center/facility; and
such other information as the Department may prescribe to ensure
physical and structural safety. The applicant shall submit with the
application an annual license and inspection fee of $250.
§ 212-1 DAY CARE § 212-2
212:355
§ 212-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, nonprofit entity, partnership or corporation who operates a
child day-care center or facility within the City of Scranton without
obtaining a license or having an inspection pursuant to the provisions
of this article, or failing to take corrective action, shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of $300 plus costs and, in default thereof, be sentenced
to imprisonment for not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days. Each
day that a violation occurs shall be a separate violation. A citation under
this article shall not preclude or prevent citations for violation of any
BOCA standard building codes which are or may be adopted by the City of
Scranton based upon an inspection or reinspection.
C. Upon receipt of an application and annual license and inspection fee,
the Department of Community Development by its Bureau of Licenses
and Inspection shall, in cooperation with the Scranton Fire Department,
schedule an inspection of the center/facility. If such inspection shows
that the center/facility is in compliance with the standard building
codes (BOCA Codes) adopted by the City of Scranton and any other
pertinent building regulations enacted by the city, the license will be
issued by the Department or the Master Code Official. If improvements
or corrections are required to bring the center/facility up to code, the
inspector(s) shall issue a notice stating the deficiencies, and directing
corrective action to be completed within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 40 days. A reinspection shall then be scheduled. The applicant
or operator/owner may appeal any corrective notice to the Housing
Appeals Board within 10 days from the date of the notice, paying an
appeal fee of $100 with the appeal, to the Department.
§ 212-2 SCRANTON CODE § 212-3
212:356
ARTICLE II
Adult Day-Care Centers
[Adopted 3-12-1999 by Ord. No. 39-1999]
§ 212-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER OR FACILITY — The premises where care is
provided at any one time to three or more adults unrelated to the owner or
operator of the center or facility.
CITY — The City of Scranton.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development of the City
of Scranton.
INSPECTOR — Any person authorized by law or ordinance to inspect
buildings or systems, e.g., plumbing, electrical systems, mechanical
systems, necessary to operate or use buildings within the City of Scranton.
An inspector also includes anyone authorized by the Department of
Community Development Master Code Official to inspect buildings.
OPERATOR — The person in charge of an adult day-care center or facility;
it includes a nonprofit entity and includes a corporation or partnership.
OWNER — The legal or equitable owner of property or premises used for an
adult day-care center or facility within the City of Scranton.
§ 212-5. Inspection and licensing.
A. Any person or operator of an adult day-care center or facility within the
City of Scranton, either within 30 days after the effective date of this
article, if operating or in existence on the day this article becomes
effective; or any person or operator wishing to establish or operate an
adult day-care center or facility with the City of Scranton after the
effective date of this article, shall arrange for the inspection of said
center/facility by the City of Scranton, and obtain a license annually
from the Department of Community Development of the City of
Scranton.
B. An applicant shall complete and return to the Department forms
approved by the Department, an application for the operation of an
adult day-care center/facility, stating the name, address and telephone
number of the center, the name, address and telephone number of the
operator or owner, if different from that of the center, a drawing or
picture of the building, and description thereof; the proposed capacity
of the center; the hours of proposed operation of the center/facility; and
such other information as the Department may prescribe to ensure
physical and structural safety. The applicant shall submit with the
application an annual license and inspection fee of $250.
§ 212-4 DAY CARE § 212-5
212:357
§ 212-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, nonprofit entity, partnership or corporation who operates an
adult day-care center or facility within the City of Scranton without
obtaining a license or having an inspection pursuant to the provisions
of this article, or failing to take corrective action, shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of $300 plus costs and, in default thereof, be sentenced
to imprisonment for not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days. Each
day that a violation occurs shall be a separate violation. A citation under
this article shall not preclude or prevent citations for violation of any
BOCA standard building codes which are or may be adopted by the City of
Scranton based upon an inspection or reinspection.
C. Upon receipt of an application and annual license and inspection fee,
the Department of Community Development by its Bureau of Licenses
and Inspection shall, in cooperation with the Scranton Fire Department,
schedule an inspection of the center/facility. If such inspection shows
that the center/facility is in compliance with the standard building
codes (BOCA Codes) adopted by the City of Scranton and any other
pertinent building regulations enacted by the city, the license will be
issued by the Department or the Master Code Official. If improvements
or corrections are required to bring the center/facility up to code, the
inspector(s) shall issue a notice stating the deficiencies, and directing
corrective action to be completed within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 40 days. A reinspection shall then be scheduled. The applicant
or operator/owner may appeal any corrective notice to the Housing
Appeals Board within 10 days from the date of the notice, paying an
appeal fee of $100 with the appeal, to the Department.
§ 212-5 SCRANTON CODE § 212-6
212:358
Chapter 213
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 158.
§ 212-6 DAY CARE § 212-6
212:359

ARTICLE I
Sale or Possession of Bath Salts by Minors
[Adopted 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 22-2011]
§ 213-1. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
plural number include the singular number; words in the singular shall
include the plural, and words in the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter.
KNOWLEDGE — A person acts knowingly with respect to a material
element of this article when:
METHADRONE, METHYLENEDIOXPYROVALERONE (MDPV)
(COMMONLY REFERRED TO AS "bath salts") — Compounds or
psychoactive drugs with stimulant properties which act as a
norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI) or that work on the
same receptors as the chemical compounds in methamphctamines and/or
any derivatives and synthetic cannabis and/or its derivatives for human
consumption or ingestion thereof, including but not limited to the following
street or brand names: Ivory Wave, Bounce, Plant Food, Meph, Mad Cow,
Shake N'Vac, Drone, Bubbles, Meow Meow, MCAT, and 4MMC (hereinafter
at times collectively referred to as "MDPV").
MINOR — A person under 18 years of age.
PERSON — Any individual, including adults or minors, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, owner, contractor,
salesperson, or any other form of entity or the combination or joint venture
thereof.
§ 213-2. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person or minor to knowingly, recklessly or
under the circumstances to:
The element involves the nature of his/her conduct or the attendant
circumstances so that the person knows or should have known that the
conduct is of that nature or that such circumstances exist; and
A.
If the element involves a result of the person's conduct, the person
knows or should have known that it is practically certain that the
conduct will cause such a result.
B.
The results of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the
offense, when he/she knows or should have known that such a result is
likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
C.
§ 213-1 DAY CARE § 213-2
212:361
§ 213-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be fined
not to exceed $300 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, together
with judgment or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days per offense.
A. Give, exchange, deliver, aid, assist or abet a minor in obtaining MDPV,
commonly referred to as "bath salts" and/or its derivatives;
B. Sell at retail or wholesale to a minor MDPV, commonly referred to as
"bath salts" and/or its derivatives;
C. Aid, assist or abet a minor in obtaining MDVP, commonly referred to as
"bath salts" and/or its derivatives.
D. To possess any MDPV, commonly referred to as "bath salts" and/or its
derivatives.
§ 213-2 SCRANTON CODE § 213-3
212:362
ARTICLE II
Sale, Possession, Manufacture and Production of Bath Salts
[Adopted 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]
§ 213-4. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
plural number include the singular number; words in the singular shall
include the plural, and words in the masculine shall include feminine and
neuter.
DELIVER or DELIVERY — Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession of MDVP and synthetic drugs, with or without consideration,
whether or not there is an agency relationship.
DISTRIBUTE — To deliver either with or without MDVP or other synthetic
drugs and/or their derivatives.
KNOWLEDGE — A person acts knowingly with respect to a material
element of this article when:
MANUFACTURE — The production, preparation, propagation,
compounding, conversion or processing of MDPV and/or their derivatives,
either directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances of natural origin,
or independently by means of chemical synthesis, and includes any
packaging or repackaging of synthetic cannabis or synthetic drugs or
labeling of its container, except that this term does not include the
preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of synthetic cannabis or
synthetic drugs as an incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical
analysis and not for sale.
METHADRONE, METHYLENEDIOXPYROVALERONE (MDPV)
(COMMONLY REFERRED TO AS "bath salts") — Compounds or
psychoactive drugs with stimulant properties which act as a
norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI) or that work on the
same receptors as the chemical compounds in methamphctamines and/or
any derivatives and synthetic cannabis and/or its derivatives for human
consumption or ingestion thereof, including but not limited to the following
The element involves the nature of his/her conduct or the attendant
circumstances so that the person knows or should have known that the
conduct is of that nature or that such circumstances exist; and
A.
If the element involves a result of the person's conduct, the person
knows or should have known that it is practically certain that the
conduct will cause such a result.
B.
The results of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the
offense, when he/she knows or should have known that such a result is
likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
C.
§ 213-4 DAY CARE § 213-4
212:363
street or brand names: Ivory Wave, Bounce, Plant Food, Meph, Mad Cow,
Shake N'Vac, Drone, Bubbles, Meow Meow, MCAT, and 4MMC (hereinafter
at times collectively referred to as "MDPV").
PERSON — Any individual, including adults or minors, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, owner, contractor,
salesperson, or any other form of entity or the combination or joint venture
thereof.
POSSESSION — Possession may be actual or constructive:
PRODUCE or PRODUCTION — Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting
or the mixing of or combining any chemicals, herbs or any materials,
whether solid or liquid that result in the creation of MDPV and/or their
derivatives.
§ 213-5. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, recklessly or under the
circumstances where one should know to:
§ 213-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be fined
not to exceed $300 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, together
with judgment or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days per offense.
A. Actual possession means exercising physical dominion.
Constructive possession may be inferred if the defendant has intent
and capacity to maintain control and dominion over cannabis, synthetic
drug or drug paraphernalia.
B.
A. Sell at retail or wholesale MDPV commonly referred to as "bath salts"
and/or its derivatives;
B. Possess any MDPV commonly referred to as "bath salts" and/or its
derivatives; and
C. Give, exchange, deliver, aid, assist or abet another person in obtaining
methadone commonly referred to as "bath salts" and/or its derivatives.
D. Manufacture any MDPV commonly referred to as "bath salts" and/or its
derivatives; and
E. Produce any MDPV commonly referred to as "bath salts" and/or its
derivatives.
§ 213-4 SCRANTON CODE § 213-6
212:364
ARTICLE III
Sale or Possession of Synthetic Cannabinoids by Minors
[Adopted 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 24-2011]
§ 213-7. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
plural number include the singular number; words in the singular shall
include the plural, and words in the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter.
KNOWLEDGE — A person acts knowingly with respect to a material
element of this article when:
MINOR — A person under 18 years of age.
PERSON — Any individual, including adults or minors, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, owner, contractor,
salesperson, or any other form of entity or the combination or joint venture
thereof.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS — An herbal and chemical product which
mimics the effects of cannabinoids, including but not limited to synthetic
cannabinoids, synthetic cannabis, cannablcvclohexanol, JWH-015, JWH-018,
JWH-073, JWH-200, Win-55, HU-210, HU-211, CP-47, 497, CP 55, 940 and
212-2 and is distributed or sold under the brand names, including, but
not limited to, SPICE-Diamond, Gold, Tropical Synergy, Arctic Synergy,
Gold Spirit, PEP Spice, Yucatan Fire, Smoke, K2, Skunk, Spice, K2 Citron
and K2 Blonde (hereinafter at times collectively referred to as "synthetic
cannabinoids").
§ 213-8. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person or minor to knowingly, recklessly or
under the circumstances:
The element involves the nature of his/her conduct or the attendant
circumstances, the person knows or should have known that the
conduct is of that nature or that such circumstances exist; and
A.
If the element involves a result of the person's conduct, the person
knows or should have known that it is practically certain that the
conduct will cause such a result.
B.
The results of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the
offense, when he/she knows or should have known that such a result is
likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
C.
A. Give, exchange, deliver, aid, assist or abet a minor in obtaining
synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives.
§ 213-7 DAY CARE § 213-8
212:365
§ 213-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be fined
not to exceed $300 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, together
with judgment or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days per offense.
B. Sell at retail or wholesale to a minor synthetic cannabinoids and/or its
derivatives;
C. Aid, assist or abet a minor in obtaining synthetic cannabinoids and/or
its derivatives.
D. Possess any synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives;
§ 213-8 SCRANTON CODE § 213-9
212:366
ARTICLE IV
Sale, Possession, Manufacture and Production of Synthetic
Cannabinoids
[Adopted 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]
§ 213-10. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
plural number include the singular number; words in the singular shall
include the plural, and words in the masculine shall include feminine and
neuter.
DELIVER or DELIVERY — Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession of synthetic cannabinoids with or without consideration,
whether or not there is an agency relationship.
DISTRIBUTE — To deliver either with or without synthetic cannabinoids or
other synthetic drugs and/or its derivatives.
KNOWLEDGE — A person acts knowingly with respect to a material
element of this article when:
MANUFACTURE — The production, preparation, propagation,
compounding, conversion or processing of synthetic cannabinoids and/or
its derivatives, either directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances
of natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, and
includes any packaging or repackaging of synthetic cannabinoids or
synthetic drugs or labeling of its container, except that this term does not
include the preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of synthetic
cannabinoids or synthetic drugs as an incident to lawful research, teaching
or chemical analysis and not for sale.
PERSON — Any individual, including adults or minors, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, owner, contractor,
salesperson, or any other form of entity or the combination or joint venture
thereof.
POSSESSION — Possession may be actual or constructive:
The element involves the nature of his/her conduct or the attendant
circumstances so that the person knows or should have known that the
conduct is of that nature or that such circumstances exist; and
A.
If the element involves a result of the person's conduct, the person
knows or should have known that it is practically certain that the
conduct will cause such a result.
B.
The results of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the
offense, when he/she knows or should have known that such a result is
likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
C.
§ 213-10 DAY CARE § 213-10
212:367
PRODUCE or PRODUCTION — Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting
or the mixing of or combining any chemicals, herbs or any materials,
whether solid or liquid that result in the creation of synthetic cannabinoids
and/or its derivatives.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS — An herbal and chemical product which
mimics the effects of cannabinoids, including but not limited to synthetic
cannabinoids, cannablcvclohexano, synthetic cannabis, JWH-015, JWH-018,
JWH-073, JWH-200, Win-55, HU-210, HU-211, CP-47, 497, CP 55, 940 and
212-2 and is distributed or sold under the brand names, including, but
not limited to SPICE-Diamond, Gold, Tropical Synergy, Arctic Synergy, Gold
Spirit, PEP Spice, Yucatan Fire, Smoke, K2, Skunk, Space, K2 Citron and
K2 Blonde (hereinafter at times collectively referred to as "synthetic
cannabinoids").
§ 213-11. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, recklessly or under the
circumstances to:
§ 213-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be fined
not to exceed $300 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, together
with judgment or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days per offense.
A. Actual possession means exercising physical dominion.
Constructive possession may be inferred if the defendant has intent and
capacity to maintain control and dominion over cannabinoids, synthetic
drug or drug paraphernalia.
B.
A. Sell at retail or wholesale synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives;
B. Possess any synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives; and
C. Give, exchange, deliver, aid, assist or abet another person in obtaining
synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives;
D. Manufacture any synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives; and
E. Produce any synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives; and
§ 213-10 SCRANTON CODE § 213-12
212:368
Chapter 215
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 152.
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Contractors — See Ch. 203.
Heating and air-conditioning systems — See
Ch. 290.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 313.
Plumbing — See Ch. 345.
Poles and wires — See Ch. 349.
§ 215-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Scranton, being marked and designated as the "National
Electrical Code, 1999, Twelfth Edition," as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code for the
City of Scranton in the State of Pennsylvania for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the National Electrical Code,
1999 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part thereof as if
fully set out in this chapter.
§ 215-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or
the Electrical Code hereby adopted shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty
of a summary offense and shall be fined an amount not to exceed $600
and a minimum of $200 for any offense, recoverable with costs, together
with judgment of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days if the amount of
such fine and costs shall not be promptly paid. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person found guilty shall
be responsible to pay for any and all repairs to correct any and all violations.
§ 215-3. Permit requirements.
Upon the filing of a written application in such form as the Electrical
Inspector shall require, and upon payment of the required fee, a permit
shall be issued in duplicate to the electrical contractor or other person
making application, one copy thereof to be conspicuously posted upon the
premises where the work is being done, until the work done has been
inspected and approved by either the electrical underwriters agency or the
Electrical Inspector of the City of Scranton.
§ 215-4. Inspection.
§ 213-12 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 215-4
215:369
§ 215-5. Stop-work orders; fines.
Upon notice from the Code Official that electrical work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall
be given to the owner of the property or to the owner's agent or to the
person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which
work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code Official
shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. Any
person who shall continue any work on the system after being served with
a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform
to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less
than $500 dollars or not more than $10,000.
A. Before any electrical contractor or other person doing the electrical
installation or construction work for which he has received a permit
shall complete such work, he shall make application for inspection on
the form used by an approved electrical underwriters inspection
agency, specifying the premises wherein the installation or construction
is being done, the extent, specification and classification of such work,
and pay the fees for all inspections.
B. The electrical underwriters inspection agency shall, upon receipt of an
inspection application, make or cause to be made an inspection of such
work and conduct such test as may be necessary. If the work is done in
accordance with the requirements of this Electrical Code, the electrical
underwriter inspection agency shall thereupon issue a cut-in card to the
local electric utility office and a rough wiring or final certificate of
approval, as the case may be, to the applicant and the City Electrical
Inspector; provided, however, that if service entrance and/or metering
are not involved in the work to be inspected, the issuance of a cut-in
card to the utility company will not be required.
C. When the electrical installation or construction is not approved by the
underwriters inspector, such inspector shall send a notice of
noncompliance to the applicant and to the City Electrical Inspector and,
if required, to the local electric utility company.
D. No electrical energy shall be introduced into a building which, previous
to the installation or construction, had no electrical energy until a cut-in
card is issued to the local utility, excepting only as such electrical
energy may be used by contractors in furtherance of the construction
work, electrical or otherwise, in such building.
§ 215-4 SCRANTON CODE § 215-5
215:370
Chapter 218
ENGINE BRAKE RETARDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 412. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 439.
§ 218-1. Use of brake retarders prohibited.
The use of commercial vehicle brake retarders ("Jake brakes®") is hereby
prohibited on the following designated streets within the City limits:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Keyser Avenue North From Continental Avenue and West
Market Street
Keyser Avenue South From Segment 0150 offset 1160 to
Luzerne Street
Keyser Avenue South West Market Street to Segment 0150
offset 2020
Lackawanna Avenue -- Between 6th Avenue and Spruce
Street
Main Avenue North Between Hampton Street and Oram
Street
Main Avenue South From St. Ann's Street and Oram
Street
South Washington
Avenue
-- Between Cherry Street and Hickory
Street
§ 218-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to fire-protection or other emergency vehicles.
Chapter 221
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 232.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 278.
§ 215-5 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 221-1
221:371
§ 221-1. Permit required; fees.
Where, in accordance with Section F-2700.2(3) of the BOCA Basic Fire
Prevention Code,46 a permit is required to use explosives or blasting agents,
and a permit fee shall be paid to the Department of Public Safety by the
contractor or other applicant. Such permits shall be classified as follows:
§ 221-2. Notice to city; blasting inspector's fee. [Added by Ord. No.
85-1989]
When a blasting permit has been issued by the city, the person or persons
doing blasting shall be required to give the City Engineer's office a
minimum of seventy-two (72) hours' notice of blasting. The blasting
inspector, furnished by the City Engineer's office, shall review a complete
log of each blast and observe the operation of the blast for city records. The
person or persons doing the blasting is to pay the blasting inspector's fee
at the rate of ten dollars ($10.) per hour for each hour on the project. The
blasting inspector's fee shall be paid to the City Engineer's office and by him
transmitted to the City Treasurer's office. All monetary transactions are to
be made by personal check, cashiers check or any other means other than
cash and are to be made payable to the City of Scranton.
A. Where the estimated cost of construction under contract is in excess of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.), and which contract contemplates
extensive continuous blasting, the permit shall be called a "Class A-1"
permit, and the fee on issuance shall be five hundred fifty dollars
($550.) per calendar year, and an additional one hundred twenty dollars
($120.) for each calendar month or part of month for the balance of the
calendar year while the operation continues or until the permit is
surrendered, which permits shall be valid only for the calendar year or
part of year when issued.
B. Where the estimated cost of construction under contract is over fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.) but less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.), the permit shall be called a "Class A" permit, and a fee of
twelve dollars ($12.) per day shall be charged.
C. Where the estimated cost of construction under contract is less than
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.) the permit shall be called a "Class B"
permit, and a fee of twelve dollars ($12.) shall be charged for each
location, operation or job, which permit shall be valid for a period of five
(5) blasting days and no longer. Application and permits shall be in such
form as may be prescribed by the Director of the Department of Public
Safety.
46.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 243, Fire Prevention.
§ 221-1 SCRANTON CODE § 221-2
221:372
Chapter 226
FEES, MISCELLANEOUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Funds and trusts — See Ch. 65.
Building construction fees — See Ch. 187.
Solid waste — See Ch. 400.
Subdivision and land development fees — See
Ch. 423.
§ 221-2 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 221-2
221:373

ARTICLE I
Birth Certificates
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Sec. 2-6 of the 1979 Code]
§ 226-1. Fee.
The fee payable to the city for the issuance of a birth certificate shall be $2.
§ 226-1 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-1
221:375

ARTICLE II
Health and Sanitation
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 17, Art. I, of the 1979 Code]
§ 226-2. Annual swimming pool inspection; fee.
§ 226-3. Issuance of certificates of immunization travel cards; fee.
A. All tanks, swimming pools, wells and pools used for swimming within
the city shall be inspected annually by the Office of Public Health and a
certificate of water analysis issued to the owner thereof.
B. The fee for each certificate issued under this section shall be $5.
A. The Office of Public Health shall issue certificates of immunization
travel cards for persons traveling to foreign lands or without or beyond
the territorial limits of the United States of America.
B. The fee for each immunization certificate shall be $2.
§ 226-2 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-3
221:377

ARTICLE III
Fire, Police, Detective and Ambulance Reports
[Adopted 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 28-201047]
§ 226-4. Fees for copies; deposit and use of fees.
A. All copies of fire, police, detective and ambulance reports, except for
motor vehicle accident reports as provided in Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code, Title 75, Section 3751, Reports by Police, Section (B)(2), which
shall remain $15, provided by the City of Scranton Police Department
and the City of Scranton Fire Department shall be furnished for a fee of
$25 per report, except that any person requesting a report who is the
victim of a crime and who is obtaining a copy of the report shall be
exempt from paying the twenty-five-dollar fee for the report.
B. All fees received by the City for each report shall be deposited into a
special City interest-bearing account to be established by the Business
Administrator. The funds in this account shall be solely used by the City
for the purpose of purchasing police vehicles, and if there are a
sufficient number of police vehicles, then to purchase equipment
necessary for police officers.
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Police Department Reports,
adopted 9-26-1979 as Sec. 2-7 of the 1979 Code, as amended in its entirety 3-8-1999 by
Ord. No. 30-1999.
§ 226-4 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-4
221:379

ARTICLE IV
City Records
[Adopted by Ord. No. 90-1990 (Sec. 2-8 of the 1979 Code)]
§ 226-5. Fees.
Each city department, bureau and office, including the Office of Economic
and Community Development, shall charge a fee of $0.25 per page for
copies of any records, documents, ordinances, resolutions and maps
provided to any person, firm or corporation. If the time required to copy
such documents, records, ordinances, resolutions and maps exceeds 15
minutes, then an additional fee of $5 per half hour or fraction thereof
shall be charged to cover the salary and other costs, including fringe
benefits, of the city employee performing such copying. Except as provided
below, payment shall be made to the City Treasurer, checks payable to
the City of Scranton, and, if payment is made in cash, a receipt shall be
required prior to the provision of copies. If payment is made by check,
which is subsequently dishonored, a check service fee of $25 is authorized,
in addition to any costs of collection, including but not limited to court
costs, filing fees and the salary or fee per hour of any attorney or solicitor
required to prepare for and attend a hearing on behalf of the city. The City
Treasurer shall pay the Office of Economic and Community Development
copier moneys over the Office of Economic and Community Development
miscellaneous revenue account; all other moneys received for copies shall
go into the general fund.
§ 226-6. Exceptions.
A. The provision of police, fire, detective and ambulance reports,
previously provided for by Article II, Police Department Reports, of this
chapter, shall be exempted from the fees prescribed in § 226-4, as
Article II remains in full force and effect.
B. The provision of documents, reports, ordinances, resolutions and maps
to governmental agencies shall be exempted from the fees prescribed in
§ 226-4.
C. The provision of bid specifications to persons wishing to bid for city
contracts shall be exempt.
D. Where another ordinance sets a specified fee for the provision of
documents or records, including but not limited to Article I, Birth
Certificates, such article shall control, and the fee specified in § 226-4
shall not apply.
E. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the provision of
information by city employees in the normal course of business, where
necessary to carry out city responsibilities.
§ 226-5 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-7
221:381
§ 226-7. Prohibitions on copying.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the disclosure of
documents, records, files, including but not limited to investigative files,
such as police, work-product of attorneys, trade secrets or other
confidential material, otherwise protected against disclosure by law, rules
of court, rules and regulations of the Scranton Civil Service Commission, or
other agencies.
§ 226-8. Rules and regulations.
The City Treasurer is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and procedures
to implement payment procedures consistent with this section. The
Business Administrator is hereby authorized to prescribe rules and
regulations concerning the making of copies and payment procedures for
such times that the City Treasurer's office is not open to receive cash
payments or to prescribe procedures for the handling of requests of copies
where the total charge does not exceed $1. Such rules and regulations
shall be promulgated in accordance with § 6-11 of the Administrative Code
(Chapter 6, Administrative Code).
§ 226-7 SCRANTON CODE § 226-8
221:382
ARTICLE V
Bad Checks
[Adopted by Ord. No. 212-1990 (Sec. 2-9 of the 1979 Code)]
§ 226-9. Fee for bad checks.
A. The City Treasurer and other appropriate city officials are hereby
authorized to charge a bad check fee of $25 for each returned or
dishonored check paid to the city.
B. The bad check fee shall be in addition to any and all other lawful costs
of collection, authorized by the Uniform Commercial Code or other
statutes, ordinances or regulations, including but not limited to court
costs or attorney's fees.
C. All moneys collected from the bad check fee shall be deposited into the
general city fund account, fines/forfeits/miscellaneous.
§ 226-9 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-9
221:383

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)48
§ 226-10. (Reserved)
48.Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Accident Reports, adopted by Ord. No. 91-1994 (Sec. 2-7.1
of the 1979 Code), was repealed 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 28-2010.
§ 226-10 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-10
221:385

ARTICLE VII
Attorney Fees
[Adopted 9-25-1996 by Ord. No. 114-1996]
§ 226-11. Statutory authority; schedule of fees.
In accordance with Act 1996-1,49 the City of Scranton hereby adopts the
following schedule of attorney fees for municipal claims:
A. In instances where the claims are collected by attorneys in the full-time
employment of the City of Scranton, a fee of $44 per hour shall be
assessed for all work and added to the claim.
B. In instances where attorneys are retained as independent contractors
to collect municipal claims, a charge of $125 per hour shall be assessed
for all work and added to the claim, and such $125 per hour shall be the
full compensation to be paid to said independent contractor for the
collection of municipal claims.
49.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106(a).
§ 226-11 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-11
221:387

ARTICLE VIII
Microenterprise Revolving Loan Program
[Adopted 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 98-1997]
§ 226-12. Collection authorized.
The Law Department of the City of Scranton is authorized to assess and
collect a fee in the amount of $275 for legal services for each closing
conducted with regard to the Microenterprise Revolving Loan Program, and
it is prescribed that said fee be used to subsidize computer and other legal
research costs.
§ 226-12 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-12
221:389

ARTICLE IX
Emergency Services
[Adopted 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 8-1999; amended in its entirety
7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 47-2000]
§ 226-13. Bureau of Fire to be reimbursed.
The City of Scranton Bureau of Fire shall be reimbursed whenever a Fire
Department vehicle (including but not limited to Rescue 1) responds to
an emergency. Emergency services provided include, but are not limited
to: extrication by the "Jaws of Life" or other emergency equipment; basic
medical evaluation and assistance as required; scene stabilization,
including but not limited to clean up of scene, application of absorbents to
absorb vehicle and bodily fluids to protect the environment and conform
to environmental legislation and regulations; securing the vehicles to avoid
the risk of further injury; provision of traffic control, if necessary, pending
arrival of police; securing the scene pending the arrival of utility personnel
as necessary.
§ 226-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC EMS ASSISTANCE — To evaluate a person's medical condition,
provide basic first aid, stopping bleeding, ensuring an open airway, and
includes the use of a collar or backboard or other bandaging or
immobilization as appropriate; as well as assisting an ambulance crew in
providing treatment. "EMS" means emergency medical services.
CITY — City of Scranton.
COMMUNICATION CENTER — The Lackawanna County Communications
Center.
DRIVER or OPERATOR — One who drives or operates either a vehicle,
motorcycle or bicycle.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. This includes but is not
limited to motor vehicle or vehicle accidents.
EXTRICATION — The removal of a person from a vehicle or other location
from which they are not able to leave by their own ability, either because of
being trapped, endangered or injured. Extrication may be done by using the
"Jaws of Life," or by some other equipment.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Scranton Fire Department. The Deputy Fire
Chief is the second highest ranking person in this Department.
FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLE — Any vehicle operated by the Fire
Department, including Rescue One.
§ 226-13 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-14
221:391
GUARDIAN — One, other than a parent, who cares for and has custody of a
minor or other person.
INSURANCE CARRIER — One who insures a person or vehicle.
MAY — Used in a permissive sense in this article.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18.
OWNER — One who owns or has title to property, such as a vehicle.
PARENT — The father or mother, natural or step-person or adopted, of a
minor.
PEDESTRIAN — One using their feet to move.
PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE — An executor or administrator of any
description under the Decedents, Estates and Fiduciaries Code of the
Pennsylvania Statutes (Title 20).
RESCUE 1 — The Rescue 1 Fire Company of the Scranton Fire Department.
SCENE STABILIZATION — Includes, but is not limited to: clean up of
an accident scene, application of absorbents to absorb vehicle and bodily
fluids to protect the environment and comply with environment legislation
and regulations, securing the vehicles to avoid the risk of further injury,
provision of traffic control, if necessary, pending arrival of police, securing
the scene pending the arrival of utility personnel as necessary.
SHALL — Used in a mandatory sense in this article.
VEHICLE — Includes an automobile, bus, truck, tractor-trailer, motorcycle,
motor vehicle and bicycle as well as an "off road vehicle". For the purposes
of this article also includes a wheelchair user.
§ 226-15. Information to be provided.
§ 226-16. Fees to be charged.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the driver or operator of any vehicle to
provide the Scranton Fire Department with the following information:
(1) Their name, address and telephone number of their insurance
carrier, if applicable, and the name and address of the owner.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of any person who is
rendered services as specified above, and the name and address of
their insurance carrier (if applicable).
(3) If the person aided or driver/operator is a minor, the parent or
guardian shall be responsible for the provision of the information.
In the event of serious injury or fatality, the next of kin or estate
shall provide the information.
A. The City of Scranton Bureau of Fire shall be reimbursed a fee which in
the event of a motor vehicle accident shall be a per-vehicle fee, or per-
§ 226-14 SCRANTON CODE § 226-16
221:392
§ 226-17. Administration and enforcement.
pedestrian or per-bicyclist, when a Fire Department vehicle responds
to an emergency, which fees shall be as follows:
Class Service Fee
1 Basic EMS assistance (collar,
backboard, etc.)
$250
2 Cleanup (absorbents) scene
stabilization
$250
3 Technical, heavy rescue (jaws, air
bags, extended service)
$750
4 No fee shall be charged when the
Fire report specifically indicates no
services were provided or when a
Fire Department vehicle is not
dispatched by the Communications
Center.
5 If more than one service is provided,
the charge shall be at the highest
rate.
B. Prohibited defenses.
(1) It shall not be a defense to any action to collect these fees that a
person was not at fault for the accident, as the fee is not based
upon fault; provided that subrogation is not prohibited by this
provision.
(2) It shall not be a defense to any action to collect these fees that a
person has no insurance coverage; provided that emergency
services not be refused for lack or insurance or inability to pay. The
fee is not dependent on insurance coverage.
A. The City of Scranton, through the Bureau of Fire and the City
Treasurer's office, shall have the responsibility and authority to assess
the fees as herein provided.
B. Any applicable charges for emergency services rendered shall be billed
by the city to the driver or operator of the vehicle, and if he or she
cannot be served, the passenger or pedestrian for whom services were
rendered shall be billed. In the event of a fatality, the estate or personal
representative shall be billed. The city may bill an insurance carrier for
any person in its discretion.
C. The Deputy Fire Chief or his designate is authorized to provide fire
reports upon written request after the payment of a fee as prescribed
by File of Council No. 180, 1994.
§ 226-16 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-17
221:393
§ 226-18. Violation and penalties.
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this article or of any regulation or requirement, pursuant
hereto and authorized hereby, shall upon conviction thereof be ordered
to pay a fine of $300 plus costs, which may include legal fees and court
appearance fees, and in default of payment of fines and costs, imprisoned
not more than 90 days following a hearing pursuant to Rule 1407 of the
Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
D. The Deputy Fire Chief or any authorized custodian, such as the
Accounts Receivable Clerk, is hereby authorized to certify that a
document submitted to him by fire personnel, or prepared by him, and
in his custody, is a fair and accurate copy of those on file with his office.
Such certified copies shall be competent evidence in any action brought
under this article in any court of competent jurisdiction without any
further evidence of their truth, accuracy or authenticity in any action to
recover fees.
E. The City Solicitor is hereby authorized to certify to any court of
competent jurisdiction legal costs of an action to recover these fees,
which certification shall be competent evidence of such legal costs
without any further evidence of their accuracy or authenticity being
required.
F. The City Solicitor is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to settle claims
arising prior to this amendment which have not yet been filed in court,
due to the brevity of certain records. This provision shall not be
construed to require the dismissal of any pending actions.
G. Court appearance fees required pursuant to a collective bargaining
agreement to be paid by the city to any fire personnel due to any action
to collect the emergency services fee shall be included as costs by any
court of competent jurisdiction, upon certification by the Deputy Fire
Chief or his designate, effective from the date that this amendment
becomes effective.
§ 226-17 SCRANTON CODE § 226-18
221:394
ARTICLE X
Reinspection
[Adopted 3-12-1999 by Ord. No. 40-1999]
§ 226-19. Fee to be charged.
The City of Scranton is hereby authorized to charge and collect a
reinspection fee of $50 per inspector, per hour, to cover the expense of
reinspection of properties and grounds within the City of Scranton
necessary to assure compliance with the Standard Building and Fire
Prevention (BOCA) Codes of the City of Scranton, Chapter 445, Zoning, and
other building regulations authorized by law or ordinance to prevent blight,
maintain the public health and safety and ensure that structures and ground
are properly maintained.
§ 226-20. Records.
The Directors of the Department of Community Development, the Master
Code Official of said Department, and the Superintendent of Fire are hereby
authorized to establish time records necessary for the determination and
collection of the said reinspection fee to be paid over to the City Treasurer,
and by him placed into the General Fund of the City of Scranton.
§ 226-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall fail to pay the reinspection fee after notice thereof
shall pay a fine of $300 plus costs, in addition to the reinspection fee, and, in
default thereof, be sentenced to imprisonment for 90 days. The Director of
Community Development, the Master Code Official and the Superintendent
of Fire, or their designees, are hereby authorized to seek attorneys' fees and
costs for collecting municipal claims permitted by law or ordinance, should
the city elect to utilize its civil remedies.
§ 226-19 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-21
221:395

ARTICLE XI
Delinquent Real Estate Taxes and Refuse Fees
[Adopted 12-7-2010 by Ord. No. 50-201050]
§ 226-22. Authorization to file liens.
In addition to the authorizations for the collection of taxes and institution of
tax sales authorized by the Second Class A Cities Code contained in Title 53
of the Pennsylvania Statutes, the City Treasurer is authorized and directed
to file liens for existing delinquent real estate taxes and refuse fees with
the Clerk of Judicial Records of Lackawanna County in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 226-23. Interest.
In accordance with 53 P.S. § 7143, interest at the rate of 10% per annum
shall be assessed from the date of filing of liens for real estate taxes with
the Clerk of Judicial Records of the county.
§ 226-24. Costs, charges, expenses and fees.
In accordance with the provisions of 53 P.S. § 7101, the following costs,
charges, expenses and fees are authorized to be assessed and collected,
when necessary, by the City with respect to the collection of delinquent and
unpaid real estate taxes and delinquent refuse fees:
§ 226-25. Implementation.
The proper officials of the City are hereby authorized and empowered to
take such additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate to
implement this article.
A. Any fees associated with the filing of liens with the Office of the Clerk of
Judicial Records of Lackawanna County; to account for monies
received; and for the filing of any praecipe to satisfy a lien so filed.
B. Any fees associated with the cost of publication for any required legal
notices.
50.Editor's Note: Former Art. XI, Delinquent Real Estate Taxes, was repealed 12-7-2010 by
Ord. No. 49-2010.
§ 226-22 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS § 226-25
221:397
Chapter 232
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Explosives and blasting agents — See Ch. 221.
§ 226-25 SCRANTON CODE § 226-25
232:398
ARTICLE I
Firearms
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Sec. 21-22 of the 1979 Code]
§ 232-1. Discharge of firearms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any firearm within
the city, except for law enforcement officers in pursuit of their duties.
§ 232-1 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 232-1
232:399

ARTICLE II
Martial Arts Weapons
[Adopted as Ord. No. 13-1987 (Sec. 21-8 of the 1979 Code)]
§ 232-2. Prohibited acts.
A person commits a summary offense if he sells, repairs or otherwise deals
in, uses, attempts to use or possess any martial arts weapons.
§ 232-3. Defenses.
It is a defense under this article if the defendant is able to prove that he
possessed or dealt with the weapon solely as curio or that he possessed
it briefly in consequence of having found it or taken it from an aggressor
or under circumstances negating any intent or likelihood that the weapon
would be used unlawfully or that he either possessed such a weapon at
his home for use in a bona fide martial arts activity or exhibition or if he
possessed it outside of his home that he then and there possessed such a
weapon while taking it to or during or returning from a bona fide martial
arts activity or exhibition.
§ 232-4. Exceptions.
§ 232-5. Defined terms.
As used in this section, the term "offensive martial arts weapon" includes,
but is not limited to:
A. This article does not apply to the possession of a martial arts weapon on
the premises of a school which holds a regulatory or business license
and instructs individuals in martial arts or self-defense.
B. The manufacture of martial arts weapons for sale to or their sale to a
school which holds a regulatory or business license and instructs
individuals in martial arts or self-defense.
C. Any offensive martial arts weapon owned or controlled by a law
enforcement agency and in the care of an authorized law enforcement
official.
A. A nunchaku, also known as "chaku sticks," "kung fu sticks," "klackers,"
"centrifugal force sticks" or similar weapons consisting of two or more
lengths of a rigid material joined together by a rope, cord, wire or chain
in such a manner as to allow free movement of a portion of the device
while held in hand and capable of being rotated in such a manner as to
inflict serious injury upon a person by striking or choking.
B. A shuriken, also known as a "Chinese throwing star" or any other disclike
object with sharpened points on the circumference thereof and
designed for use primarily as a weapon to be thrown.
§ 232-2 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 232-5
232:401
§ 232-6. Violations and penalties.
Upon conviction before a District Justice of the offense described herein,
the defendant shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more
than $300 for each offense.
C. A manrikigusari, also known as "fighting chain" or similar weapon
consisting of a length of chain having weights at ends.
D. A Kama, bakahatsugama or similar sickle-like object often attached to a
weighted chain which may or may not be concealed inside the handle.
E. A blow gun.
F. Hand or foot claws.
§ 232-5 SCRANTON CODE § 232-6
232:402
ARTICLE III
Arrows
[Adopted as Ord. No. 155-1993 (Sec. 21-25 of the 1979 Code)]
§ 232-7. Discharge prohibited; exceptions.
§ 232-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable, upon
conviction, to a fine of not less than $100, plus costs, nor more than $300,
plus costs, and, in default of payment, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days
for each offense. Each discharge of an arrow shall constitute a separate
offense. Each person at which an arrow is pointed in violation of this section
shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
A. No person shall shoot or discharge an arrow from a bow or shall point a
bow and arrow at another person within the city limits.
B. This section shall not be construed to prohibit supervised archery
practice at any public or private school or nonprofit institution,
provided that such archery practice is conducted within enclosed
spaces or areas such as to prevent any arrows from causing any injury
to any person.
§ 232-7 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 232-8
232:403

ARTICLE IV
Air Guns, Spring Guns and Similar Devices
[Adopted 2-14-1951 by Ord. No. 3-1951]
§ 232-9. Prohibited devices.
It shall be unlawful and it is hereby prohibited for any person or persons to
use or operate or have in their possession with the intent to use within the
limits of the City of Scranton any air gun, air pistol, spring gun or pistol or
any implement, not a fire arm, which impels with force a pellet of any kind.
§ 232-10. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful and it is hereby prohibited for any person, persons,
firms, associations or corporations to store, sell, offer or expose for sale at
retail or have in their possession with the intent to sell at retail within the
limits of the City of Scranton any air gun, air pistol, spring gun or pistol or
any implement, not a fire arm, which impels with force a pellet of any kind.
§ 232-11. Enforcement.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to seize, remove and
destroy any air gun, air pistol, spring gun or pistol or any implement, not
a fire arm, which impels with force a pellet of any kind, which shall be
used or discharged within the City of Scranton, or which shall be held and
possessed in violation of this article.
§ 232-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100 or
shall be imprisoned for a period of not more than 30 days in default of such
fine.
§ 232-9 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 232-12
232:405
Chapter 237
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Fire — See Ch. 59. Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
§ 237-1. Permit required; liability of user.
No person shall open any of the city's fire hydrants without having first
obtained a written permit to do so from the Chief of the Bureau of Fire. Such
permit shall be issued on the written condition, which shall be embodied
in the permit, and to which the party receiving it shall subscribe, that the
recipient of such permit will be liable for any damage which may be caused
either to the hydrant or the streets or sidewalks or the adjacent property
by reason of the opening of the hydrant by himself, his agent or employee.
Such permit shall be issued subject to such arrangements as the individual
receiving the same may make with the corporation from which the city now
or hereafter may contract for water. The city shall not assume any liability
for any water used out of a public fire hydrant other than for such water as
may be used for city purposes as enumerated in the contract between the
city and the corporation with which it contracts for water.
§ 237-2. Obstructions.
No person shall permit any obstruction or material to remain within such
close proximity to any public fire hydrant so as to interfere with access to
and the free use of such hydrant by the Bureau of Fire.
§ 237-3. Injuring fire hydrants.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or wantonly
break, stop-up or open the spouts of any of the public hydrants which the
city has the right to use or otherwise injure or damage such hydrants.
§ 232-12 SCRANTON CODE § 237-3
237:406
Chapter 243
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Fire — See Ch. 59.
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 152.
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Contractors — See Ch. 203.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 215.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 237.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 278.
Heating and air-conditioning systems — See
Ch. 290.
Insurance — See Ch. 298, Art. I.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 313.
Plumbing — See Ch. 345.
§ 243-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 31-1980;
94-1981; 5-1986; 91-1987; 174-1990; 150-1993; 4-26-1999 by Ord.
No. 61-1999]
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Scranton, being marked and designated as the "1999
BOCA National Fire Prevention Code" as published by the Building Officials
and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Scranton in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of the "BOCA National Fire Prevention Code 1999, as are hereby
referred to, are adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter, excepting any additions and changes as set forth in this chapter.
§ 243-2. Appeals.
Whenever the Fire Chief shall disapprove any application or refuse to grant
a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the
code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief to the Director of the Department
of Public Safety within 10 days from the date of the decision appealed.
§ 243-3. New materials; processes of occupancies which may
require permits.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety, the Fire Chief and the
chief fire inspector shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after
giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those
now enumerated in the Fire Prevention Code. The Chief of the Bureau of
§ 237-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 243-3
243:407
Fire Prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and
distribute copies thereof to interested parties.
§ 243-4. Additions; deletions; amendments. [Amended by Ord. Nos.
72-1990; 174-1990; 150-1993; 187-1994; 4-26-1999 by Ord. No.
61-1999]
§ 243-5. Stop-work orders; fines. [Added 4-26-1999 by Ord. No.
61-1999]
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the building after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as he is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
to a fine of not less than $500 or more than $10,000 per offense.
A. Section F-101.1 Insert the "City of Scranton" as the name of the
jurisdiction.
B. Section F-107.2.3 shall be amended to read as follows:
F-107.2.3 Permits: Permits shall be required in accordance with
Schedule 1.
C. Section F-112.3 shall be amended to read as follows:
F-112.3 Penalty for violations: Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a
summary offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $200 and not
more than $600, plus costs, or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days
in default of payment. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense. Any person found violating this chapter,
shall be responsible for payment required to bring the property
effected by said violation into compliance with said code.
D. Section F-503.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
F-503.4 Single- and multiple-station smoke detectors: Singleand
multiple-station smoke detectors shall be installed in each guest
room, suite, sleeping area and corridor in Use Groups R-1, R-2 and
I-1 and in dwelling units in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms in
occupancies in Use Group R-3. In all residential occupancies, smoke
detectors shall be required on every story of the dwelling unit,
including basements. In dwelling units with split levels and without
an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke detector
installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level,
provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper
level.
§ 243-3 SCRANTON CODE § 243-5
243:408
Chapter 256
FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 158. Health and sanitation fees — See Ch. Ch. 226,
Art. II.
§ 243-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 243-5
243:409

ARTICLE I
Restaurants, Food Carts and Food Trucks; City Health Inspector
[Adopted 7-18-2013 by Ord. No. 34-201351]
§ 256-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, restaurants, food carts and food trucks shall
constitute an establishment that serves and/or prepares food or drink and
shall be defined as:
FOOD CART — A mobile kitchen that is set up on the street to facilitate the
sale and marketing of street food to people from the local pedestrian traffic.
Food carts are often found in large cities throughout the world and can be
found selling food of just about any variety.
FOOD TRUCK —
RESTAURANT — Any eating or drinking establishment on a permanent
foundation, whether or not it has a seating capacity, or any store, drinking
or eating establishment licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board,
Food carts come in two basic styles. One allows the vendor to sit or
stand inside and serve food through a window. Another uses all of the
room inside the cart for storage and to house the cooking machinery,
usually some type of grilling surface. The cart style is determined
principally by the type of food served at the cart.
A.
Food carts are different from food trucks because they do not travel
under their own power. Some food carts are towed by another vehicle,
while some alternatively are pushed by a human.
B.
Health license certification is to be displayed at all times and made
visible to the public/customer view.
C.
A food truck or mobile kitchen is a mobile venue that is self contained,
and owners employees work from inside, sell food, and all food trucks
are driven from location to location. Some, including ice cream trucks,
sell mostly frozen or prepackaged food; others are more like
restaurants on wheels. Some may cater to specific meals, such as the
breakfast truck, lunch truck or lunch wagon and snack truck, break
truck or taco truck. Food trucks have propane tanks which are to be
securely contained on the truck; generators are not to come off the
truck and be placed on City streets or sidewalks. Trash is to be picked
up after each time the truck is set to sell food. Grease is not to be
discarded into City sewer grates.
A.
Health license certification is to be displayed at all times and made
visible for public/customer view.
B.
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 256, Food and Food Handlers,
comprised of Art. I, Food-Handling Establishments, adopted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No.
112-2009, and Art. II, Adoption of Standards, adopted 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 113-2009.
§ 256-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 256-1
243:411
regardless of seating capacity, including but not limited to bars, night clubs,
restaurants, mini marts or grocery stores ("merchant").
VENDOR —
§ 256-2. Hours of operation; proximity of food carts and food trucks
to merchant store buildings.
§ 256-3. City Health Inspector duties and qualifications.
A. Collectively refers to food carts and food trucks.
Health license certification is to be displayed at all times and made
visible for public/customer view.
B.
A. Merchants may operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Vendors
may operate from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. daily, except in Center City
(Lackawanna Avenue, Franklin Avenue, Mulberry Street and Jefferson
Avenue) where they can operate at any time, subject to the provisions
that a food cart or food truck is staffed, is open for business, is selling
food and drink and is in compliance with all parking ordinances of the
City of Scranton. Under no circumstances may a vendor leave the food
cart or food truck unattended on the street or sidewalks at anytime. The
vendor must vacate the parking spot at the conclusion of business each
day or evening.
B. No vendor, operator or owner, even though licensed pursuant to
Chapter 340 of the Code of the City of Scranton, shall locate or stand
and transact his business within 100 feet of a restaurant's service area
and entranceway for public ingress and egress. The service area
includes outdoor dining that has been approved by the City.
C. The one-hundred-foot prohibition does not apply to vendors who are
operating on privately owned premises, provided that the vendors have
written permission to conduct business on the private property from the
record-title owner of the premises.
D. The one-hundred-foot prohibition does not apply to establishments who
sell pre-packaged food and beverages.
A. The City Health Inspector shall conduct physical inspections of
restaurants, food carts or food trucks serving and/or preparing food or
drink located within the City of Scranton for compliance with
Pennsylvania statutes, codes and regulations, as well as this article.
B. Duties.
(1) The City Health Inspector shall issue licenses to restaurants, food
carts or food trucks within the City of Scranton in accordance with
Title 7, Chapter 46 of the Pennsylvania Code; Title 7, Chapter 76 of
the Pennsylvania Code; the Act of May 23, 1945, as amended by Act
179 of 2002; and/or the provisions of this article.
§ 256-1 SCRANTON CODE § 256-3
243:412
§ 256-4. Inspections.
(2) The City Health Inspector shall perform duties and responsibilities,
including, but not limited to, conducting inspections as outlined in
§ 256-4; preparing daily reports of inspection activities; keeping
accurate records of inspections and licenses; handling food
poisoning complaints in conjunction with the Pennsylvania State
Health Department; cooperating as needed with the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board, the Department of Agriculture, and the
Department of Environmental Resources; reporting to vehicle
accidents and fires within the City if food or drink establishments
are involved; and any other duties the Director of Licensing,
Inspections and Permits may direct.
C. Qualifications.
(1) The City Health Inspector shall have knowledge of the following:
food protection; inspection requirements and procedures;
knowledge of all applicable statutes, codes and regulations
governing food handling and preparation, including employee
certification requirements; knowledge of proper installation, use
and maintenance of equipment and utensils; knowledge of product
sampling practices and techniques; interpretation of laboratory
results and corrective actions; rights and duties of food
establishment management and personnel; knowledge of proper
sanitation and use of approved chemicals; and knowledge of proper
procedures and regulation requirements for food products.
(2) In addition, the Health Inspector shall have knowledge of
inspection and investigation procedures concerning public/private
housing, mobile home/recreational vehicle parks, health and safety
risks of substandard housing, codes, heating, cooling and
ventilation systems, utility connections, and child safety hazards.
(3) The City Health Inspector shall possess or have the ability to obtain
a valid motor vehicle operator's license as issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Motor Vehicles. The
City Health Inspector shall possess, as a minimum, a high school
degree or GED equivalent and certification as a certified food
safety professional. Certification must be obtained within two
months from date of employment as the City Health Inspector.
A. It shall be the duty of the City Health Inspector to make periodic
inspections of all restaurants, food carts or food trucks within the City
of Scranton and file reports of such inspections in order to ensure
maintenance of said facilities is in a clean and sanitary condition and in
order to protect the public against violations of the provisions of Title 7,
Chapter 46 of the Pennsylvania Code; Title 7, Chapter 76 of the
Pennsylvania Code, the Act of May 23, 1945, as amended by Act 179 of
2002; and/or the provisions of this article.
§ 256-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 256-4
243:413
§ 256-5. License fees.
§ 256-6. Annual application.
§ 256-7. License renewal; late fees.
All licenses must be renewed within five business days from the expiration
date of the establishment's current license. Failure to renew within the
allotted time period shall result in the assessment of a late fee in the amount
of double the cost of the license.
B. Upon inspection, the City Health Inspector shall list all violations and
variations from the above codes and laws, and all other facts regarding
the same, and shall list corrections required to be made. Notice shall be
given to the establishment, along with the time frame in which to cure
any violations and variations. Thereafter, the City Health Inspector shall
inspect each establishment, as needed, to ensure such corrective action
is taken.
A. In addition to the fee of $1 exacted for the issuance of such license as
provided for by the Pennsylvania Public Eating and Drinking Law, 35
P.S. 655.1 et seq., there shall be paid concurrently with said license fee
and prior to the issuance of said license, the amount of $150 for eating
and drinking establishments with a seating capacity of one to 25
persons (including establishments that provide takeout services) and
$200 for eating and drinking establishments with a capacity of 26
persons or more.
B. In addition, any eating or drinking establishment licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, including but not limited to bars,
nightclubs, restaurants, mini marts and grocery stores, regardless of
seating capacity, shall pay a fee in the amount of $200
C. The license fee for a food cart shall be $50 and for a food truck shall be
$250.
D. The revenue from the license fees defrays the cost of inspections of
such establishments and the costs of laboratory tests as required by
Pennsylvania statutes, codes and regulations, as well as this article.
A. All restaurants, food carts and food trucks shall be required to apply for
a license on an annual basis, as required by the Public Eating and
Drinking Law, 35 P.S. 655.1 et seq.
B. All restaurants, food carts and food trucks must file an annual business
privilege and mercantile tax return to the Single Tax office in order to
procure and display an annual business privilege/mercantile tax
license.
§ 256-4 SCRANTON CODE § 256-8
243:414
§ 256-8. Payment and proof of payment.
All payments of fees, including, but not limited to, license fees, late fees,
inspection fees and reinstatement fees, shall be payable to the City of
Scranton and are subject to appropriation by the Council of the City of
Scranton. The City Treasurer shall issue an appropriate receipt evidencing
such payment.
§ 256-9. Issuance of license.
After the City has received the appropriate payment for the license,
including payment of any outstanding late fees, inspection fees and
reinstatement fees, the City Health Inspector shall issue the appropriate
license.
§ 256-10. Revocation, suspension and reinstatement of license.
§ 256-11. Violations and penalties.
A. Revocation and suspension. If the Director of Licensing, Inspections
and Permits, the City Health Inspector, or any other duly appointed and
authorized code enforcement officer shall determine that any
provisions of Title 7, Chapter 46 of the Pennsylvania Code, known as the
"Pennsylvania Food Code," and/or any provision of this article, have
been or are currently being violated by an eating or drinking
establishment, he or she may revoke or suspend said establishment's
license, cause all business operations to cease immediately, and direct
that the establishment be immediately vacated and closed.
B. Reinstatement. Reinstatement of a revoked or suspended license shall
occur only when the act, default or omission which was grounds for the
revocation or suspension has been remedied. Whether the act, default
or omission has been remedied shall be determined by the Director of
Licensing, Inspections and Permits, the City Health Inspector, or any
other duly appointed and authorized code enforcement officer in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Food Code and/or this article.
C. Reinstatement fee. The fee for reinstatement of a revoked or suspended
license shall be double the original license fee, as well as payment of
any outstanding fees.
A. Health license violation.
(1) If any person or persons, firm, or corporation shall conduct an
eating or drinking establishment without first paying the fees
outlined in § 256-5 and/or without being issued a license, or upon
violating any provision of Title 7, Section 46 of the Pennsylvania
Code, known as the "Pennsylvania Food Code," said person or
persons, firm, or corporation shall, upon conviction of such
violation before any District Judge within the City of Scranton, be
subject to a fine of not less than $500.
§ 256-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 256-11
243:415
(2) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Distance violation pursuant to § 256-2B.
(1) Upon citation by Licensing, Inspections and Permits personnel for
violation(s) of § 256-2B herein, merchants shall be fined as follows:
(a) First offense: written warning.
(b) Second and each subsequent offense. $500 for each offense.
(2) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 256-11 SCRANTON CODE § 256-11
243:416
Chapter 263
GAMBLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and entertainment — See Ch.
164.
Poolrooms and billiard rooms — See Ch. 354.
§ 263-1. Prohibited operations.
No person shall conduct any house, room, place or resort where games of
any description are played or operated for money or other thing of value or
where policies are sold.
§ 263-2. Prima facie evidence.
The presence in any house, room, place or resort of roulette wheels, faro
tables, poker tables or other apparatus, machine or device commonly used
for gambling shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the house, room,
place or resort being used for gambling purposes.
§ 263-3. Conducting games or selling policies.
No person whether acting as proprietor, lessee, agent or employee shall
conduct any game for money or anything for value or sell policies.
§ 263-4. Renting property for gambling.
No person shall rent any house, room, place or resort to any party who
conducts therein any game for money or other thing of value or sells
policies, after having been previously notified by the Superintendent of
Police that gambling is conducted within such premises.
§ 263-5. Frequenting gambling places.
No person shall frequent any house, room, place or resort where games are
played for money or other thing of value or where policies are sold.
Chapter 269
GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
§ 256-11 GAMBLING § 269-1
263:417
§ 269-1. Care of grounds and equipment.
The owners, licensees or operators of all gasoline filling stations, gasoline
service stations or consumer stations where gasoline products of any kind
are stored for delivery by means of pumps, standards, pipelines or other
devices directly to and into the tanks of any motor-driven vehicle shall at
all times keep the ground space, driveways and other areaways adjacent
to such pumps, standards, pipelines and other devices, as well as such
equipment itself, free from grease, oil or other inflammable materials.
§ 269-2. Inspection.
It shall be the duty of fire inspectors once every week to regularly inspect
all service, filling or consumer stations, the equipment thereof and the area
adjacent thereto, to determine whether or not the provisions of § 269-1 are
being carried out.
§ 269-3. License. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 173-1992; 190-1994]
A. The owner, licensee or operator of any gasoline filling station, gasoline
service station or consumer station shall pay annually to the city a
license fee to cover the cost of the regulation and inspection thereof.
B. For each pump, standard, pipeline or other device used in connection
with the supplying of said gasoline products to any motor-driven vehicle
there shall be paid a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.). For the purpose of
this section the terms pumps, standard, pipeline or other device as used
herein describes a pump, standard, pipeline or other device capable of
supplying gasoline products to no more than one (1) motor-driven
vehicle at any one (1) given time, for each additional motor-driven
vehicle which may be supplied with gasoline products from said pump,
standard, pipeline or other device at any one (1) given time an
additional fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.) shall be paid. It is the intent
of this section that where each pump, standard, pipeline or other device
used in connection with the supplying of said gasoline products
contains more than one (1) hose, pipeline or other connecting device to
a motor-driven vehicle but which cannot, due to mechanical or
electrical controls, supply gasoline products to more than one (1)
motor-driven vehicle at a time, even though there may be a separate
hose, pumpline or other connecting device on either side of a pump or
standard, the collector of fees should collect only one (1) fee of twentyfive
dollars ($25.). If the pump, standard, pipeline or other connecting
device capable of supplying a motor-driven vehicle with gasoline
products is capable of supplying fuel through two (2) separate
connecting devices or pipelines to more than one (1) motor vehicle
simultaneously, the person so designated by the city shall collect the
additional fee.
C. The license and inspection fee shall be paid on or before May 1 of each
year and the license shall expire on April 30 of the following year. For
§ 269-1 SCRANTON CODE § 269-3
269:418
Chapter 272
GAS PIPING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243. Gasoline service stations — See Ch. 269.
§ 272-1. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted by reference the 1974 Edition of the National
Fuel Gas Code as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA). Such code shall be in full force and effect in the city as if fully set
forth herein.
§ 272-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of the National Fuel Gas Code shall be
subject to the penalty of § 1-16.
Chapter 275
GRAFFITI
any license taken out later than November 1 in any year, the license fee
required to be paid shall be one-half (1/2) of the yearly fee.
§ 269-3 GAS PIPING STANDARDS § 272-2
272:419

ARTICLE I
Sale of Paints, Markers and Similar Products
[Adopted 4-10-1996 as Ord. No. 63-1996]
§ 275-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 275-2. Prohibited conduct.
A. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Article shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the masculine shall
include the feminine and neuter.
B. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ETCHING EQUIPMENT OR MATERIALS — Any tool, device, equipment
or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on metal,
glass, plastic, concrete or stone.
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any marker containing a fluid which is not
water soluble and which has a point, brush, applicator or other writing
surface of three-eighths (3/8) of an inch or greater.
MINOR — A person under eighteen (18) years of age.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, association,
owner, contractor, salesperson or any other legal entity.
A. No person shall sell at retail to any minor paint in spray cans or any
marker containing a fluid which is not water soluble and which has a
point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of three-eighths (3/8)
of an inch or greater. For purposes of this section, to "sell at retail"
means to sell to a consumer for ultimate use and not for purposes of
resale.
B. No person shall possess a spray paint container, liquid paint or indelible
marker on the property of another or in any public building or upon any
public facility, unless the owner, manager or other person having
control of the property, building or facility consented to the presence of
the materials.
C. No person shall possess a spray paint container, liquid paint, indelible
marker or etching equipment or materials on any public right-of-way
(including, without limitation, any street or sidewalk) with intent to use
the same to deface any building, structure or property.
D. No minor shall possess any spray paint container or indelible marker,
except:
§ 275-1 GRAFFITI § 275-2
275:421
§ 275-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Article,
shall upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be
fined not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.) for any one (1) offense,
recoverable with costs, together with judgment or imprisonment not to
exceed thirty (30) days per offense.
(1) A minor may possess spray paint containers or indelible markers
while under the immediate supervision of his or her parent, legal
guardian or teacher.
(2) A minor employee may possess spray paint containers or indelible
markers at the direction and under the supervision of his or her
employer.
E. No person shall aid, assist or abet a minor in obtaining spray paint cans
or indelible markers in violation of Subsection D.
§ 275-2 SCRANTON CODE § 275-3
275:422
Chapter 278
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
§ 275-3 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 275-3
278:423

ARTICLE I
Lead Removal
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 17, Art. II, Div. 1, of the 1979 Code]
§ 278-1. Short title.
This Article shall be known as the "Hazardous Substances Control
Ordinance."
§ 278-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPROVAL — Satisfactory compliance as determined by the Director of the
Department of Health.
DIRECTOR — That person who heads the Public Health Department or his
designated representative.
DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMING HOUSE, ROOMING UNIT — A
building or structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or recreation by human occupants.
EXTRACTABLE OR LEACHABLE LEAD — The quantity of lead in solution
form as applied to food containers, cooking, eating or drinking utensils or
tableware shall not exceed seven (7) micrograms per milliliter.
FACILITY — Any building or structure and equipment therein.
LEAD PAINT — Any pigmented, liquid substance applied to surfaces by
brush, roller, spray or other means in which the total nonvolatile ingredients
contain more than five-tenths percent (0.5%) of lead by weight, calculated
as lead metal either as a liquid or as dried film already applied.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including all facilities thereon.
SUBSTANCE — Includes, but not limited to lead bearing putty, ceramics,
plumbing, sealers, paint and similar items.
SURFACES — Includes, but not limited to such areas as window sills,
window frames, doors, door frames, walls, ceilings, porches, stairs,
handrails, toys, furniture, food utensils and other appurtenances.
§ 278-3. Prohibited use of lead paint.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to use or apply or cause to
be used or applied lead paint, as defined in this Article, or any
substance containing lead in excess of five-tenths percent (0.5%) by
weight to interior surfaces and to those exterior surfaces accessible to
children of any premises, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit or facility occupied or used by children.
B. The owner of a residential building shall be notified that a health hazard
exists when the interior surfaces of the building contain free lead or
§ 278-1 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 278-3
278:425
§ 278-4. Prohibited distribution.
§ 278-5. Labeling of substances.
Containers in which substances having lead content are stored, sold,
transferred or added for wholesale or retail purposes shall be labeled in
conformance with state and federal laws and regulations and recommended
standards of the Federal Hazardous Substances Labeling Act.
§ 278-6. Hazardous conditions; notice; methods of removal.
§ 278-7. Prohibition of eviction of occupants with children.
No owner or landlord found to be in violation of § 278-6 herein may evict,
or cause to be evicted, occupants with children for the purpose of avoiding
corrective maintenance orders by the Director of Public Health, a court or
other appropriate authority to eliminate hazardous lead exposures. Further,
the families with children shall be permitted to continue their lease or rental
agreement executed prior to corrective maintenance.
lead in its compounds in any quantity of more than one (1) milligram
per square centimeter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, transfer, give or deliver toys
or furniture to which lead paint has been applied.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, transfer, give or deliver any
food container, cooking, eating or drinking utensil or tableware having
extractable or leachable lead on it or in it.
A. When the Director of Public Health determines that the presence of
lead paint or a lead bearing substance upon any premises creates a
health hazard to children or other persons he shall issue a ten-day
notice to the owner or occupant to eliminate the hazard; however, at the
discretion of the Director of Public Health, additional time may be
granted to remove, abate or remedy such condition.
B. Lead paint shall be completely removed from any surface which can be
chewed or eaten by children; loose, cracked, chipped, blistered, peeling
lead paint or other accessible lead bearing substances shall be
completely removed. In lieu of removal of the lead paint, the accessible
surfaces shall be covered with an approved, durable protective
material.
C. The methods used for the removal of lead paint shall not present a
hazard to health from fumes, dust or vapors by inhalation or absorption
through the skin and mucous membranes and shall be in accordance
with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and safety standards
and practices, of the city and state and federal agencies.
§ 278-3 SCRANTON CODE § 278-8
278:426
§ 278-8. Failure to perform corrective maintenance.
A failure to perform corrective maintenance shall cause the dwelling to be
declared unfit for human habitation.
§ 278-9. Reports of lead poisoning.
Every public health official, physician or director of a laboratory, hospital
or other treatment facility who diagnoses or suspects the existence of lead
poisoning in any person shall immediately notify, in writing, the Director of
Public Health of such fact. Notification shall include name and age of the
individual, name of parents (or employer if person is an adult) and present
address.
§ 278-10. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other sanction or remedial procedure, any owner,
landlord, occupant or other person who shall violate any provision of this
Article, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.) or be confined in jail not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. Each day's continuance of a violation
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 278-8 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 278-10
278:427

ARTICLE II
Recovery of Removal Costs
[Adopted as Ord. No. 94-1989 (Ch. 17, Art. II, Div. 2, of the 1979
Code]
§ 278-11. Short title.
The City of Scranton hereby adopts this Article to be entitled,
"Reimbursement for Removal of Hazardous and Toxic Material."
§ 278-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENTITY — Any individual, corporation, association, partnership, joint-stock
company, business trust, syndicate, joint adventureship or other
combination or group of persons.
EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSE — That expense and those related costs and
fees that are incurred by the city for any extraordinary service, including
but not limited to the city's actual cost of labor and materials associated
with the use of any specialized extinguishing or abatement agent, chemical
neutralizer or similar equipment or material that is employed to extinguish,
confine, neutralize, contain or clean any material that is or may be involved
in a fire, spill or the threat of any spill or fire.
EXTRAORDINARY SERVICE — A service performed by the Scranton Fire
Department, the Scranton Police Department, the Public Works
Department, the Building Inspection Bureau, the Parks and Recreations
Department or any other city Department or Bureau that is in addition to
or above the normal services provided by such Departments or Bureaus.
"Extraordinary services" are the abatement and disposition of hazardous,
toxic, infectious or chemical waste and material, including but not limited to
spills or the threat of spills of such waste and materials, utility line breaks
or leakages, other imminent or perceived or possible threats to the health,
safety or welfare of city residents and those incidents where a property
owner has been previously warned about violations of any city ordinance
that, in the judgment of the city, are a particular threat to the health, safety
or welfare of the city residents, and for which the owner (or owners, agent
or person in charge of the property) has neglected to comply or has refused
compliance therewith.
§ 278-13. Reimbursement for extraordinary expenses.
The city shall impose upon or be reimbursed by any responsible entity all
fees, extraordinary expenses and any other related costs incurred for any
and all extraordinary service performed by, on behalf of or at the request of
the city.
§ 278-11 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 278-14
278:429
§ 278-14. Administration; collection of fees and costs.
The City Business Administrator shall collect all fees as follows:
A. Fees and costs (including overhead costs) shall encompass all
manpower, equipment, materials and maintenance expenses in such a
form as to ensure the city's full reimbursement for charges for services
actually rendered. A particular cost or fee schedule need not be set
forth in this Article or elsewhere in the city ordinances or by further
formal action by the City Council. The City Council's approval of this
Article shall constitute authorization for the Business Administrator (or
his designee) to collect all such fees and costs (including overhead
costs) pursuant to his receipt of related expenditures or costs that are
submitted to him by the affected city Bureaus or Departments.
B. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the extraordinary or dangerous
occurrence giving rise to the extraordinary service, the affected Bureau
or Department shall submit its extraordinary service-related costs, fees,
charges and expenses to the Business Administrator for his review. At
such time as all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to
extraordinary service have been collected and reviewed by the Business
Administrator, but in any case not later than sixty (60) days from the
date of determining the cost or rendering of the extraordinary services,
the Business Administrator shall send a bill for such costs, fees, charges
and expenses, to the property owner, agent or manager and/or the
person(s) or entity(ies) responsible for the condition which necessitated
the rendering of extraordinary services with a demand that a full
remittance be made within thirty (30) days of receipt of any bills. In the
unusual circumstances that the Business Administrator is not able to
determine all the costs associated with the incident within a reasonable
time, a partial billing may be made. Interest at the rate of six percent
(6%) per annum will be charged on all unpaid balances past due over
thirty (30) days. At the discretion of the Department head, materials
used by the city may be replaced, in kind, by the person(s) responsible
for the incident, in lieu of cash payment.
C. It is also contemplated that local, state or federal agencies may bill, fine
or penalize the city for matters (including but not limited to, cleanup
costs, fees or expenses) relating to an extraordinary or dangerous
occurrence. The Business Administrator shall, if possible, include any
and all such costs or fees in the consolidated bill sent to the property
owner. The city shall not, however, waive any right to collect such local,
state or federal costs if they are not charged to the property owner or
his agent within the consolidated billing period (sixty (60) days). In this
regard, the Business Administrator shall expect reimbursement of all
local, state or federal costs within thirty (30) days of the owner's (or his
agents) receipt of the bill for these particular costs, fees and charges
and expenses.
D. In cases of hardship, or where circumstances are such that a full
remittance cannot be made to the city within the thirty-day period, City
§ 278-14 SCRANTON CODE § 278-14
278:430
§ 278-15. Enforcement.
The city may enforce the provision of this Article by civil action in the court
of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due hereunder,
plus attorneys fees or for any other relief that may be appropriate.
§ 278-16. Emergency services not to be refused for nonpayment.
Nothing in this Article shall authorize any city Bureau or Department or any
city staff member or Bureau or Department personnel to refuse or delay
any emergency service to any person, firm, organization or corporation,
that has not reimbursed the city for a municipal service, or that owes the
city any money whatsoever. Furthermore, nothing in this Article shall be
construed to demand reimbursement to the city for those municipal services
that are normally provided to city residents and others as a matter of the
city's general operating procedure and for which the levying of taxes or the
demand for reimbursement is normally made.
Council shall hereby authorize the City Solicitor to enter into
negotiations with the property owner or his agent for an extended
payback period of time not to exceed six (6) months.
E. All moneys received under the provision of this Article shall be placed in
the general operating fund or capital budget for those actual costs and
expenses necessary to furnish fire, police and other emergency or
public safety services or protection provided by the city as outlined
herein.
§ 278-14 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 278-16
278:431
Chapter 290
HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 215.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 313.
§ 278-16 SCRANTON CODE § 278-16
290:432
ARTICLE I
Central Systems
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 7, Art. V 1/2, Div. 2, of the 1979 Code]
§ 290-1. Permit required.
A permit shall be required for all new installations and for all major
replacements in existing installations and all service or maintenance
contracts of central heating and air-conditioning systems.
§ 290-2. Plans and specifications.
Where a permit is required an application shall be filed with the Building
Official and if, due to the size of the equipment involved or the complications
that might arise from the installation of the equipment, the Building Official
deems it necessary, such application shall be accompanied by specifications
and diagrammatic mechanical drawings in sufficient detail before a permit
shall be issued for the installation of central heating and air-conditioning
systems. The plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth
(1/8) inch to one (1) foot and shall show the location and arrangement of
all equipment and distribution elements, including safeties and pressurecontrolling
devices.
§ 290-3. Permit fee.
A permit fee shall be computed by cost of installation as follows:
Value Charge
$0 to $500. $15.00
$501 to $1,000 $30.00
Each additional $1,000 $6.00
§ 290-1 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 290-3
290:433

ARTICLE II
Woodburning Stoves
[Adopted as Ord. No. 37-1980 (Ch. 7, Art. V 1/2, Div. 3, of the 1979
Code)]
§ 290-4. Installation; fee.
It is the policy of the City of Scranton and it is in the best interest of the
City of Scranton to make certain installation of woodburning stoves is done
properly so as to eliminate potential harm to persons and/or property in
the City of Scranton. Whenever the installation of woodburning stoves is
contemplated in the City of Scranton, the following requirements shall be
maintained:
A. The proper distance a woodburning or coalburning stove should be
from noncombustible and combustible surfaces is thirty-six (36) inches
from combustible surfaces and eighteen (18) inches from
noncombustible surfaces.
B. A pad under the stove is essential. A one-fourth-inch asbestos millboard
covered with sheet metal is preferred. It should extend at least eighteen
(18) inches beyond the ash removal door.
C. The chimney requirements are as follows: if an existing chimney is to be
used, make sure it is sound and has a flue lining. The stove should have
its own chimney with nothing connected to it. The chimney should rise
two (2) or three (3) feet above any roof ridge that comes within ten (10)
feet of it. The chimney should contain a cleanout door.
D. On noncombustible surface walls, such as stone, concrete or brick, a
one-inch air space must be provided and a one-fourth-inch asbestos
millboard placed behind a brick or stone wall.
E. If stove legs are less than four (4) inches long, sheet metal should be
mounted on a four-inch hollow masonry base, such as cinder block.
F. If it is necessary to pass through a combustible wall or ceiling, the stove
pipe should be triple-walled or a thimble shall be used to pass through a
combustible wall. The thimble shall be three (3) times the diameter of
the pipe and well ventilated to allow air movement.
G. If no thimble is used, all combustible material must be cut out of the
wall to provide at least three (3) times the diameter of the stove pipe or
connector and this space or opening must be filled with material that is
noncombustible and insulating.
H. The workmanship of the chimney and installation of the woodburning or
coalburning stoves shall be inspected by the fire inspectors before walls
are closed up to make certain that the proper clearances are adhered
to.
§ 290-4 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 290-4
290:435
I. The person installing the woodburning stove shall pay a permit fee of
ten dollars ($10.) to cover the cost of the inspection.
§ 290-4 SCRANTON CODE § 290-4
290:436
ARTICLE III
Outdoor Furnaces
[Adopted 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 115-2007]
§ 290-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREWOOD — Trunk and branches from trees and bushes.
OUTDOOR FURNACE — Any structure, equipment, or device installed or
otherwise affixed outdoors for the purpose of burning fuel to provide heat
or energy to a building, structure or other interior space.
UNTREATED LUMBER — Dry wood which has been milled and dried but
which has not been treated or combined with any petroleum product,
chemical, preservative, glue, adhesive, stain, paint or other substance.
§ 290-6. Purpose.
Outdoor furnaces present potentially dangerous smoke, fumes and odors all
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City.
Therefore, it is the intention of the City of Scranton to establish restrictions
on the construction and operation of outdoor furnaces within the limits of
the City of Scranton.
§ 290-7. Enforcement.
This may be enforced by the Department of Public Safety and/or the
Department of Permits, Inspections and Licenses.
§ 290-8. Specific Restrictions.
§ 290-9. Permit.
Anyone wishing to install an outdoor furnace must first obtain a building
permit from the Department of Permits, Inspections and Licenses. That
permit must include a review of the issues and restrictions set forth in this
article.
§ 290-10. Existing furnaces.
Any existing outdoor furnace will be permitted, provided that the owner
obtained a building permit therefor. That permit for existing outdoor
A. Only firewood and untreated lumber are allowable fuel for burning in
an outdoor furnace. Burning of any other material is prohibited.
B. Outdoor furnaces are permitted only on lots of three acres or more.
C. Outdoor furnaces must be situated at a minimum of 200 feet from the
nearest property line.
§ 290-5 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 290-10
290:437
furnaces does not need to comply with Subsections B and C of § 290-8,
Specific Restrictions, section above but must otherwise comply with any
manufacturer's requirements or other laws, ordinances or regulations
applicable to this outdoor furnace. If an existing outdoor furnace was
installed without a building permit, the existing outdoor furnace is subject
to all sanctions and penalties applicable to construction without building
permits. Nothing herein is to be construed to allow grandfather rights to
construct without building permits.
§ 290-11. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with any provisions of this article shall constitute a
violation thereof and shall subject the property owner to a maximum fine of
$500 for a first offense. Any subsequent offenses will subject the property
owner to a fine of no more than $1,000. In addition to the fines set forth
herein, upon a second offense under this article, the permit issued (if
applicable) will be hereby revoked. In the event that no permit was
obtained, upon a second violation, no permit may be received by the
property owner. All property owners will be treated as jointly and severally
liable for these fines, and said fines imposed hereunder will constitute a
municipal lien on the real estate in question until such time as the fines are
paid, including any applicable interest.
§ 290-10 SCRANTON CODE § 290-11
290:438
Chapter 296
HUMAN RELATIONS AND DISCRIMINATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards and commissions — See Ch. 18.
Contracting procedures — See Ch. 41.
Rental property — See Ch. 373.
Rooming houses — see Ch. 375.
§ 296-1. Purpose.
§ 296-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in the chapter shall be
defined as follows, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ACCESSIBLE — Being in compliance with the applicable standards set forth
in the following: "The Fair Housing Act" (Public Law 90-284 as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 3601, et seq.); "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" (Public
Law 101-336, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101, et seq.); "Act of September 1, 1965 PL.
459, No. 235" as amended; "An Act requiring that certain buildings and
facilities adhere to certain principles, standards and specifications to make
the same accessible to and useable by persons with physical disabilities and
providing for enforcement."
AGE — Includes any person 40 years of age or older and shall also include
any other person so protected by further amendment to the Federal Age
Discrimination in Employment Act.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY —
A. In order to ensure that all persons regardless of race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry or place of birth, sex, gender identity, sexual
orientation, handicap or disability, use of guide or support animals
because of the blindness, deafness or physical handicap of the user or
because the user is a handler or trainer of support or guide animals,
marital status, familial status (in housing only), or age, enjoy the full
benefits of citizenship and are afforded equal opportunities for
employment, housing and use of public accommodation facilities, it is
necessary that appropriate legislation be enacted.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as supporting or advocating
any particular doctrine, position, point of view, life style or religious
view. To the contrary, it is the intention of this chapter that all persons
are treated fairly and equally, and it is the express intent of this chapter
to guarantee fair and equal treatment under law to all people of the
City.
Any building, structure or facility, or portion thereof, which is used,
occupied or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied
A.
§ 290-11 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-2
290:439
COMMISSION — The Human Relations Commission of the City of Scranton.
DISABILITY or HANDICAP — Herein referred to as disability, with respect
to a person, means:
DISCRIMINATION — Any exclusion, denial, intimidation, coercion,
difference or segregation in treatment in hiring, referring for hiring,
promoting, training, in membership in employee or labor organizations, in
the advertisement, sale, lease, rental, financing or zoning of housing; or in
rendering service in places of a public accommodation because of protected
class based upon race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry or place
of birth, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability, marital status,
familial status (in housing only) or age or because of the protected class of
an individual with whom the person is known to have an association. For
the purpose of this chapter, an employer's granting of benefits to married
persons, as defined by the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which
are greater than those benefits granted to nonmarried persons, shall not
constitute unlawful discrimination under this act.
EMPLOYEE — Does not include:
for the purpose of operating a business, an office, a manufactory or any
public accommodation; and
Any vacant land offered for sale, lease or held for the purpose of
constructing or locating thereon any such building, structure, facility,
business concern or public accommodation.
B.
Physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more
of such person's major life activities;
A.
B. Record of such an impairment; or
Regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not
include current, illegal use or addition to a controlled substance as
defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (Public Law
91-513, 21 U.S.C. § 802).
C.
For employment, disability means a non-job-related disability which
does not substantially interfere with the ability to perform the essential
functions of the employment which a person with disability applies for,
is engaged in or has been engaged in. Uninsurability or increased cost
of insurance under a group or employee insurance plan does not render
a disability job related.
D.
Any individuals who, as part of the employment, reside in the personal
residence of the employer; or
A.
B. Any individual employed by said individual's parents, spouse or child;
Those employed by religious, fraternal, charitable or sectarian
corporations or associations in the direct provision of services of the
organization wherein membership is a bona fide occupational
C.
§ 296-2 SCRANTON CODE § 296-2
290:440
EMPLOYER — Any person who employs four or more employees, exclusive
of the parents, spouse or children of such person, including the City of
Scranton, its departments, boards, commissions and authorities, any other
governmental agency within its jurisdiction, but excluding any religious,
fraternal, charitable or sectarian organization which is not supported in
whole or in part by any city appropriation.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY — Includes any person regularly undertaking with
or without compensation to procure opportunities to work or to procure,
recruit, refer or place employees.
FAIR HOUSING ACT — Public Law 90-284, 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq.
FAMILIAL STATUS —
GENDER IDENTITY — Self-perception or perception by others, as male
or female, including a person's appearance, behavior, or physical
characteristics, that may be in accord with, or opposed to, one's physical
anatomy, chromosomal sex, or sex assigned at birth.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS —
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS —
qualification, except such corporations or associations supported, in
whole or in part, by government appropriations.
One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years
being domiciled with:
A parent or other person having legal custody of such individual or
individuals; or
(1)
The designee of such parent or other person having said custody,
with the written permission of such parent or other person.
(2)
A.
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial
status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of
18 years.
B.
Any building, structure, mobile home site or facility, proportion thereof,
which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied as the home residence or sleeping place of one
or more individuals, groups or families whether or not living
independently of each other; and
A.
Any vacant land offered for sale, lease or held for the purpose of
constructing or locating thereon any such building, structure, mobile
home site or facility.
B.
Housing:
Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development determines is specifically
(1)
A.
§ 296-2 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-2
290:441
LABOR ORGANIZATION — Any organization which exists for the purpose,
in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or dealing with employers
concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment or of other
mutual aid or protection in relation to employment.
LENDING INSTITUTION — Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association or any other person or organization regularly engaged in the
business of lending money or guaranteeing loans.
OWNER — Includes lessee, sublessee, assignee, manager, agent, or any
other person having the right of ownership or possession or the authority
to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation, including the City and its
dependents, authorities, boards and commissions.
PENNSYLVANIA HUMAN RELATIONS ACT — Public Law 744, No. 322 as
amended.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, legal representative, trustees in bankruptcy
or receivers. It also includes, but is not limited to, any owner, lessor,
assignor, builder, manager, broker, salesman, agent, employee, independent
contractor, lending institution and all authorities, boards and commissions
thereof.
PROTECTED CLASS — Any person legally protected from discrimination
based upon race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry or place of birth,
sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, handicap or disability, use of guide
or support animals because of the blindness, deafness or physical handicap
of the user or because the user is a handler or trainer of support or guide
designed and operated to assist elderly persons as defined in the
State or Federal Program; or
Is intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or
older; or
(2)
Is intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit.
(3)
In determining whether housing qualified as housing for older persons
under this section, the Commission's requirement shall include by not
be limited to the following:
That at least 80% of the units are occupied by at least one person
55 years of age or older per unit; and
(1)
The publication of, and adherence to, policies and procedures
which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide
housing for persons 55 years of age or older.
(2)
B.
Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older
persons by reason of unoccupied units provided, that such units are
reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of
this section.
C.
§ 296-2 SCRANTON CODE § 296-2
290:442
animals, marital status, familial status (in housing only) or age or because
of the protected class of an individual with whom the person is known to
have an association.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION RESORT or AMUSEMENT — Accepting or
soliciting the patronage of the general public or offering goods or services
to the general public including loans, or is listed in the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act, Section 4(1), but shall not include any personal, professional
services which are in their nature distinctly private, personal and
confidential.
REAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTIONS — Any of the following:
SEX — Male or female, and includes the gender of a person, as perceived,
presumed or assumed by others.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality
and bi-sexuality, by preference, practice or as perceived by others.
§ 296-3. Unlawful employment practices.
It shall be an unlawful employment practice because of protected class or
because of the protected class of an individual with whom the person is
known to have an association:
The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining
a dwelling, a housing accommodation or commercial property; or
(1)
(2) Secured by real property including residential real estate.
A.
The selling, brokering, using as collateral, or appraising of real
property including residential real property.
B.
A. For any employer to refuse to hire or employ or contract with, or to bar
or discharge from employment such individual, or to otherwise
discriminate against such individual with respect to compensation, hire,
tenure, terms, conditions or privileges of employment or contract, if the
individual is the best able and most competent to perform the services
required.
(1) The provision of this subsection shall not apply to: operation of the
terms or conditions of any bona fide retirement or pension plan
which have the effect of a minimum service requirement, age
limitations placed upon entry into bona fide apprenticeship
programs of two years or more approved by the State
Apprenticeship and Training Council of the Department of Labor
and Industry. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, it shall
not be an unlawful employment practice for a religious corporation
or association to hire or employ on the basis of sex in those certain
instances where sex is a bona fide occupational qualification
§ 296-2 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-3
290:443
because of the religious beliefs, practices, or observances of the
corporation, or association.
B. For any employer, employment agency, or labor organization, prior to
the employment to:
(1) Elicit any information or make or keep a record of or use any form
of application or application blank containing questions or entries
concerning the protected class of any applicant for employment or
membership. Prior to an offer of employment, an employer may not
inquire as to whether an individual has a disability or as to the
severity of such disability. An employer may inquire as to the
individual's ability to perform the essential functions of the
employment.
(2) Print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or
advertisement relating to employment indicating any preference,
limitation, specification or discrimination based upon protected
class.
(3) Deny or limit, through a quota system, employment or membership
because of protected class.
(4) Substantially confine or limit recruitment or hiring of individuals,
with intent to circumvent the spirit and purpose of this act, to any
employment agency, employment service, labor organization,
training school or center, or any other employee-referring source
which services individuals who are predominantly of the same
protected class.
(5) Deny employment because of a prior disability.
(6) To exclude or otherwise deny equal jobs or benefits to a person
because of the protected class of an individual with whom the
person is known to have a relationship or association.
(7) For any labor organization because of protected class to deny full
and equal membership rights to any individual or otherwise to
discriminate against such individuals with respect to hire, tenure,
terms, conditions or privileges of employment or any other matter,
directly or indirectly, related to employment.
(8) For any person, employer, employment agency, or labor
organization to discriminate in any manner against any individual
because such individual has opposed any practice forbidden by this
act, or because such individual has made a charge, testified or
assisted, in any manner, in any investigation, proceeding or hearing
under this act, or to aide, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of
any act declared by this section be an unlawful discriminatory
practice, or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with
the provisions of this act or any order issued thereunder, or to
§ 296-3 SCRANTON CODE § 296-3
290:444
§ 296-4. Unlawful housing practices.
attempt, directly or indirectly, to commit any act declared by this
section to be an unlawful discriminatory practice.
(9) For any employment agency to fail or refuse to classify properly,
refer for employment or otherwise to discriminate against any
individual because of protected class. However, this section shall
not be construed to prohibit the refusal to hire or the dismissal of a
person who is not able to function properly in the job applied for or
engaged in.
C. Nothing in this section shall bar any institution or organization for
persons with disabilities from limiting or giving preference in
employment or membership to handicapped or disabled persons.
A. Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing or other prohibited
practices. It shall be unlawful housing practice because of the protected
class of an individual with whom the person is known to have an
association, to:
(1) Refuse to sell, lease, finance, rent after making a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person, or otherwise to deny
or withhold any housing accommodation or commercial property
from any person, prospective owner, occupant or user of such
housing accommodation or commercial property.
(2) Evict or attempt to evict an occupant of any housing
accommodation before the end of the term of the lease because of
pregnancy or the birth of a child.
(3) Refuse to lend money, whether or not secured by a mortgage or
otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair
or maintenance of any housing accommodation or commercial
property or otherwise withhold financing of any housing
accommodation or commercial property from any person because
of protected class.
(4) Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of
selling or leasing any housing accommodation or commercial
property or in furnishing facilities, services or privileges in
connection with the ownership, occupancy or use of any housing
accommodation or commercial property because of protected
class.
(5) Represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(6) For the purpose of this section, discrimination includes:
§ 296-3 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-4
290:445
(a) Refusal to permit, at the expense of a person with a disability,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to
be occupied by such person if such modification may be
necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises,
except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is
reasonable to do so, grant permission for a modification if the
renter agrees to restore the interior of the premises to the
condition that existed before the modification, with reasonable
wear and tear excepted.
(b) Refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling.
(c) In connection with the design and construction of covered
multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is
30 months after the date of enactment of the Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988 (enacted September 13, 1988), a
failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
[1] The public use and common use portions of such dwellings
are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped
persons;
[2] All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to
allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
[3] All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
[a] An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
[b] Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and
other environmental controls in accessible locations;
[c] Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
[d] Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an
individual in a wheel chair can maneuver about the
space.
(7) Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of any
loan of money, whether or not secured by a mortgage or otherwise
for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or
maintenance of housing accommodation or commercial property
because of protected class.
(8) Make, print, publish, circulate or cause to be made, printed,
published or circulated any statement or advertisement: relating to
§ 296-4 SCRANTON CODE § 296-4
290:446
§ 296-5. Unlawful real estate practices.
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice because of the Protected
Class or because of the protected class of an individual with whom the
person is known to have an association, to:
the sale, lease or acquisition of any housing accommodation or
commercial property or the loan of money, whether or not secured
by mortgage or otherwise for the acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing
accommodation or commercial property which indicates any
preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based upon
protected class or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation, specification, or discrimination.
(9) Make any inquiry, elicit any information, make or keep any record
or use any form of application, containing questions or entries
concerning protected class in connection with the sale or lease of
any housing accommodation or commercial property or loan of any
money whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise for the
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
any housing combination or commercial property, except for the
collection of such information when such collection is authorized by
federal, state, or local law, or by the terms of a judicial decree or
settlement; or in any other case giving rise to a duty to collect such
information.
(10) For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national
origin.
A. Deny any person access to membership or participation in any multiplelisting
service, real estate broker's organization or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings or commercial property, or to discriminate against them in
the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation.
B. For any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in real
estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in
making available such transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such
transaction.
C. Induce, solicit or attempt to induce or solicit for commercial profit any
listing, sale or transaction involving any housing accommodation or
commercial property by representing that such housing
accommodation or commercial property is within any neighborhood,
community or area adjacent to any other area in which they reside, or
do not reside, persons of any particular protected class.
§ 296-4 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-5
290:447
D. Discourage, or attempt to discourage, the purchase or lease of any
housing accommodation or commercial property by representing that
such housing accommodation or commercial property is within any
neighborhood, community or area adjacent to any other area in which
there reside, or may in the future reside in increased or decreased
numbers, persons of any protected class.
E. Misrepresent, steer, create or distort a circumstance, condition or
incident for the purpose of fostering the impression or belief, on the
part of any owner, occupant or prospective owner or occupant of any
housing accommodation or commercial property that it is within any
neighborhood, community or area adjacent to any other area which
would be adversely impacted by the residence, or future increased or
decreased residence, of persons of any protected class.
F. In any way misrepresent or otherwise mis-advertise within a
neighborhood or community, whether or not in writing, that any
housing accommodation or commercial property within such a
neighborhood or community is available for inspection, sale, lease,
sublease or other transfer, in any context where such misrepresentation
or mis-advertising would have the effect of fostering an impression or
belief that there has been or will be an increase in real estate activity
within such neighborhood or community due to the residence, or
anticipated increased or decreased residence, of persons of any
protected class.
G. For any person to harass, threaten, intimidate, harm, damage or
otherwise penalize any person, group or business because he or they
exercised or encouraged others to exercise their rights under this
chapter; or because he or they have complied with the provisions of this
chapter, or enjoyed the benefits of this chapter, or because he or they
have made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in any
investigation, proceeding or hearing hereunder.
H. For any person to aide, abet, incite, induce, compel or coerce the doing
of an unlawful practice promoted by this chapter or to obstruct or
prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this chapter
or any order issued hereunder.
I. For any person who with intent to mislead in any proceeding under this
chapter to destroy or mutilate, falsify, alter or refuse to supply records
and documents produced pursuant to subpoena or other lawful order
under this Section.
J. Inapplicability of prohibitions.
(1) Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business
of furnishing appraisals of property to take into consideration
factors of race, color, religious creed, ancestry, national origin,
marital status, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, age,
handicap or disability, or familial status.
§ 296-5 SCRANTON CODE § 296-5
290:448
(2) Nothing in this chapter, regarding age or familial status, shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons.
(3) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society or any non-profit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns, operates for other
than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from
giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such
religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin.
(4) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in fact open
to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes provide lodgings which it owns or operates for other than
a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of
such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its
members.
(5) Nothing in this chapter shall apply with respect to discrimination
based on sex in the rental or leasing of housing accommodation in a
single-sex dormitory.
(6) Exemption. Nothing in § 296-5A, D, E and F or § 296-6 of this
chapter shall apply to:
(a) Any single-family housing sold or rented by an owner;
provided, that such private individual owner does not own
more than three such single-family houses at anyone time;
provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such singlefamily
house by a private individual owner not residing in such
house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent
resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted
by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such
sale within any twenty-four-month period; provided further,
that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any
interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under
any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all
or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more
than three such single-family houses at anyone time; provided
further, that after December 31, 1969, the sale or rental of
such single-family houses shall be excepted from the
application of this title only if such house is sold or rented
without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or
the sales or rental services of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent, salesman, or person and without the
publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of section 804(c) of
this title (42 U.S.C. § 3604 (c)); but nothing in this provision
shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors,
§ 296-5 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-5
290:449
§ 296-6. Unlawful public accommodation practices.
It shall be an unlawful public accommodation practice for any person being
the owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent or employee
of any establishment offering public accommodation, resort or amusement
because of protected class or because of the protected class of an individual
with whom the person is known to have an association, to:
§ 296-7. Human Relations Commission.
title companies, and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer the title, or
(b) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four
families living independently of each other, if the owner
actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as
his residence.
A. Refuse, withhold from or deny to any person because of protected class,
either directly or indirectly, any of the accommodations, advantages,
facilities, services or privileges of such place of public accommodation,
resort or amusement.
B. Publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail, either directly or
indirectly, any written or printed communication, notice or
advertisement to the effect that any of the accommodations,
advantages, facilities and privileges of any such place shall be refused,
withheld or denied to any person on account of protected class,
objectionable or not acceptable, desired or solicited.
C. Obstruct any person from enjoyment of his rights under this chapter
relating to public accommodations.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established the Human Relations
Commission of the City of Scranton comprised of 11 members, who
shall by first choice be residents of the City, appointed by the Mayor
with, the advice and consent of City Council, and who shall serve
without compensation. In the event the requirements of the position
and/or availability of volunteers cannot be met by a resident of the City,
then the members need not be residents of the City of Scranton, but
must be either a City of Scranton taxpayer, maintain a business in the
City, be employed in the City and/or attend school in the City of
Scranton. All members shall be 18 years or older and shall serve
overlapping terms of three years each.
B. Powers and duties. The Commission is hereby vested with the authority
to administer and enforce this chapter and shall be given sufficient
administrative and legal support from the City staff persons to carry out
the following powers and duties:
(1) To meet and function at any place within the City;
§ 296-5 SCRANTON CODE § 296-7
290:450
(2) To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations to
effect the policies and provisions of this chapter, and to make
recommendations to agencies of the City of Scranton and the City
Council thereof to effect such policies;
(3) To initiate, receive, investigate and pass upon complaints charging
unlawful discriminatory practices in violation of § 296-3, 296-4,
296-5, and 296-6, taking place within the city limits of Scranton.
(4) To study the problems of discrimination and foster, through
community effort or otherwise, good will among the groups and
elements of the population of the City;
(5) To issue such publications and such results of investigations,
providing an investigation results in a public hearing and to
research as, in its judgment, will tend to promote good will and
minimize or eliminate discrimination.
(6) From time to time, but not less than once a year, to report to the
Mayor or his designee, and the City Council of the City of Scranton
describing in detail the investigations, proceedings, hearings and
studies it has conducted and their outcome, the decisions it has
rendered and the other work performed by it, and make
recommendations for such further legislation concerning abuses
and discrimination.
C. Administrative support. The City of Scranton from time to time shall
designate an individual City employee or department to provide
administrative support services to the Commission.
D. Procedure.
(1) Filing a complaint.
(a) Any individual claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful
discriminatory practice, and any person who believes that such
person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice
that is about to occur, may make, sign and file with the
Commission a verified complaint in writing which shall state
the name and address of the person or persons alleged to have
committed the unlawful practice and the particulars thereof.
The complaint shall also contain such other information as may
be required by the Commission. The Commission, upon its own
initiative, may in like manner sign and file a complaint. The
person or entity filing said complaint shall have the power
reasonably and fairly to amend their/its complaint.
(b) Upon the filing of such complaint and an initial finding of
probable cause as to jurisdiction over the respondent and
protected class of the complainant, the Commission shall send
the complaint along with notice, upon the aggrieved person
acknowledging such filing and advising the aggrieved person
§ 296-7 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-7
290:451
of the time limits and choice of forums provided under this
chapter.
(c) The Commission shall serve a copy of the complaint to the
named respondent within 30 days from the date of filing the
complaint. Administrative support personnel shall, no later
than 30 days after such filing of the complaint, advise such
respondent of the procedural rights and obligations of
respondent under this chapter, together with a copy of the
original complaint.
(d) Upon receipt of a complaint from a City employee or any
citizen against the City of Scranton, the Commission may,
independent of the City and City staff, retain outside legal
counsel to advise on legal matters for such complaint on behalf
of the Commission. Upon disposition of the complaint, the City,
after consultation between the Mayor or his/her designee, and
legal counsel, shall pay a reasonable fee to such legal counsel.
Neither City staff members nor City legal counsel may
represent the complainant in any such case.
(e) Time period for filing complaint. Any complaint filed pursuant
to this section must be so filed within 180 days after the
alleged act of discrimination, unless otherwise required by the
Fair Housing Act.
(f) Withdrawing complaint. Any complaint may be withdrawn at
any time by the party filing the complaint.
(2) Investigation.
(a) Prior to the filing of a complaint, an initial probable cause
determination will be made regarding jurisdiction over the
respondent and protected class status of the complaint. After
the filing of any complaint, the Commission shall assign an
investigation committee, comprised of members of the
commission, for the purpose of investigating the substance of
the alleged discriminatory action. The members of the
investigating committee shall not serve on the hearing panel
regarding the same matter. The investigating committee will
issue a case management order to the parties of the matter
establishing relevant discovery deadlines and timeframes. In
the conduct of such investigation, the Commission may issue
subpoenas to any person charged with or associated with an
unlawful practice to furnish information, records of the
documents. The Commission may seek enforcement of its
subpoena by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of
Lackawanna County.
(b) When a complaint is filed alleging a discriminatory housing
practice, the Commission shall make an investigation of the
alleged discriminatory housing practice and complete such
§ 296-7 SCRANTON CODE § 296-7
290:452
investigation within 100 days after the filing of the complaint,
unless it is impracticable to do so. If the commission is unable
to complete the investigation within 100 days after the filing
of the complaint, the Commission shall notify the complainant
and respondent, in writing, of the reasons for not doing so.
(c) A respondent shall file a written, verified answer to the
complaint within 30 days of service of the complaint, except in
the case of a Fair Housing complaint of discrimination, in
which case a respondent shall file, not later than 10 days after
receipt of notice from the Commission, an answer to such
complaint. The Commission, upon request of the respondent,
may grant an extension of time to file an answer, except for a
Fair Housing where not more than 30 additional days may be
granted unless otherwise required by the Fair Housing Act.
(d) Complaints and answers shall be verified and may be
reasonably and fairly amended at any time prior to
establishment of a hearing. A party must request leave of the
commission to amend after a hearing has been scheduled,
leave shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(e) The Commission shall send notice of the right to file a lawsuit
to the complainant one year after the date the complaint is
filed.
(f) After service of the complaint, the Commission shall encourage
voluntary and informed predetermination settlements between
parties.
(3) Allegation and notice. If after such investigation, it is determined
that there is no basis for the allegations of the complaint, the
Commission shall, within 10 days from such determination, cause
to be issued and served upon the complainant, written notice of
such determination. The notice shall also state that the complaint
will be dismissed unless within 10 days after such service the
complainant or his/her attorney file with the Commission a request
for reconsideration. The Complainant or his/her attorney shall state
in the request the basis for reconsideration and provide any new or
additional evidence in support thereof. The Commission shall, upon
request for such reconsideration, review the request and consider
such additional new evidence, if any, and may provide an
opportunity to appear before the investigating committee at a
preliminary hearing, to argue such additional information as may
be available to support the allegations of the complaint.
(4) Conciliation. During the period beginning with the filing of such
complaint, the Commission shall, to the extent feasible, engage in
conciliation with respect to such complaint. A conciliation
agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be an agreement
between the respondent and the complainant, and shall be subject
§ 296-7 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-7
290:453
to approval by the Commission. Each conciliation agreement shall
be made public unless the complainant and respondent otherwise
agree and the Commission determines that disclosure is not
required to further the purposes of this chapter.
(5) Establishment of hearing.
(a) If the Commission, in its discretion, finds it is not possible to
eliminate such unlawful practices by persuasion, the
Commission shall cause to be issued and served, a written
notice, together with a copy of such complaint as the same may
have been amended, requiring the party named in such
complaint, hereinafter referred to as respondent, to answer the
charges of such complaint at a hearing before the Commission
at a time and place to be specified in such notice. The
Commission shall appoint a hearing panel compromised of
Commission members not serving on the investigating
committee for the instant matter.
(b) When notice of a hearing is given as set forth in Subsection
D(3)(a) and an election procedure is required by the Fair
Housing Act, either party may elect, as an alternative to public
hearing before the Commission, to have the claims asserted in
the complaint decided in a civil action brought under the
original jurisdiction of the Lackawanna County Court of
Common Pleas. The Commission shall send written notice to all
parties and inform them of their right to take civil action. An
election must be made within 20 days after service of the
notice of a hearing. A party making this election shall notify the
Commission and all other parties. The complainant has the
right to intervene as a party in state court pursuant to such an
election. If an election for civil action is made by either party,
the Commission shall, within 30 days from the date of election,
commence and maintain a civil action on behalf of the
complainant.
(c) In any action brought under this subsection, the Commission
recommends that:
[1] All filing fees shall be waived for the Commission and all
parties, including the action brought under the Court of
Common Pleas original jurisdiction and any appeal arising
out of such action.
[2] If, after a trial, the Court of Common Pleas finds that a
respondent engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful
discriminatory practice as defined in this chapter, the
Court may award attorneys' fees and costs to the
complainant on whose behalf the action was commenced.
[3] If, after a trial, the Court of Common Pleas finds that a
respondent has not engaged in or is not engaging in any
§ 296-7 SCRANTON CODE § 296-7
290:454
unlawful discriminatory practice as defined in this chapter,
the Court may award attorneys' fees and costs to the
prevailing respondent if the respondent proves that the
complaint upon which the civil action was based was
brought in bad faith.
[4] If, after a trial, the Court of Common Pleas finds that a
respondent has not engaged in any unlawful
discriminatory practice as defined in this act, the Court
may award attorneys' fees and costs to the prevailing
respondent if the Court determines that the complaint is
frivolous and that the Commission dealt with the party
complained against in a willful, wanton and oppressive
manner, in which case the Commission shall be ordered to
pay such costs and attorneys' fees.
(6) Hearing.
(a) The case in support of the complaint shall be presented to the
hearing panel designated by the Commission, and comprised of
commissioners having not served on the investigating
committee regarding the complaint for the purpose of hearing
said complaint by complainant's attorney or agents.
(b) The respondent may appear at such hearing in person or
otherwise, with or without counsel, and submit testimony. The
complainant may likewise appear at such hearing in person or
otherwise, with or without counsel, and submit testimony. At a
hearing under this section, each party may present witnesses
and engage in cross-examination, and obtain the issuance of
subpoenas in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil
Procedure and local rules of court. The Commission may issue
subpoenas in aid of investigations and hearings under this
chapter. Such subpoenas may be ordered to the same extent
and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the
subpoenas were ordered or served in aid of a civil action in the
Court of Common Pleas of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
for the jurisdiction in which the investigation is taking place.
Any aggrieved person may intervene as a party in the
proceeding. The Commission or the complainant shall have the
power reasonably and fairly to amend any complaint and the
respondent shall have like power to amend his answer. The
Pennsylvania Rules of Evidence will act to guide the
presentation of evidence in such hearing but will not be strictly
adhered to with the hearing being an administrative
proceeding. The testimony taken at the hearing shall be under
oath and be transcribed.
(7) Findings.
§ 296-7 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-7
290:455
(a) If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, the Commission finds
that a respondent has engaged in any unlawful discriminatory
practice as defined in this chapter, the Commission shall state
its findings of fact, and shall issue and cause to be served on
such respondent a finding requiring such respondent to cease
and desist from such unlawful discriminatory practice and to
take such affirmative action. This affirmative action includes,
but is not limited to, reimbursement of certifiable travel
expenses in matters involving the complaint; compensation for
loss of time from work in matters involving the complaint;
hiring, reinstatement and/or upgrading of employees, with or
without back pay; admission or restoration to membership in
any respondent labor organization; the making of reasonable
accommodations; selling or leasing of specified housing
accommodations or commercial property upon such equal
terms and conditions and such equal facilities, services and
privileges; the lending of money, whether or not secured by
mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of housing
accommodations or commercial property; upon such equal
terms and conditions to any person discriminated against or all
persons; any other verifiable, reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses caused by unlawful discriminatory practice; and any
and all other compensation as provided under the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Act.
(b) In those cases alleging a violation of §§ 296-4, 296-5, 296-6,
and violations of the Fair Housing Act, the Commission may
award actual damages including damages caused by
humiliation and embarrassment as, in the judgment of the
Commission, to effectuate the purposes of this chapter,
including a requirement for report of the manner of
compliance.
[1] The Commission may also assess a civil penalty against the
respondent in a complaint of discrimination filed under
§ 296-4, § 296-5, § 296-6, and violations of the Fair
Housing Act of this Act;
[a] In an amount not exceeding $10,000, if the
respondent has not been adjudged to have committed
any prior discriminatory practice;
[b] In an amount not exceeding $25,000, if the
respondent has been adjudged to have committed one
other discriminatory practice during the five-year
period ending on the date of the order; or
[c] In an amount not exceeding $50,000, if the
respondent has been adjudged to have committed
§ 296-7 SCRANTON CODE § 296-7
290:456
more than one other discriminatory practice during
the seven year period ending on the date of the order.
(c) If the Commission finds that the respondent has engaged in or
is engaging in an unlawful discriminatory practice charged in
the complaint, the Commission shall enjoin the respondent
from engaging in such unlawful discriminatory practice and
order affirmative action which may include, but is not limited
to, reinstatement or hiring of employees, granting of back pay,
or any other legal or equitable relief as the court deems
appropriate. Back pay liability shall not accrue from a date
more than three years prior to the filing of a complaint
charging violations of this chapter.
(d) If upon all the evidence at the hearing, in those cases alleging a
violation of § 296-4, § 296-5, § 296-6, the Commission finds that
a respondent has engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful
discriminatory practice, as defined in this chapter, the
Commission may award attorneys' fees and costs to prevailing
complainants.
(e) If upon all the evidence at the hearing, in those cases alleging a
violation of § 296-4, § 296-5, § 296-6, the Commission finds that
a respondent has not engaged in or is not engaging in any
unlawful discriminatory practice as defined in this chapter, the
Commission may award attorneys' fees and costs to a
prevailing respondent if the respondent proves that the
complaint was brought in bad faith.
(f) The remedies and damages announced above shall also be
available to a prevailing party, other than the United States, as
the Commission, in its discretion, may allow.
(8) Commonwealth license. When the respondent is a licensee of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Commission shall inform the
appropriate State's licensing authority of the order with the
request that the licensing-authority take such action as it deems
appropriate against such licensee.
(9) Complaint dismissal.
(a) If, upon all the evidence, the Commission shall find that a
respondent has not engaged in any such unlawful
discriminatory practice, the Commission shall state its findings
of fact, and shall issue and cause to be served on the
complainant an order dismissing said complaint as to such
respondent.
(b) In the case of an alleged violation under § 296-4 and § 296-5, if
upon all the evidence, the Commission shall find that a
respondent has not engaged in or is not about to engage in a
discriminatory housing practice, the Commission shall state its
§ 296-7 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-7
290:457
findings of fact, and shall issue and cause to be served on the
complainant an order dismissing the said complaint as to such
respondent.
(10) Rules and records of hearing. The Commission shall establish rules
of practice to govern, expedite and effectuate the foregoing
procedure and its own actions thereunder. A hearing panel three or
more commissioners designated by the Commission shall
constitute the Commission for any hearing required to be held by
the Commission under this chapter. The recommended findings,
conclusions and order made by said members shall be final and
subject to judicial review. The recommended findings, conclusions
and order made by said hearing panel shall become a part of the
permanent record of the proceeding and shall accompany any
order served upon the parties to the complaint.
(11) Enforcement, judicial review and penalty.
(a) Injunction. If the Commission concludes, at any time following
the filing of a complaint under this chapter that prompt judicial
action is necessary to prevent immediate and irreparable
harm, the Commission may commence an action in the Court of
Common Pleas, and that Court may grant an appropriate
preliminary or special injunction pending final disposition of
the complaint. Any such order relief shall be granted in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure
Section 1531.
(b) Enforcement. The complainant or the Commission may secure
enforcement of the order of the Commission or other
appropriate relief. When the Commission has heard and
decided any complaint brought before it, enforcement of its
order shall be initiated by the filing of a petition in court,
together with a transcript of the record of the hearing before
the Commission, and issuance and service of a copy of said
petition as in proceedings in equity. The Commission's copy of
the testimony shall be available at all reasonable times to all
parties for examination without cost, and for the purpose of
enforcement or judicial review of the order. Any failure to obey
an order of the Court may be punishable by such Court as
contempt thereof.
(c) Enforcement by private person.
[1] In cases involving a claim of discrimination, except for
claims alleging discriminatory housing practices, if a
complainant invokes the procedures set forth in this act,
that individual's right of action in the courts of the
Commonwealth shall not be foreclosed. If within one year
after the filing of the complaint with the Commission, the
Commission dismisses the complaint, or for whatever
§ 296-7 SCRANTON CODE § 296-7
290:458
reason closes the complainant's case, or has not entered
into a conciliation agreement to which the complainant is
a party, the Commission must so notify the complainant.
On receipt of such a notice, the complainant shall be able
to bring an action in the Court of Common Pleas of
Lackawanna County based on the right to freedom from
discrimination granted by this chapter. A person claiming
to be aggrieved by a discriminatory housing practice, may
commence a civil action whether or not a complaint has
been filed under this section and without regard to the
status of any such complaint, but if the Commission has
obtained a conciliation agreement with the consent of an
aggrieved person, no action may be filed under this
chapter by such aggrieved person with respect to the
alleged discriminatory housing practice which forms the
basis for such complaint, except for the purpose of
enforcing the terms of such an agreement. A person
alleged to be aggrieved by a discriminatory housing
practice may not commence a civil action under this
chapter with respect to an alleged discriminatory housing
practice which forms the basis of a charge issued by the
Commission, if the Commission or an administrative law
judge assigned by the Commission has commenced a
hearing on the record under this chapter with respect to
such charge.
[2] An action under this subsection shall be filed within two
years of the date of the last alleged discriminatory act.
Computation of such two-year period shall not include any
time during which an administrative proceeding under this
chapter was pending with respect to a complaint under
this chapter based upon such discriminatory housing
practice.
[3] If the Court finds that the respondent has engaged in or is
engaging in an unlawful discriminatory practice charged
in the complaint, the Court shall enjoin the respondent
from engaging in such unlawful discriminatory practice
and order affirmative action which may include, but is not
limited to, reinstatement or hiring of employees, granting
of back pay, or any other legal or equitable relief as the
Court deems appropriate. Back-pay liability shall not
accrue from a date more than three years prior to the filing
of the complaint charging violations of the chapter.
[4] The Court shall serve upon the Commission any final order
issued in any action brought under this subsection.
[5] Findings after trial.
§ 296-7 HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS § 296-7
290:459
[a] If, after a trial, held pursuant to Subsection D(11)(c),
the Court of Common Pleas finds that a defendant
engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful
discriminatory practices defined in this chapter, the
Court may award attorneys' fees and costs as provided
under the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act to the
prevailing plaintiff.
[b] If, after a trial held pursuant to Subsection D(11)(c),
the Court of Common Pleas finds that a defendant has
not engaged in or is not engaging in any unlawful
discriminatory practice as defined in this act, the
court may award attorneys' fees and costs to the
prevailing defendant if the defendant proves that the
complaint was brought in bad faith, except in the case
of complaints brought under § 296-4, Unlawful
housing practices. For claims raised under the Fair
Housing Act, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development is responsible for attorneys' fees to
prevailing respondents within the framework of the
Equal Access to Justice Act.
(d) Penalties. Any person who shall willfully resist, prevent,
impede or interfere with the Commission, its members, agents
or agencies, in the performance of duties pursuant to this
chapter, or shall willfully violate an order of the Commission,
shall be guilty of misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, or to
undergo imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both, in the
discretion of the court, but procedure for the review of an
order shall not be deemed to be such willful conduct. The
provisions of this chapter shall be construed liberally for the
accomplishment of the purposes thereof, and any law
inconsistent with any provisions hereof shall not apply.
(12) Except as otherwise provided, any order of the Commission may be
subject to judicial review under provisions appearing in 2 P.S §§ 751
through 764.
(13) Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with the
provision of any other ordinance of the City, or in any regulation
issued under the authority of such Ordinance, the provisions which
establish the higher standard for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare shall prevail.
§ 296-7 SCRANTON CODE § 296-7
290:460
Chapter 298
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
§ 296-7 INSURANCE § 296-7
298:461

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted as Ord. No. 171-1992 (Ch. 7, Art. X, of the 1979 Code),
amended in its entirety 2-1-1995 by Ord. No. 10-1995]
§ 298-1. Authority of Treasurer.
The Treasurer of the City of Scranton is hereby appointed as the designated
officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties stated
herein.
§ 298-2. Municipal certificate; transfer of proceeds.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the
"insuring agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure
located within the City of Scranton where the amount recoverable for
the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds seven thousand
five hundred dollars ($7.500.), unless the named insured or insuring
agent is furnished by the Treasurer of the City of Scranton with a
municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508 (b) of Act 98 of 1992,52 as
amended by Act 93 of 1994, and unless there is compliance with
Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and unless there is
compliance with Section 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 1992 as amended
and the provisions of this Article.
B. Where pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended,
the Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges against real
property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided however, that if the loss is agreed upon by the named insured
and the insuring agent equals or exceeds sixty percent (60%) of the
aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building
restructure, the following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the Treasurer of the City of Scranton, in the aggregate of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.) for each fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.) of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a
claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000.) or less, the amount transferred to the
City of Scranton shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.); or
(2) If, at the time of a loss report, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
52.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638 et seq.
§ 298-1 INSURANCE § 298-2
298:463
insuring agent shall transfer to the City of Scranton from the
insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
(3) The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(4) After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the Treasurer of the City of
Scranton shall return the amount of the funds transferred to the
municipality in excess of the estimate to the named insured, if the
City of Scranton has not commenced to remove, repair or secure
the building or other structure.
(5) Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the City of Scranton
shall do the following:
(a) The Treasurer of the City of Scranton shall place the proceeds
in the separate fund to be used solely as security against the
total costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
structure, which are incurred by the City of Scranton. Such
costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal
or administrative costs incurred by the municipality in
connection with such removal, repair or securing of the
building or any proceedings related thereto.
(b) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the City of Scranton with the name and
address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred
funds and the name and address of the named insured, the
designated officer shall contact the named insured, certify that
the proceeds have been received by the City of Scranton and
notify the named insured that the procedures under this
subsection shall be followed.
(c) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all
applicable regulations and orders of the City of Scranton and
the required proof of such completion received by the
Treasurer of the City of Scranton, and if the City of Scranton
has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing, the
fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the City of
Scranton has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the cost shall be paid from the
fund, and if excess funds remain, the City of Scranton shall
transfer the remaining funds to the named insured.
(d) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
City of Scranton pursuant to this section, and not returned to
the named insured, such interest shall belong to the City of
Scranton. To the extent that the proceeds are returned to the
§ 298-2 SCRANTON CODE § 298-2
298:464
§ 298-3. Additional remedies; additional agreements.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit the ability of the City
of Scranton to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this Article
shall be construed to prohibit the City of Scranton and the named insured
from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to
the named insured of some other reasonable disposition of the damaged
property has been negotiated.
§ 298-4. Fees.
The governing body may fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal
activities of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening
separate fund accounts.
§ 298-5. Violations and penalties.
An owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who violates
this Article shall be subject to a penalty of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.) per violation.
named insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall be
distributed to the named insured at the time that the proceeds
are returned.
§ 298-2 INSURANCE § 298-5
298:465
Chapter 301
JUNK AND JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Second hand goods and dealers — See Ch.
379.
Solid waste — See Ch. 400.
§ 301-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead, scrap
zinc and all other scrap metals and their alloys, bones, rags, paper, used
cloth, used rubber, used rope, used tinfoil, used bottles, old or used
machinery, used tools, used appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used
lumber, used boxes or crates, used pipe or pipe fittings, used tires and
other manufactured goods that are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to
make them unusable in their existing condition, but are subject to being
dismantled.
JUNKYARDS — Any buildings, structures and premises where junk, waste,
discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled,
packed, disassembled or handled, including automobile wrecking yards,
house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but not
including the purchase or storage of used furniture and household
equipment, used cars held for sale in operating condition and not for the
purpose of being sold for scrap or salvage.
§ 301-2. Fence required.
All outdoor storage facilities in junkyards shall be enclosed in a substantial,
solid, nontransparent fence not less than eight (8) feet, nor more than ten
(10) feet high. Such enclosure shall at all times be painted and kept in good
order.
§ 301-3. Storage of materials.
No material or merchandise of any sort shall be stored in front of the
enclosure provided for in § 301-2.
§ 301-4. Placement of materials.
No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any junkyard premises in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off such premises by natural
causes or forces.
§ 298-5 SCRANTON CODE § 301-5
301:466
§ 301-5. Storage in closed containers.
All materials or wastes on junkyard premises which might cause fumes
or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or
otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only
in closed containers.
§ 301-6. Burning restricted.
No person shall burn in any junkyard refuse or junk, including rubber tires,
batteries and rubber from wires or any type of junk or old used automobiles
which may cause fumes or odors injurious to the health and welfare of
adjoining residents.
§ 301-7. License required.
No person shall keep or maintain any junkyard within the city unless a
license therefor shall have been previously obtained.
§ 301-8. Application.
Every person desiring to keep, maintain or operate a junkyard shall file with
the Department of Public Safety an application for a license. The application
shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the particular place for
which the license is desired and the size of the area and the name of the
owner or owners of the premises.
§ 301-9. Issuance; term.
A license to keep or maintain any junkyard shall be issued only by the
Superintendent of Building Inspection of the Department of Public Safety
and shall be for a period of one (1) year or any fractional part thereof The
license year shall commence on the first Monday of September of each year.
§ 301-10. Fee.
§ 301-11. Transfer of license.
The license issued under this chapter may be transferred by the owner
for the duration of the term for which issued. However, the Department of
Public Safety shall be notified of the proposed transfer, and the transfer may
be made only upon the approval of the Director of the Department.
Chapter 303
A. The fee for licensing junkyards by the Department of Community
Development, Bureau of Inspections and licensing shall be five hundred
dollars ($500.) for each yard or premises for which application is made.
B. The license fee may be prorated on a monthly basis.
§ 301-5 LACKAWANNA RIVER LEVEE § 301-11
303:467
LACKAWANNA RIVER LEVEE
§ 303-1. Prohibited acts; erection of signs.
The placement of any structure, as hereinafter defined, or the traversing
with any vehicle, as hereinafter defined, or the storage of any material,
whether contained or loose, is hereby prohibited and may be punishable
by the fines and penalties as set forth herein. Further authorized is the
erection of any and all appropriate signage to indicate that nothing may be
placed within the ten-foot buffer described above.53
§ 303-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STRUCTURE — Any building of any nature or any size, either with
foundation or without foundation, including but not limited to mobile
structures which may be removed. "Structure" includes, by way of example
and not limitation, any dumpster or like device for storage. "Structure"
includes, by way of example and not limitation, any shed or like structure,
no matter what the size. "Structure" includes any type of fence, whether
secured in the ground or resting upon the ground.
VEHICLE — Any vehicle, used for travel or otherwise, including but not
limited to automobiles, trucks, vans of any nature, tractor trailers,
motorcycles, motor scooters, mobile homes and trailers. In addition, this list
includes any vehicle as defined under the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 303-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter will be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $500 per violation. Each
continuing day in which the violation is not corrected following written
notice from the City constitutes a distinct violation subject to an
additional fine of $500.
B. If any damage has been caused to the levee or any of its appurtenances
as a result of a violation of this chapter, the party damaging said levee
or appurtenance responsible for shall, in addition to the fines above, be
liable for the cost of any repairs as such repairs are deemed necessary
by the City and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
53.Editor's Note: The preamble to this chapter described said buffer as an area of 10 feet
from the toe of the slope on the land side of the levee.
§ 301-11 SCRANTON CODE § 303-3
303:468
Chapter 305
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising and billposting — See Ch. 140. Solid waste — See Ch. 400.
§ 305-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning ascribed thereto:
HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, sample, device, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, paper, magazine, booklet or other which advertises for
sale any product or directs attention to any business, mercantile or
commercial establishment or activity or any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind.
LITTER — Includes garbage, refuse, ashes, rubbish and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create
a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PARK — A park, square, playground, pool, recreation center or other public
area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
or parking lot designed or used either wholly or in part for residential,
industrial or commercial purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant, including any yards, grounds, walks,
driveways, porches, steps, vestibules or mailboxes belonging or
appurtenant to such premises.
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public
ways and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
PUBLIC RECEPTACLES — A receptacle placed by the city at various
locations for the reception of litter, other than household or commercial
refuse.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
§ 305-2. Disposal of litter.
A. No person shall place, throw, drop or deposit litter in or upon any
street, sidewalk, park, stream or other body of water or other place
within the city, except in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles.
B. No person shall place or deposit litter in public receptacles or
authorized private receptacles except in such manner as to prevent it
§ 303-3 LITTERING § 305-2
305:469
§ 305-3. Deposit from vehicles or aircraft.
No person in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place or private premises. No person shall operate a truck or
other vehicle, unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
its contents from falling, being blown or deposited upon any street or public
place. No person shall throw out, drop or deposit any litter, handbill or other
object from aircraft so as to cause it to fall within the city.
§ 305-4. Litter on sidewalks. [Amended by Ord. No. 166-1992]
§ 305-5. Litter on private premises. [Amended by Ord. No.
166-1992]
The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times
maintain the premises free from litter. No person shall throw or deposit
litter on any private premises or on any open or vacant lot or premises,
whether or not owned or controlled by such person, except that such
owner or person in control may maintain authorized private receptacles for
deposit, collection or temporary storage of litter. In order to ensure that
garbage or other solid waste (as defined in the Solid Waste Management
Act54) deposited for collection is not broken into and becomes litter, each
owner of buildings within the city used for residential purposes shall ensure
that each dwelling unit therein has sufficient garbage containers of at
least thirty-two-gallon capacity with securely fitted lids. The owners of
commercial and industrial buildings shall be required to maintain a
sufficient number of garbage containers of at least thirty-two-gallon
capacity so that all garbage is deposited into said containers, unless
from being scattered or carried by the elements to any street, sidewalk
or other public place or upon private premises.
A. Persons owning or occupying private premises shall make reasonable
efforts to keep the sidewalks in front of such premises free of litter. No
person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or public place
the accumulation of litter from any building or lot, or from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway.
B. No person shall place the garbage for pickup prior to twenty-four (24)
hours from the usual scheduled pickup day. Delayed pickup days will be
announced by the Department of Public Works.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalty of a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars
($300.), or be subject to imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, if
said fine and costs are not paid, plus costs of prosecution, for each
offense. Each day that any of the provisions of this section are violated
shall constitute a separate offense. Each property on which a violation
of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
54.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101.
§ 305-2 SCRANTON CODE § 305-5
305:470
dumpsters are used. Containers shall be placed at the curb for pickup no
sooner than twenty-four (24) hours prior thereto.
§ 305-6. Handbill distribution.
No person shall place or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle or
premises without the acceptance thereof by the owner or occupancy of
such vehicle or premises, provided that this section does not prohibit or
otherwise regulate the delivery of any matter by the United States Postal
Service.
§ 305-7. Dumping inside the city.
§ 305-8. Dumping in public or private receptacles.
The dumping of household or commercial refuse within the city into a
public receptacle or into another private receptacle without the owner's
permission by any person is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 305-9. Vandalism committed by minors.
If any person, parent or adult knowingly permits a minor child to commit
any violation of this chapter or if they knowingly permit the minor to commit
acts of vandalism, the parent or adult shall be responsible for any costs
which may be incurred by the city or any designated sponsored group for
causing the nuisance or repairing the vandalized property.
§ 305-10. Tampering with receptacles.
No person shall steal, upset, mutilate, deface or tamper with public or
private receptacles or cause the contents thereof to be spilled or scattered
in or upon any public place or private premises. If any provisions of this
section are violated, the person or firm shall be required to provide incurred
costs for repairing the damage in addition to any penalties hereafter
prescribed.
§ 305-11. Preventing the scattering of litter prior to pickup.
All litter that is subject to movement by the elements shall be secured by
the owner and/or occupant of the premises prior to the regularly scheduled
pickup before the litter is scattered by the elements to adjoining public or
private places.
A. The dumping, throwing or placing of ashes, scrap, garbage, rubbish or
refuse of any kind within the city, by any person, is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and is prohibited.
B. The dumping, throwing or placing of ashes, scrap, garbage, rubbish or
refuse of any kind within the rivers, streams, creeks or waterways
located within the City of Scranton by any person is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 305-5 LITTERING § 305-12
305:471
§ 305-12. Construction or demolition sites.
The general contractor in charge of any construction or demolition site
shall maintain the site in such a manner that litter will be prevented
from being scattered by the elements to adjoining premises. All litter from
construction, demolition or any related activities shall be picked up at the
end of each workday and placed in containers in order to prevent scattering
either on or to adjoining premises. Each day that the provisions of this
section are violated shall be considered a separate and additional violation.
§ 305-13. Loading and unloading docks.
The person owning, operating or in control of a loading or unloading dock
shall at all times maintain the dock area free of litter in such a manner
that litter will be prevented from being carried by the elements to adjoining
premises.
§ 305-14. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of § 305-2 shall be subject
to a penalty or fine not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.) or
imprisonment not exceeding five (5) days for each violation. Any person
who violated the above provisions shall have five (5) days from the date
of notice of violation to pay such fine to the City Treasurer. The failure
to make payment within five (5) days shall result in a summons being
issued in accordance with the law.
B. Any person who violates §§ 305-3, 305-6, 305-8, 305-9, 305-11, 305-12
and 305-13 shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.), plus the costs of prosecution, and/or be subject to
imprisonment not to exceed fifteen (15) days if said fine and costs are
not paid, for each offense. In addition to said fine or imprisonment and
costs, said violator shall clean up the entire dumping area. Failure to
clean up said area by the violator will result in the city cleaning up the
said area and the total expenditures will be charged to said violator,
together with the costs of collection, including attorneys fees. If the
violator has disregarded an order from the Department of Community
Development to remove garbage, debris or litter on his or her premises,
and the city thereafter cleans up the area, then a lien may be placed on
the property in accordance with state law, for the removal of a
nuisance.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§ 305-5, 305-7 and
305-10 shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.), plus the
costs of prosecution, or be subject to imprisonment not exceeding
ninety (90) days if said fine and costs are not paid, for each offense. In
addition to said fine or imprisonment, said violator shall clean up the
entire dumping area. Failure to clean such area by the violator will
result in the city cleaning up said area and the total expenditures will
be charged to such violator, plus the costs of collection, including
§ 305-12 SCRANTON CODE § 305-14
305:472
§ 305-15. Anti-litter account.
The City Treasurer is hereby authorized to open a special city account to be
known as the "Anti-litter Account," and any funds derived from violations of
this chapter shall be deposited in such account. Such funds shall be used to
promote and effect this chapter.
§ 305-16. Designated appropriate city employees.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized to
designate the appropriate city employees to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 309
LOITERING
§ 309-1. Definitions and word usage.
attorneys fees. If the violator has disregarded an order from the
Department of Community Development to remove garbage, debris or
litter on his or her premises, and the city thereafter cleans up the area,
then a lien may be placed on the property in accordance with state law
for the removal of a nuisance.
D. Each day a violation continues or is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense for which a separate penalty may be imposed. Each
property on which a violation occurs or is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense for which a separate penalty may be
imposed.
E. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be issued a litter offense notice which shall be a form
delivered by the anti-litter and sanitation officer. The violator shall be
required to pay the appropriate fine or penalty to the City Treasurer
within ten (10) days from the notice of violation. The failure to make
such payment within ten (10) days shall result in a summons being
issued in accordance with law.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall
have the meaning ascribed thereto:
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A police officer or the Director of
Public Safety of the city.
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one (1) location or
lingering or standing around without purpose either alone or in consort
with others.
OWNER — One who holds property in fee or who has equitable title.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and
includes any public street, public sidewalk or public bridge, alley or
§ 305-14 LOITERING § 309-1
309:473
§ 309-2. Obstruction of public places.
§ 309-3. Loitering on private property; posting; public notice.
court, as well as the front of and the area immediately adjacent to any
parking lot, store, restaurant, tavern or other place of business.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is used in the mandatory sense.
A. No person shall loiter in a public place, as defined in § 309-1A, in such
manner as to obstruct any public street, public sidewalk, public bridge
or other public place or public building by hindering or impeding or
tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of
vehicles or pedestrians.
B. No person shall commit in or upon any public street, public sidewalk,
public bridge or other public place or public buildings any act which
obstructs or interferes with the free and uninterrupted use of property
of the lawful conducting of any business by anyone in or upon or facing
or fronting on any such public street, public sidewalk, public bridge or
other public place or public building, in such manner as to hinder or
impede or tend to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted ingress
and egress thereto.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit peaceful picketing
provided that such picketing does not obstruct free and uninterrupted
passage of vehicles or pedestrians.
A. No person shall loiter, as hereinafter defined, on private property which
has been posted in accordance with this section.
B. Any owner of private property who desires to bring such property
within this section shall post the property and provide public notice as
specified below.
C. Each entrance shall have a sign posted as to be visible at all times to an
ordinarily observant driver or pedestrian. Signs to be read in darkness
are to be reflectorized or illuminated by lights which includes
positioning to be illuminated by approaching vehicles.
D. Each building shall have a sign posted on each side where loitering is
prohibited.
E. If loitering is prohibited in a parking lot, signs shall be posted
prominently throughout. The signs shall state "Loitering Prohibited" or
"No Loitering," and entrance signs shall also indicate, whether as one
(1) sign or two (2) adjacent signs, "Violators Prosecuted." These signs
shall contain lettering at least three-fourths (3/4) inches high.
F. The owner of private property to be posted shall advertise twice in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City of Scranton or once in
two (2) such newspapers, that he, name, owner of property identified by
§ 309-1 SCRANTON CODE § 309-3
309:474
§ 309-4. Release of liability.
§ 309-5. Violations and penalties; evidence.
address or other description of its location, has posted "No Loitering
Signs, Violators Prosecuted." The cost of such notice shall be at the
owner's expense. A copy of such public notice shall be forwarded to the
Director of Public Safety, with the date of publication.
A. Each owner of private property to be posted in accordance with § 309-3
above shall execute a hold harmless agreement, which shall be
approved by the City Solicitor and which agreement shall clearly state
that the Scranton Police Department cannot and does not serve as a
guarantor of the safety of any person or property on said property, nor
is it to act as private security personnel, but it may act to keep order
and enforce this section thereon. A copy shall be filed with the Director
of Public Safety and the City Solicitor.
B. The Director of Public Safety or his designate shall inspect such private
property to ensure proper posting prior to enforcement action. If such
property or owner fails to comply with the requirements of this section,
the Director of Public Safety shall so inform him and no citation may
thereafter be issued pursuant to § 309-3A herein until such compliance
be made.
A. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in § 309-2, a law enforcement officer of the City of Scranton shall order
that person to stop causing or committing such condition. If any person
receiving any such order from a law enforcement officer fails or refuses
to obey the same, that person shall be guilty of violating the pertinent
subsection of this section and upon conviction is subject to a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.) or imprisonment of not more than
ninety (90) days, or both, plus costs of prosecution, as a violator of a
summary offense.
B. Any person who violates § 309-3A posted property shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, is subject to a fine not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.) or imprisonment of not more than ninety
(90) days, or both, plus costs of prosecution. The posting of the property
shall constitute a warning.
C. Any document submitted to the Director of Public Safety, or written by
him verifying the proper posting and public notice, may be, after
certification by the Director of Public Safety, or an authorized
custodian, that such documents are a fair and accurate copy of those on
file with his office, shall be competent evidence in any court of
competent jurisdiction to show compliance with the provisions of this
section without any further evidence of their truth, accuracy or
authenticity in any prosecution under this section.
§ 309-3 LOITERING § 309-5
309:475
§ 309-6. Notice of intent to remove signs.
The owner, by advising the Director of Public Safety, in writing, may give
thirty (30) days' prior notice of his intent to remove the signs required to
be posted under this section. After such time no citations may be issued
pursuant to § 309-3A. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or
prohibit any person from posting his property for trespassing.
Chapter 313
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 215. Heating and air-conditioning
standards — See Ch. 290.
§ 313-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Scranton, being marked and designated as the "The
International Mechanical Code, 1998 Edition," as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of
the City of Scranton in the State of Pennsylvania for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Mechanical
Code, 1998, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this chapter.
§ 313-2. Amendments.
The following sections of the International Mechanical Code, 1998 Edition
are amended to read as follows:
D. Fines collected pursuant to this section shall be paid into the city
treasury.
A. Section 107.1.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
107.1.1 Approved inspection agencies.
1. The code official shall accept reports of approved inspection
agencies, provided that such agencies satisfy the requirements as
to qualifications and reliability as stated in § 313-4, Requirements
for mechanical underwriters.
§ 309-5 SCRANTON CODE § 313-2
313:476
2. Before any mechanical contractor or other person doing
mechanical work for which he has received a permit shall
complete such work, he shall make application for inspection
on the form used by the approved mechanical underwriters
inspections agency specifying the premises wherein the
installation or construction is being done and the extent,
specification and classification of such work and shall pay the fees
for all inspections.
3. The mechanical underwriters inspection agencies shall, upon
receipt of inspection application, make or cause to be made
inspection of such work and conduct such tests as may be
necessary. If the work is done in accordance with the
requirements of this mechanical code, the mechanical
underwriters inspection agency shall thereupon issue a rough or
final certificate of approval, as the case may be, to the applicant
and the Mechanical Inspector.
4. When the mechanical installation is not approved by the
mechanical underwriters inspector or the City Mechanical
Inspector, such inspector shall send a notice of noncompliance to
the applicant and to the city code official.
5. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a final certificate
is issued by the mechanical underwriters agency.
B. Section 108.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair mechanical equipment
or systems in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code
official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not
less than $200 and not more than $600, plus costs, or imprisonment
not exceeding 30 days, in default of payment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person found
violating this chapter shall be responsible for payment required to
bring the property affected by said violation into compliance with said
code.
C. Section 108.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:
§ 313-2 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 313-2
313:477
§ 313-3. Certificate of inspection.
§ 313-4. Requirements for mechanical underwriters.
108.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the code official that
mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code
or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately
cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work.
The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized
to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be
required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person
who shall continue any work on the system after being served with
a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a
fine of not less than $500 nor more than $10,000.
A. Certification. A mechanical underwriter inspector must possess
certification in each of the following levels of BOCA examination:
mechanical one-family and two-family dwellings, mechanical general
and mechanical plan review. Inspectors not possessing plan review
certification shall have a period of 18 months from the date of
enactment of this chapter to complete this certification process. During
this grace period, an inspector must possess mechanical one-family and
two-family dwellings and mechanical general BOCA certifications in
order to perform work as an underwriter. Any person not successfully
completing certification in mechanical plan review at the end of the
eighteen-month grace period shall not be eligible for licensure until
successful completion of the mechanical plan review specified.
B. Insurance coverage. Any person performing work as a mechanical
underwriter inspector shall show proof of:
(1) Professional liability insurance: at least $500,000.
(2) Errors and omissions insurance: at least $500,000.
C. Proximity. In order to facilitate efficient inspections, any person
performing work as a mechanical underwriter inspector shall perform
said work from a fully staffed office within the City of Scranton.
D. Any person performing work as a mechanical underwriter inspector
shall possess a current city license. A license may be obtained by
showing proof of current BOCA certification and payment of $150 to the
City Treasurer.
E. Mechanical underwriters shall have a minimum of 45 hours of
continuing education units (CEU) every three years.
F. Mechanical underwriters shall not inspect any work where a permit has
not been posted.
§ 313-2 SCRANTON CODE § 313-4
313:478
§ 313-5. Temporary use.
The code official shall be authorized to permit the temporary use of
equipment required for heating, ventilating or providing air-conditioning
equipment or any equipment for which a permit has been procured from the
bureau before such installation has been completed and the final certificate
of inspection has been issued. Any work performed under the temporary
certificate shall be in compliance with the International Mechanical Code.
Chapter 317
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 169.
Explosives and blasting agents — See Ch. 221.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 336.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 340.
Zoning — See Ch. 445.
§ 317-1. Findings and policy.
G. Mechanical underwriters shall not inspect any work which has been
performed by a nonlicensed contractor.
H. Mechanical underwriters agencies shall provide the city with the names
of all qualified inspectors along with their certification of the required
CEU on an annual basis.
I. The code official, with the approval of the Director of the Department of
Community Development, reserves the right to terminate only the
mechanical underwriter inspector and/or the underwriter for cause,
after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by
the Building Appeals Board.
J. A mechanical underwriter inspection is not required for residential
buildings.
A. The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud
noises within the limits of the City of Scranton is a condition which has
existed for some time, and the extent and magnitude of such noises are
increasing.
B. The making and creation of such loud noises is a detriment to the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare of the city and may
cause damage to property or business.
C. The necessity, in the public interest, for the provisions herein contained
and enacted is declared as a matter of public policy for the purpose of
§ 313-4 NOISE § 317-1
317:479
§ 317-2. Definitions and standards.
securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety,
welfare and the peace and quiet of the residents of the city.
A. All terminology used in this chapter not defined below shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level
as measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighting decibel
network. The level so read shall be designated "dB(A)."
CITY — The City of Scranton.
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION — Any erection, repair, renovation,
demolition or removal of any building or structure and the excavation,
filling, grading and regulation of lots in connection therewith.
DECIBEL — A logarithmic unit of measure used in describing the
amplitude of sound. Decibel is denoted as "dB."
DEPARTMENT — Any department, agency or authority of the City of
Scranton.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A motor vehicle used in response to a public
calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure
to danger.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to
a safe condition following a public calamity, work to restore public
utilities or work required to protect persons or property from an
imminent exposure to danger.
IMPULSIVE NOISE — Noise characterized by brief excursions of sound
pressure which significantly exceed the ambient sound pressure. The
duration of a single impulse is usually less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — As defined in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.)
MUFFLER or SOUND-DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device decreasing
or abating the level of sound escaping from an engine or machinery
system.
NOISE — Any sound which is unwanted or which causes an adverse
psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — For the purpose of issuing exceptions
or investigating land use bases for noise disturbances, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall be the Noise Control Officer. In all other
§ 317-1 SCRANTON CODE § 317-2
317:480
cases of complaint, investigation, enforcement or citation of violations
of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Bureau of Police.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — A sound which:
PERSONS — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation,
user, owner or operator, and includes any officer, employee,
department, agency or instrument of a state or any political subdivision
of a state. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, "person" includes the individual members, partners, officers
and managers or any of them of partnerships and associations and, as
for corporations, the officers and managers thereof or any of them and,
in their absence, the shareholders.
POWER MODEL VEHICLES — Any powered vehicles, either airborne,
waterborne or landborne, which are designed not to carry persons or
property, such as but not limited to model airplanes, boats, cars and
rockets, and which can be propelled by mechanical means.
PROPERTY BOUNDARY — An imaginary line, exterior to any enclosed
structure, at the ground surface, which separates the real property
owned, rented or leased by one person from that owned, rented or
leased by another person and its vertical extension.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are
owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY — All land, whether publicly or privately owned,
whether improved or not improved, with or without structures,
exclusive of any areas devoted to public rights-of-way.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces
that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium or the
superposition of such propagated oscillation which evokes an auditory
sensation. The description of "sound" may include any characteristics
of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound-pressure level obtained by the
use of a sound-level meter and frequency weighting network, such as
Disrupts or injures the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace or
safety of persons or animals;
(1)
Annoys, disturbs or perturbs a reasonable person with normal
sensitivities;
(2)
(3) Endangers or injures personal or real property; or
Is in excess of the sound levels by zoning districts established by
this chapter.
(4)
§ 317-2 NOISE § 317-2
317:481
§ 317-3. Administration and enforcement.
The power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be
vested in the Bureau of Police.
§ 317-4. Consultation with Bureau of Police prior to project
approval.
Each department whose duty it is to review and approve new projects or
changes to existing projects that result or may result in the emission of
noise shall consult with the Bureau of Police prior to such approval for its
recommendations.
§ 317-5. Requirements prior to entering into agreements.
Any written agreement, purchase order or instrument whereby the city
is committed to an expenditure of funds in return for work, services,
equipment, materials or any combination of the foregoing shall not be
entered into unless such agreement, purchase order or instrument contains
provisions requiring that any equipment or activities which are subject to
the provisions of this chapter will be operated, constructed or conducted
without causing violation of this chapter.
A, B or C, as specified in the American National Standards Institute
specifications for sound-level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971 or the latest
revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not included,
the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument, which includes but is not
limited to a microphone, amplifier, rms detector, integrator or time
average or output meter, that measures sound-pressure fluctuations.
The output meter reads sound-pressure level when properly calibrated
and the instrument is of Type 2 or better as specified in American
National Standards Institute Publication S1.4-1971 or its successor
publication. The manufacturer's published indication of compliance
with such specifications shall comply.
SOUND PRESSURE — The instantaneous difference between the actual
pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in
space, as produced by sound energy.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — The level of sound measured in dB units
with a sound level meter which has a uniform ("flat") response over the
band of frequencies measured.
VIBRATION — An oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or
random nature described by displacement, velocity or acceleration with
respect to a given reference point.
ZONING DISTRICTS — The land use districts established in File of the
Council No. 74-1993 (as amended).55
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 445, Zoning.
§ 317-2 SCRANTON CODE § 317-6
317:482
§ 317-6. Zoning districts.
No residential district adjoining, abutting or otherwise bounded by an
industrial district shall receive in excess of 65 dB(A) as measured from
a point 10 feet inside the property line of any residence immediately on
the boundary of the two districts or immediately fronting a public right-ofway,
which right-of-way abuts, adjoins or runs contiguous with an industrial
zone boundary unless a sound barrier shall have been constructed. A sound
barrier shall be set back from the property a distance not less than a
distance equivalent to the height of the barrier erected within the property
of the source of a noise disturbance in an industrial zone. The sound barrier
shall be in conformity with any agreements with the Noise Control Officer
but shall be constructed of decorative masonry with an evergreen tree
barricade on the residential side, which trees shall not be spaced less than
10 feet apart. Appropriate federal and state noise barrier guidelines and
standards shall be consulted. If a sound barrier is required, the maximum
dB(A) shall be 75.
§ 317-7. Prohibited acts.
A. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
noise disturbance. Noncommercial public speaking and public
assembly activities shall be exempt. The following acts are specifically
declared to be a noise disturbance and in violation of this chapter:
(1) Radios, television sets and similar devices. Operating or permitting
the use or operation of any radio set, musical instrument,
television, phonograph, sound amplifier, automobile radio,
automobile stereo, high-fidelity equipment, portable stereo or
other device, including but not limited to devices utilizing digital
technology, for the production or reproduction of sound:
(a) At any time of the day in such a manner from any source so as
to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary;
(b) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across any
real property boundary when operated in or on a motor vehicle
on a public right-of-way or public space;
(c) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any
person other than the operator of the device, when operated by
any passenger on a common carrier; or
(d) At such a sound intensity that the sound is audible from a
distance of 40 feet in any public area, street or sidewalk of the
city; when the sound source is in any public area, street or
sidewalk of the city.
(2) Stationary nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or
permitting the sounding of any signal from any stationary bell,
chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for
§ 317-6 NOISE § 317-7
317:483
nonemergency purposes, from any place, for more than one minute
in any hourly period.
(3) Emergency signaling devices.
(a) The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors
of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or
similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for
emergency purposes or for testing; or
(b) Testing:
[1] Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall
occur at the same time of the day each time such test is
performed, but not before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.
Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test
time. In no case shall such test time exceed 60 seconds.
[2] Testing of the complete emergency signaling system,
including the functioning of the signaling device and the
personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur
more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall
not occur before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. The time limit
specified in Subsection A(3)(b)[1] shall not apply to such
complete system testing.
(c) Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar
alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is
automatically terminated within six minutes.
(4) Loudspeakers/public address systems. The use of or operation of
any loudspeaker, public address system device or similar device
such that sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a real
property boundary.
(5) Vehicle, motorboat or aircraft repairs and testing. Repairing,
rebuilding or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or
aircraft in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary.
(6) Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operating of
powered model vehicles in such a manner as to create a noise
disturbance across a residential real property boundary or in a
public space between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day.
(7) Domestic power tools.
(a) Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically
powered mower, saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden
tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential
areas so as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential
§ 317-7 SCRANTON CODE § 317-7
317:484
property boundary between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. the following day.
(b) Snow removal devices such as snowblowers are exempt from
this section under one or more of the following conditions:
[1] A municipal snow emergency declared by the city; an
emergency declaration by the Governor of the
Commonwealth, state emergency agency or their
designees;
[2] When an accumulation of one inch or more is forecast by
the National Weather Service; or
[3] In the case of personal emergency or need to reach a place
of employment.
(8) Street sales. Offering for sale by shouting or outcry or by any other
amplified or unamplified sound within any residential or
commercial area of the city except between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
(9) Motor vehicle prohibitions.
(a) Exhaust system. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a
muffler or other effective noise suppressing system in good
working order and in constant operation, and no muffler or
exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass or
similar device so as to cause a noise disturbance.
(b) Maximum permissible motor vehicle sound-pressure levels on
public rights-of-way. No person shall operate or cause to be
operated a public or private motor vehicle or motorcycle or any
equipment attached to such a vehicle on a public right-of-way
at any time in such a manner that the sound emitted by the
motor vehicle or motorcycle or any equipment attached to such
a vehicle exceeds the level set forth in Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Regulations Title 67, Chapter
157, Subchapter b, 67 Pa. Code § 157.11, and all amendments
thereto.
(c) Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment
attached to such a vehicle while the vehicle is stationary, for
reasons other than traffic congestion, anywhere within 250
feet of any residence in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a residential property boundary for a
period longer than 15 minutes in any hour.
(d) Unnecessary hornblowing. No person shall at any time sound
the horn or other warning device of a vehicle except when
§ 317-7 NOISE § 317-7
317:485
absolutely necessary as a warning while actually driving such
vehicle.
(e) Sound trucks. No person shall operate sound-amplifying
equipment mounted on or attached to any motor vehicle:
[1] Such that sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance
across a real property boundary; or
[2] Such that sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance on
a public right-of-way or public space between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
(10) Concerts, block parties and other outdoor performances. Band
concerts, block parties, church carnivals or other performances, or
similar activities publicly or privately sponsored and presented in
any public or private space outdoors, shall not produce sound in
excess of 85 dB(A) unless in receipt of a noise control exception as
issued by the Noise Control Officer.
(11) Loading and unloading operations. Loading, unloading, opening,
closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building or
construction materials, industrial waste or cast-off parts, garbage
cans or other similar objects, without attenuation of sound through
mufflers, suppressors, exterior barriers or the like, of
manufacturing or industrial equipment between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the day following in such a manner as to
cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary. This subsection shall not apply to municipal or utility
services in or about the public right-of-way.
(12) Explosives, firearms and similar devices. The use or firing of
explosives, firearms or similar devices which create impulsive
sound so as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property
boundary or on a public right-of-way, without first obtaining a
variance issued pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance56 of the City of
Scranton.
(13) Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work:
(a) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. the following
day on weekdays and Saturdays or between the hours of 8:00
p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on Sundays and holidays, such that the sound
therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real
property line, except for public safety emergency work or
unless a variance has been obtained.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 445, Zoning.
§ 317-7 SCRANTON CODE § 317-7
317:486
(b) At any other time such that the sound level exceeds 85 dB(A) at
or across a real property boundary unless a variance has been
obtained.
(14) Places of public entertainment. Operating, playing or permitting
the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph,
drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, electronic or
mechanical sound-producing device now or to be developed which
produces, reproduces or amplifies sound within any place of public
entertainment at a sound level greater than 90 dB(A) as read by the
slow response on a sound level meter at any point that is normally
occupied by a customer unless a conspicuous and legible sign is
located outside such a place, near each public entrance stating:
WARNING: SOUND LEVELS WITHIN MAY CAUSE PERMANENT
HEARING IMPAIRMENT!
(15) Animals and birds. Owning or possessing, harboring or controlling
any animal or bird that barks, bays, cries, squawks or makes any
other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of ten
minutes or makes such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to
the disturbance of any person any time of the day or night
regardless of whether the animal or bird is physically situated in or
upon private property; provided, however, that at the time the
animal or bird is making such noise no person is trespassing or
threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the
animal is situated or for any other legitimate cause which teased or
provoked the animal or bird.
(16) Vibration. Unless a variance is obtained, operating or permitting
the operation of any device that causes vibration which is above the
vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the
property boundary of the source if on private property or at 50 feet
from the source if the source is on a public space or public right-ofway.
For the purpose of this section, "vibration perception
threshold" means the minimum ground or structure-borne
vibrational motion necessary to cause a person of normal
sensitivities to be aware of the vibration by such direct means, but
not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving
objects.
B. Tampering. The following acts or the causing thereof is prohibited:
(1) The removal or rendering inoperative by any person other than for
purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement of any muffler or
sound-dissipative device or element of design or noise label of any
product.
(2) The intentional moving or rendering inaccurate or inoperative of
any sound-monitoring instrument or device positioned by or for the
Bureau of Police, provided that such device is clearly labeled in
§ 317-7 NOISE § 317-7
317:487
§ 317-8. Sound level limits by receiving land use/district.
No land use or its operations shall generate a sound level exceeding the
limits established in the table below, when measured at the specified
locations:
Land Use or Zoning
District Receiving the
Noise
Hours/Days Maximum Sound
Level
10 feet inside a lot in a
residential district
1. 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
other than Sundays,
Christmas Day, Thanksgiving
Day, New Year's Day,
Fourth of July, Labor Day
and Memorial Day
1. 69dB(A)
2. 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
plus all day Sundays,
Christmas Day, Thanksgiving
Day, New Year's Day,
Fourth of July, Labor Day
and Memorial Day
2. 64dB(A)
10 feet inside a lot in
an I-G or I-L District
All times and days 78 dB(A)
10 feet inside any lot
line not listed above
All times and days 70 dB(A)
§ 317-9. Exempt sounds.
accordance with noise-control regulations to warn of the potential
illegality.
(3) The use of a product which has had a muffler or sound-dissipative
device or element of design or noise label removed or rendered
inoperative, with knowledge that such action has occurred.
C. Prima facie violation. The noise from any of the aforesaid prohibited
acts that disturbs two or more residents who are in general agreement
as to times and duration of the noise and who reside in separate
residences, including apartments and condominiums located across a
property line (boundary) from the property on which the source of the
noise is generated, shall be prima facie evidence of a noise disturbance.
A. Places of religious worship. The sounding or permitting the sounding of
any stationary bell or chime used in conjunction with places of worship.
B. Public buildings outdoor sound system. The sounding or permitting the
sounding of any stationary bell, chime or public address system for any
public purpose used by any structure located on public space.
§ 317-7 SCRANTON CODE § 317-9
317:488
§ 317-10. Issuance of notice of violation and/or citation; exemption
for time to comply.
§ 317-11. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 324
OBSCENE MATERIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 336.
§ 324-1. Prohibited acts.
No person, knowing the obscene character of the materials involved, shall:
C. Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate
safety, health or welfare of the community or individuals of the
community or to restore property to a safe condition following a public
calamity.
A. Violation of the foregoing provisions of this chapter shall be cause for a
citation to be issued forthwith. In lieu of a citation, enforcement
personnel may issue an order requiring abatement of any source of
noise disturbance or vibration alleged to be in violation of this chapter
within a reasonable time period which may not exceed 30 days.
B. Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with a notice of
violation, violation of any section of this chapter shall be cause for a
citation to be issued by the Bureau of Police.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 for each violation or shall be imprisoned for a term not
to exceed 30 days, or both. Every day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit
or deny the right of the city or any other person to such equitable or
other remedies as may otherwise be available with or without process
of law.
A. Display or cause or permit the display of any obscene materials in or on
any window, showcase, newsstand, display rack, billboard, display
board, viewing screen, motion-picture-screen marquee or similar place
in such manner that the display is visible from any public street,
highway, sidewalk, transportation facility or other public thoroughfare.
§ 317-9 OBSCENE MATERIAL § 324-1
324:489
§ 324-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given to them in this subsection:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the contemporary community
standards in this section, "community" means the state.
KNOWING — As used in § 324-1, "knowing" means having general
knowledge of, or reason to know or a belief or grounds for belief which
warrants further inspection or inquiry of, the character and content of any
material described therein which is reasonably susceptible to examination
by the defendant.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — Any literature, including any book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, comic book or writing, and any figure,
visual representation or image,including any drawing, photograph, picture
or motion picture, if:
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and patently
offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory
functions and lewd exhibitions of the genitals.
B. Sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any obscene materials
to any person seventeen (17) years of age or younger or offer to sell,
lend, distribute, exhibit or give away or show or have in his possession
with intent to sell, lend, distribute, exhibit or give away or show any
obscene materials to any person seventeen (17) years of age or younger
or knowingly advertise any obscene materials in any manner.
C. Design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter, publish or in any manner
manufacture or prepare any obscene materials.
D. Write, print, publish, utter or cause to be written, printed, published or
uttered any advertisement or notice of any kind giving information,
directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state where, how, from
whom or by what means any obscene materials can be purchased,
obtained or had.
E. Hire, employ, use or permit any minor child to do or assist in doing any
act or thing mentioned in this subsection.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest.
A.
The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct of a type described in this section.
B.
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
C.
§ 324-1 SCRANTON CODE § 324-2
324:490
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance, premises or place used
for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether by air,
rail, motor vehicle or any other method, including aircraft, watercraft,
railroad cars, buses and air, boat, railroad and bus terminals and stations.
§ 324-3. Minors.
A. No person shall knowingly disseminate, by sale, loan or otherwise,
explicit sexual materials to a minor. "Explicit sexual materials" as used
in this subsection, means materials which are obscene or:
(1) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film or
similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the
human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or
(2) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter
enumerated in § 324-3A(1) or explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual
conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is
harmful to minors.
B. Admitting minor to show. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly
to exhibit for monetary consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to
a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor for a
monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited a
motion-picture show or other presentation which, in whole or in part,
depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is
harmful to minors, except that the foregoing shall not apply to any
minor accompanied by his parent.
C. Definitions for this section. As used in this section the following words
and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection:
MINOR — Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing
of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse, of physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed
genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on
the part of one so clothed.
§ 324-2 OBSCENE MATERIAL § 324-3
324:491
§ 324-4. Requiring sale as conditions of business dealings.
No person shall knowingly require any distributor or retail seller as a
condition to sale or delivery for resale or consignment of any literature,
book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book,
writing, drawing, photograph, figure or image or any written or printed
matter or any article or instrument to purchase or take by consignment
for purposes of sale, resale or distribution any obscene literature, book,
magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book, writing,
drawing, photograph, figure or image or any written or printed matter of an
obscene nature or any article or instrument of an obscene nature.
§ 324-5. Injunction.
The Mayor may institute proceedings in equity in the Court of Common
Pleas of Lackawanna County when any person violates or clearly is about to
violate this chapter for the purpose of enjoining such violation.
§ 324-6. Exemptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any recognized historical society
or museum accorded charitable status by the federal government, any
county, city, borough, township or town library, any public school, college or
university or any archive or library under the supervision and control of the
commonwealth or a political subdivision.
Chapter 328
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of or reason to know or a
belief or grounds for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry
of both:
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful, or morbid
interest of minors.
(1)
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community
as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors.
(2)
(3) Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
The character and content of any material described herein which
is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant.
(1)
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant
made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of
such minor.
(2)
§ 324-3 SCRANTON CODE § 324-6
328:492
PARKING GARAGES AND LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 439.
§ 328-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any parking garage, parking lot or any other parcel
property located within the City of Scranton which charges a fee for the
storage or parking of a motor vehicle to have, keep, lease or maintain
said property without first having obtained the proper permit from the
Department of Community Development. This permit requirement shall not
be waived in the event that said parking garage, parking lot or other
parcel of property offers discounted parking fees or free parking to persons
showing proof of patronage to or validation by any business enterprise
located within the City of Scranton.
§ 328-2. Permit fees.
§ 328-3. Closings.
The Director of the Department of Community Development, or any other
person the City of Scranton may designate, may in her discretion, cause to
be closed any parking garage, parking lot or parcel of property as described
in § 328-1 for which no permit fee has been paid.
§ 328-4. Inspections.
Any business or activity permitted under this chapter shall be subject to
inspection by the appropriate officials of the City of Scranton.
§ 328-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision in this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than six hundred
dollars ($600.) and, in default of payment, to undergo imprisonment for a
term not to exceed thirty (30) days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 332
A. No permit shall be issued under this chapter for any property as
described in § 328-1, until the annual fee shall have been paid to the
Department of Community Development.
B. The permit fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.) per space provided for
each motor vehicle.
§ 324-6 PARKING GARAGES AND LOTS § 328-5
328:493
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 169.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 158.
Bicycles — See Ch. 175.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 439.
§ 328-5 SCRANTON CODE § 328-5
328:494
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 24, Art. I, of the 1979 Code]
§ 332-1. Public use of parks.
City parks shall be open daily to all citizens on absolutely equal terms and
none shall be given special privileges therein or be permitted to make use of
them for any purpose not practically common to all and not in consonance
with the proper uses of a park.
§ 332-2. Use of driveways and walks.
The City parks are constructed and maintained for the use of the public at
large, but the driveways and roads therein shall be used only by persons
in vehicles used for purposes of pleasure or by persons on horseback
or bicycles. The walks and paths are designed for the exclusive use of
pedestrians.
§ 332-3. Park Officer to direct traffic.
If any City park officer shall deem it necessary to safety, good order and
general convenience that the speed of a vehicle should be checked or
stopped or its course altered, and shall so direct by gesture or otherwise, it
shall be the duty of the driver of such vehicle to follow such direction. No
vehicle shall be driven or permitted to stand anywhere except on the drive
or other place provided. All vehicles in motion shall be kept to the right.
§ 332-4. Rules for bicycles.57
All bicycles in City parks shall possess all the rights and privileges now
accorded to vehicles and shall strictly comply with all the rules of the road
and, in addition thereto, are subject to the following rules:
A. Riding at a faster rate than five (5) miles per hour is prohibited.
B. A bicycle shall not be towed by a rope or otherwise.
C. Riding more than two (2) abreast is prohibited.
D. Riders must keep their feet on the pedals and their hands on the handle
bars.
E. All machines must be provided with a bell which can be distinctly heard
at a distance of thirty (30) yards.
F. Riding on foot paths is prohibited.
G. Instructions on bicycles, tricycles or such other vehicles of propulsion
and trick and fancy riding are prohibited.
57.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 175, Bicycles.
§ 332-1 PARKING GARAGES AND LOTS § 332-4
328:495
§ 332-5. Riding or driving animals.
The use of animals attached to vehicles or ridden in City parks is limited to
those well broken and they must be constantly held in such control that they
may be easily and quickly turned and stopped. They shall be ridden so as
to obey all traffic rules and regulations applying to vehicles. They shall not
be driven or permitted to move at a rate of speed which shall be alarming
or cause danger, nor, under any circumstances, at a rate of speed exceeding
five (5) miles an hour.
§ 332-6. Lights on vehicles.
All vehicles in motion in City parks shall carry, between thirty (30) minutes
after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise, a white light or lights in
a conspicuous position so as to be readily seen in front.
§ 332-7. Passing of vehicles.
All vehicles in City parks, when passing other vehicles going in the same
direction, must keep to the left.
§ 332-8. Slow traffic to keep to right.
All vehicles in City parks going at a slow speed must keep well to the right.
Those going more rapidly must keep in the middle of the drive.
§ 332-9. Stopping of vehicles.
Vehicles in City parks stopping for any purpose must stop well to the right
hand side of the drive.
§ 332-10. Crossing signals.
Before stopping or crossing from one side of the drive to the other, every
driver in City parks must signal to those behind him.
§ 332-11. Misuse of park property.
No person shall, in a City park, go within the shrubberies or upon the turf
bordering the same or upon the turf between the drives and walks or walk
on the rides or drives, except to cross them, or sit or stand on a balustrade,
wall or fence or stand or lie down on a bench or seat or go to sleep.
§ 332-12. Hitching of animals.
Hitching horses or other animals to any tree, shrub, fence or railing or other
structure in City parks, except such as are provided for such purposes,
H. Cyclists' must not mount or dismount except on the extreme right of the
road or bicycle path, and in passing other bicyclists, vehicles or
horsemen going in the same direction, bells must be sounded.
§ 332-4 SCRANTON CODE § 332-12
328:496
is prohibited. Allowing animals to stand unhitched while the driver or
attendant is beyond reach of such animal is also prohibited.
§ 332-13. Animals at large; property destruction.
Animals will not be allowed to run at large in City parks and if found
within the park limits shall be impounded. Owners of animals damaging or
destroying park property will be held liable for the full value of the property
damaged or destroyed in addition to the penalty imposed for a violation of
this section.
§ 332-14. Bits for horses.
No beast of burden or draft shall be driven, ridden or led in City parks
without a bit in its mouth.
§ 332-15. Discharge of projectiles.
No person shall, in a City park, throw or discharge a stone, missile or other
projectile.
§ 332-16. Fires.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or start a fire in a City park.
§ 332-17. Selling and advertising.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a City park to sell, expose for sale or
give away any goods, wares or circulars or post or display any sign, placard
or advertising device.
§ 332-18. Sporting activities in designated areas only.
No person shall, except in a place provided therefor, bathe, skate or fish or
place in the water a boat or raft or play ball or any other game or sport in a
City park.
§ 332-19. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have possession of or drink any
alcoholic beverage in a City park.
§ 332-20. Fees for use of facilities. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 17-1983;
43-1986; 44-1986; 14-1992; 188-1994]
A. The use of swimming pools, recreation centers, baseball fields and the
Showmobile shall be charged as follows:
(1) Outdoor swimming pool sites.
§ 332-12 PARKING GARAGES AND LOTS § 332-20
328:497
(a) Outdoor swimming pool sites except Nay Aug. [Amended
6-28-1995 by Ord. No. 103-1995; 12-22-2003 by Ord. No.
252-2003]
[1] Residents daily charge: $0. [Amended 5-31-2007 by
Ord. No. 97-2007]
[2] Residents season pass charge to include Weston Field
Indoor Pool:
[a] For an individual: $50.
[b] For a family: $100.
[3] Nonresidents daily charge: $0. [Amended 5-31-2007 by
Ord. No. 97-2007]
(b) Nay Aug Swim Complex. [Added 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
95-2002]
[1] Daily charge for Scranton residents shall be as follows:
[a] Adults: $2.
[b] Children (18 and under): $1.
[2] Daily charge for nonresidents of Scranton shall be as
follows:
[a] Adults: $3.
[b] Children (18 and under): $2.
[3] Family/individual season pass for adult or child:
[a] Resident of Scranton: $50.
[b] Nonresidents of Scranton: $100.
(2) Nay Aug Park. Pavilion rentals shall be as follows:
(a) Residents: $100.
(b) Nonresidents: $125.
(3) Showmobile charges shall be as follows: [Amended 11-20-2014
by Ord. No. 55-2014]
Showmobile
For Use Within the
Scranton City
Limits
Outside City
Limits
Single-day rental $250 $500
Multi-day rental, each
day
$125 $250
§ 332-20 SCRANTON CODE § 332-20
328:498
Showmobile
For Use Within the
Scranton City
Limits
Outside City
Limits
Delivery charge $200 $200
Fees are nonrefundable and shall be waived only for Citysponsored
events. All other events are subject to the fees for the
use of the Showmobile.
(4) Weston Field Facility.
(a) Resident charges shall be as follows:
Type Charge
Annual membership charge
Adult $150.00
Preschool age $5.00
Youths (6-14 years of age) $15.00
Youths (14-18 years of age) $25.00
Seniors (62 and over) $100.00
Daily charge
Adults $2.50
Youths (6-14 years of age) $0.50
Youths (15-18 years of age) $1.00
Seniors (62 and over) $2.00
(b) Nonresident charges shall be as follows:
Type Charge
Annual membership (12 months)
Adult $275.00
Preschool age $5.00
Youths (6-14 years of age) $15.00
Youths (15-18 years of age) $25.00
Seniors (62 and over) $225.00
Daily charges
Adults $3.50
Youths (6-14 years of age) $1.50
Youths (15-18 years of age) $1.50
Seniors (62 and over) $2.00
(5) Rentals shall be as follows:
§ 332-20 PARKING GARAGES AND LOTS § 332-20
328:499
Type Charge
Indoor pool per hour, maximum 30
people
$60.00
Gym per hour, minimum 30 people $50.00
(6) South side complex charges shall be as follows: [Amended
2-15-1995 by Ord. No. 18-1995]
Type Charge
(dollars)
Residents
Baseball league/teams extra
$2.00 per hour with lights
$150.00
Nonresidents Baseball league/
teams extra $2.00 per hour
with lights
$200.00
Residents
Softball per teams extra $2.00
per hour with lights
$150.00
Nonresidents
Softball per teams extra $2.00
per hour with lights
$200.00
(7) Softball league teams.
(a) Charges for residents, per team, extra two (2) hours with lights
shall be: one hundred fifty dollars ($150).
(b) charges for nonresidents, per team, extra two (2) hours with
lights shall be: one hundred fifty dollars ($150.).
(8) Pine Brook Field.
(a) Residents. Charges per team shall be: one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.).
(b) Nonresidents. Charges per team shall be: one hundred
seventy-five dollars ($175.).
(9) Rockwell Field.
(a) Residents. Charges per team shall be: one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.).
(b) Nonresident. Charges per team shall be: one hundred seventyfive
dollars ($175.).
(10)Weston Field (Fields 1 and 2).
§ 332-20 SCRANTON CODE § 332-20
328:500
(a) Charges.
[1] Residents. Charges per team shall be: one hundred
twenty-five dollars ($125.).
[2] Nonresidents. charges per team shall be: one hundred
seventy-five dollars ($175.).
(b) All schedules must be approved by the Department of Parks
and Recreation. All activities will be balanced to serve all
parties interested in using this facility. The City shall evaluate
the field conditions to determine the availability of the field for
any given day. The season shall end the last week in
September.
(c) A one hundred fifty dollar ($150.) fee for field use per season
shall be assessed for any soccer matches, football games or
practice for any sport. A two dollar ($2.) fee per hour shall be
assessed in addition to the base amount of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.) for use of a lighted field.
B. The City of Scranton Department of Parks and Recreation reserves the
right to require all individuals to show positive identification for
residency, age and family membership.
C. The City of Scranton Department of Parks reserves the right to balance
all fields against the number of reservations between applicants on a
fair and equal basis.
§ 332-20 PARKING GARAGES AND LOTS § 332-20
328:501

ARTICLE II
Nay Aug Park
[Adopted 10-6-1993 as Ord. No. 153-1993]
§ 332-21. Prohibited acts in Nay Aug Park.
The following are prohibited acts in the area of the Nay Aug Gorge, located
within Nay Aug Park, a public park of the City of Scranton:
§ 332-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person violation any of the provisions of § 332-21 shall be liable, upon
conviction, to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.), plus costs,
nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.), plus costs, and, in default of
payment, imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days for each offense. Each
location at which a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
Each entry into the Nay Aug Gorge in violation of § 332-21 shall be deemed
a separate offense. Each attempt to dive into the Nay Aug Gorge, or climb
onto a ledge or other unauthorized platform for diving shall be deemed a
separate offense. The removal, destruction or defacing of each sign shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalties specified in this
section, any person convicted of removing, damaging or defacing any sign
or signs shall, in addition to the aforesaid penalty, be required to make
full restitution for the replacement or repair of any sign or signs, which
restitution shall include the cost of mounting or posting the sign in addition
to labor and materials.
A. No person shall dive into the Nay Aug Gorge.
B. No person shall, at the Nay Aug Gorge, bathe, swim, fish or place in the
water a boat or raft, excepting emergency personnel responding to
emergency situations.
C. No person shall enter an area at or near the Nay Aug Gorge which is
posted "No Trespassing" or "No Admittance" or "No Admittance Beyond
This Point" when the City of Scranton has posted certain areas
restricting or prohibiting access.
D. No person shall climb in the area known as the "Nay Aug Gorge,"
except personnel of the City of Scranton, or emergency personnel,
without the prior written permission of the City of Scranton.
E. No person shall remove, destroy, deface or otherwise damage any sign,
bulletin board or posted list of regulations at or near the area known as
the "Nay Aug Gorge" which has been posted by the City of Scranton.
F. No person shall refuse or neglect to obey any reasonable directions of a
police officer or any employee of the Department of Parks and
Recreation.
§ 332-21 PARKING GARAGES AND LOTS § 332-22
328:503

ARTICLE III
West Scranton Skate Park
[Adopted 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 41-2011]
§ 332-23. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The City of Scranton adopts the rules and regulations for the West Scranton
Skate Park facility located at North Bromley Avenue and Jackson Street
attached hereto marked as Exhibit A58 and incorporated herein by reference
thereto.
58.Editor’s Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 332-23 PARKING GARAGES AND LOTS § 332-23
328:505

ARTICLE IV
Tobacco-Free Areas
[Adopted 5-5-2016 by Ord. No. 23-2016]
§ 332-24. Prohibition of tobacco where children are present.
All City, parks and playgrounds within the City of Scranton where children
are present shall be designated as tobacco-free and the use of any tobacco
product or electronic cigarette, in any form, shall be prohibited hereafter; a
list of all City parks and playgrounds is attached hereto as Exhibit A59
§ 332-25. Signs designating tobacco-free areas.
Appropriate signage shall be posted to designate said tobacco-free areas.
§ 332-26. Notice.
The residents of the City of Scranton shall be notified of this article and the
designation of the tobacco-free zones as stated herein;
§ 332-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person in violation of this article shall be: forced to leave the park or
playground and may be fined for violation of this section in the amount of
$25; and
§ 332-28. Monitoring and compliance.
Council hereby authorizes its elected and appointed officials to make
periodic observations of tobacco-free areas to monitor compliance and
promote awareness of this section.
§ 332-29. Definitions.
TOBACCO PRODUCT —
Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that
is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other
means, including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, little cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; and
A.
Any electronic device that delivers nicotine or other substances to
the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to an
electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah.
B.
Notwithstanding any provision of Subsections A and B to the contrary,
"tobacco product" includes any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. "Tobacco product"
does not include any product that has been approved by the United
C.
59.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 332-24 PARKING GARAGES AND LOTS § 332-29
328:507
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is
marketed and sold for such an approved purpose.
§ 332-29 SCRANTON CODE § 332-29
328:508
Chapter 336
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 309. Noise — See Ch. 317.
§ 336-1. Aiding and abetting.
No person shall cause, permit or assist another person to commit any of the
acts or practices prohibited in this Code.
§ 336-2. Obedience to police officer.
No person shall refuse or neglect to obey any reasonable direction of a
police officer.
§ 336-3. Tampering with property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and intentionally damage,
deface, injure, remove, tamper with, carry or take away or otherwise
unlawfully assume control of any property whether public or private, real or
personal, which is not his own.
§ 336-4. Obscene, insulting language.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any vulgar, obscene, profane,
boisterous or insulting language, tending to a breach of the peace or
tending to the disturbance or annoyance of peaceable residents or travelers
nearby.
§ 336-5. Prowlers, peeping toms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prowl or loiter about property of
another or peer or peep into any house or other structure without the
consent of the owner thereof. However, this shall not be so construed as to
prohibit peaceful picketing upon the public streets, highways or sidewalks
in the case of labor disputes.
§ 336-6. Public intoxication.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found drunk or intoxicated upon
any street or highway, or in any store, theater or place of public resort.
§ 336-7. Fighting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in fighting, brawling or riotous
conduct.
§ 332-29 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 336-8
336:509
§ 336-8. Keeping of unlawful houses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a house where any illegal
activities are being carried on.
§ 336-9. Frequenting unlawful houses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resort to or frequent any house where
illegal activities are being carried on.
§ 336-10. Indecent exposure.
Chapter 340
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 309. Secondhand goods and dealers — See Ch.
379.
§ 336-8 SCRANTON CODE § 336-10
336:510
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 25 of the 1979 Code]
§ 340-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-18-2013 by Ord. No. 33-2013]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD CART —
FOOD TRUCK —
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of this City or not, traveling
from house to house, or from street to street, for the purpose of selling
or soliciting for sale, goods, wares, merchandise of services. The word
"peddler" shall include the term "solicitor."
VENDOR —
A mobile kitchen that is set up on the street to facilitate the sale and
marketing of street food to people from the local pedestrian traffic.
Food carts are often found in large cities throughout the world and can
be found selling food of just about any variety.
A.
Food carts come in two basic styles. One allows the vendor to sit or
stand inside and serve food through a window. Another uses all of the
room inside the cart for storage and to house the cooking machinery,
usually some type of grilling surface. The cart style is determined
principally by the type of food served at the cart.
B.
Food carts are different from food trucks because they do not travel
under their own power. Some food carts are towed by another vehicle,
while some alternatively are pushed by a human.
C.
Health license certification is to be displayed at all times and made
visible to the public/customer view.
D.
A food truck or mobile kitchen is a mobile venue that is self contained,
and owners/employees work from inside, sell food, and all food trucks
are driven from location to location. Some, including ice cream trucks,
sell mostly frozen or prepackaged food; others are more like
restaurants on wheels. Some may cater to specific meals, such as the
breakfast truck, lunch truck or lunch wagon, and snack truck, break
truck or taco truck. Food trucks have propane tanks which are to be
securely contained on the truck; generators are not to come off the
truck and be placed on City streets or sidewalks. Trash is to be picked
up after each time the truck is, set to sell food. Grease is not to be
discarded into City sewer grates.
A.
Health license certification is to be displayed at all times and made
visible to the public/customer view.
B.
A. Collectively refers to food carts and food trucks.
§ 340-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 340-1
336:511
§ 340-2. Enforcement.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall at all times have and
keep posted, at his office and at the Bureau of Police, a copy of this article.
It shall be the duty of every police officer to enforce the provisions of this
article and to require that all persons comply therewith in detail. However,
nothing in this section shall prevent any common informer from prosecuting
all violators of this article.
§ 340-3. Exceptions for produce.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to or prohibit the peddling or vending of
wild fruits, berries or nuts by any person who shall have himself picked or
gathered such fruits, berries or nuts for the purpose of peddling or vending
the same. Neither shall this article be construed to include farmers who
vend or peddle their own produce.
§ 340-4. Exceptions for charitable organizations.60
The provisions of this article shall not apply to solicitations, sales or
distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations
which have their principal place of activity in the City.
§ 340-5. Refusing to leave.
Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another
and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner
or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the same and not return
to such premises shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 340-6. Entrance to premises restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises
when the same are posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No
Solicitations Allowed" or other words to such effect.
§ 340-7. Misrepresentation.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements
concerning the quality or nature of his goods, wares, merchandise or
services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same.
§ 340-8. Hours of operation. [Amended 7-18-2013 by Ord. No.
33-2013]
Health license certification is to be displayed at all times and made
visible to the public/customer view.
B.
60.Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Charitable Organizations, of this chapter.
§ 340-1 SCRANTON CODE § 340-8
336:512
§ 340-9. No peddling within certain distances of stores.
§ 340-10. License required.
Every person engaged in, or about to engage in, the calling, vocation or
business of peddling shall procure a license for that purpose from the
Department of Public Safety.
§ 340-11. Form; records.
All licenses issued in pursuance of this article shall be expressed in writing,
printing, or both, as shall be most convenient to the Department of Public
Safety. Such licenses shall be signed by the Director of the Department and
shall show for what purpose the same are issued, the particular kinds of
business that are permitted to be done thereunder and the particular period
for which they are issued. There shall be kept, under the Direction of the
Director, a book or books, in which shall be kept a record of all the licenses
issued in pursuance of this article and which shall show in substance
all things contained in such licenses, all of which shall be numbered
consecutively according to the order in which they shall be issued.
§ 340-12. Term.
All licenses issued in pursuance of this article shall by their terms be limited
to expire on the first Monday of April next succeeding the day of their
issuance, and all annual license taxes provided for and created under this
article shall be due and payable on the first Monday of April of each and
A. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of
peddling within the City between the hours of 1/2 hour before sunset
and 8:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays, except
by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective
customer.
B. Vendors may operate from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. daily, except in Center
City (Lackawanna Avenue, Franklin Avenue, Mulberry Street and
Jefferson Avenue) where they can operate at any time, subject to the
provisions that a food cart or food truck is staffed, is open for business,
is selling food and drink and is in compliance with all parking
ordinances of the City of Scranton. Under no circumstances may a
vendor leave the food cart or food truck unattended on the street or
sidewalks at anytime. The vendor must vacate the parking spot at the
conclusion of business each day or evening.
A. No person, even though licensed according to the provisions of this
article, shall locate or stand and transact his business within 100 feet of
any restaurant or eating establishment conducting its business.
B. No vendor, even though licensed according to the provisions of this
article, shall locate or stand and transact his business 100 feet of any
restaurant or eating establishment conducting its business.
§ 340-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 340-12
336:513
every year. Without regard to the time when they shall be issued, a full
annual license fee shall be paid to the Department of Public Safety for
each license issued, and the Director of the Department shall not issue any
license until the amount of money, which shall be equal to a full annual
license fee therefor, shall have been paid to the Department.
§ 340-13. Fees. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 6-1987; 178-1992;
7-18-2013 by Ord. No. 33-2013]
§ 340-14. Possession and exhibition of license.
Every person who shall peddle after having procured a license as provided
in this article, shall at all times, when engaged in or following the business
of peddling, have and keep with him on his person the license issued to him.
It shall be his duty at all such times when so engaged, on the request of any
police officer of the City, to produce and exhibit such license to that officer
for examination.
§ 340-15. Signs.
A. For any annual license, for a period of one year, or for any fractional
part of the year that will elapse after the issuance of such license
preceding the first Monday of April then next, to peddle or vend as
aforesaid, from or by means of any bag, basket, crate or otherwise
howsoever, by any manner of peddling on foot, the rate shall be the rate
of $100. Additionally, for a temporary license which would limit the
peddling/vending to five special events per year, the rate shall be the
rate of $75.
B. No person, operator or owner, even though licensed pursuant to
Chapter 340 of the Code of the City of Scranton, shall locate or stand
and transact his business within 100 feet of a restaurant's service area
and entranceway for public ingress and egress. The service area
includes outdoor dining that has been approved by the City.
C. The one-hundred-foot prohibition does not apply to vendors who are
operating on privately owned premises, provided that the vendors have
written permission to conduct business on the private property from the
record-title owner of the premises.
D. The one-hundred-foot prohibition does not apply to establishments who
sell pre-packaged food and beverages.
E. The license fee for a food cart shall be $50 and for food truck shall be
$250.
A. The Department of Public Safety, with the issuance of every license
provided for in § 340-13A, shall furnish to the licensee a tin sign
numbered to correspond with the number of the license. In addition to
this number, the sign shall also indicate by impression the two years for
parts of which the license is issued. This information shall be impressed
§ 340-12 SCRANTON CODE § 340-15
336:514
§ 340-16. Loss of signs.
If any duly licensed person under this article shall lose or suffer the
destruction of his badge, sign or button, in every such case, on reasonable
proof of the loss or destruction, the Department of Public Safety shall renew
and furnish to the person so having suffered such loss or destruction, a
new sign, badge or button, as the case may be, in general similitude of the
original sign, badge or button, for which the Department shall charge, and
all such licensed persons shall pay a price not exceeding the actual cost of
renewing or replacing such sign, badge or button.
§ 340-17. Loaning signs.
No person shall loan his sign, badge or button to any other person to
be used by that other person while peddling or vending any kind of
merchandise whatever in the City. Whoever violates this section shall, upon
conviction, in addition to the penalties prescribed by this article, for every
violation thereof, suffer a forfeiture of his license, so that if he shall
thereafter peddle or vend any kind of merchandise whatever without first
having procured a new license, according to the provisions of this article,
he shall be guilty of a further violation of this article.
§ 340-18. Disposition of fees.
All moneys collected by the Director of the Department of Public Safety,
from licenses issued under this article, shall by him be turned over to
the City Treasurer, as provided by law, except that the Director is hereby
authorized and directed to withhold from such moneys such an amount
on the sign in the following form: "Scranton City Wagon Peddler's
License, No. ____Years 19__ and 19__." It shall be the duty of every such
licensee, at all times, on his cart, wagon or vehicle, to permanently
exhibit and publicly display in plain sight such sign.
B. The Department of Public Safety, with the issuance of every license
provided for in § 340-13B, shall furnish to the licensee a tin sign, badge
or button, at least two inches in diameter, on which shall be impressed
the number of the license, together with the years for parts of which the
license is granted, in the following form: "Scranton City Peddler's
License, No. ____Years 19__ and 19__." It shall be the duty of every such
licensee, at all times, when following or engaged in the business or
occupation for which such license is granted, to wear on his clothing
and publicly exhibit and display the sign, badge or button.
C. The Department of Public Safety, with the issuance of every license
provided for in § 340-10, shall furnish to the licensee a tin sign, on
which shall be impressed the number of the license, together with the
years for parts of which the license is granted, in the following form:
"Scranton City Stand License, No. ____Years 19__ and 19__." It shall be
the duty of every such licensee, at all times, in front of his stand, to
permanently exhibit and publicly display in plain sight such sign.
§ 340-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 340-18
336:515
as shall be necessary to furnish and provide the signs, badges or buttons
required by the provisions of this article.
§ 340-18 SCRANTON CODE § 340-18
336:516
ARTICLE II
Charitable Organizations
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 8, Art. II, of the 1979 Code]
§ 340-19. License required.
Any organization contemplating the solicitation of the public for funds,
either directly or by selling merchandise, advertising or services, where it
is represented that the proceeds of such solicitation or any part thereof are
to be used for purposes of charity, benevolence or patriotism, and where
any person engaged or to be engaged in such solicitation receives or is to
receive compensation or reward for such services, must, before engaging in
such enterprise, file an application with the Director of the Department of
Public Safety and obtain a license therefor.
§ 340-20. Application.
Each application filed under this article shall be open to public inspection,
shall be made under oath by an authorized officer of the organization for
whose benefit the solicitation is to be conducted, and must set forth:
§ 340-21. Issuance; fee; limitations.
Upon payment of a fee of $5, the Director of the Department of Public
Safety may, in his discretion, issue a numbered license for solicitation to
the organization for whose benefit it is to be conducted, provided that
such solicitation and the purposes thereof are lawful and not intended to
deceive the public, and provided that the license shall not be construed to
accord immunity to prosecution for violation of the laws of this state and the
ordinances of the City.
§ 340-22. Identification card for each solicitor.
No solicitor shall engage in solicitation in behalf of a licensee under this
article until furnished by the licensee with an identification card showing
the name of the organization in whose behalf he or she is soliciting, the
A. The name and address of the organization for whose benefit the
solicitation is to be conducted.
B. The amount of compensation or rewards to be paid solicitors.
C. The necessity for and purposes of the solicitation.
D. A certificate of registration from the Department of State issued in
accordance with the Act of August 9, 1963 (P.L. 628), as amended.61
E. The name and address of the organizer or promoter and all financial
arrangements for services as such.
61.Editor's Note: 10 P.S § 160-1 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 107, No. 36, § 19, 1986. See now
10 P.S. § 162.2 et seq.
§ 340-19 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 340-22
336:517
license number under which the solicitation is made and the name and
address of the solicitor.
§ 340-23. Revocation.
Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or
suspended by the Director of the Department of Public Safety for any fraud
or misrepresentation committed by the licensee or its agents.
§ 340-22 SCRANTON CODE § 340-23
336:518
ARTICLE III
Transient Merchants
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 32, Art. II, of the 1979 Code]
§ 340-24. Terms defined.
The words "transient merchant," when used in this article, shall mean every
person, whether acting as principal or agent, who enters into, begins or
engages in, or desires to begin or engage in a transient or temporary
retail or wholesale business, through a store, branch store, room, hotel or
motel room, or in open air spaces, building reservations or other means for
temporary use only, and that sells or contracts to sell, with present delivery
or promise of delivery at some future date of goods, wares, merchandise or
food products.
§ 340-25. Exception for farm products.
Farm products sold directly by producing farmers are excepted from the
provisions of this article.
§ 340-26. License required.
Each transient merchant in the City shall take out a license for the same
from the City Treasurer.
§ 340-27. Application; objections; hearing.
Before a license shall be issued under this article, application, in writing,
shall be filed with the Director of the Department of Public Safety for a
period of 15 days, setting forth the intent to apply at a certain time at the
City Treasurer's office for the issuance of a license. Any citizen may file
objections to the issuance of the license, whereupon the Director of the
Department of Public Safety shall hear the objections and shall recommend
to the City Treasurer the issuance or refusal of the license.
§ 340-28. Bond; future deliveries.
Where a transient merchant contracts to deliver at some future date goods,
wares, merchandise or food products, and the purchaser pays for such
goods before delivery, the transient merchant must accompany the license
application with a surety bond with two or more individual sureties or a
corporate surety in the amount of $2,000, which bond shall be satisfactory
in form and execution to the City Solicitor, which bond shall run for four
months from date of issuance of the license by the City Treasurer and which
transient merchant shall forfeit to the extent to cover the cost of goods not
delivered within the four-month period.
§ 340-29. Fee.
The amount to be paid for a license under this article shall be $500 per
month, or fractional part thereof, to be paid to the City Treasurer.
§ 340-24 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 340-30
336:519
§ 340-30. Term.
Each license issued under this article shall be issued for a, period of 30 days
from the date of issue, unless sooner revoked.
§ 340-31. Renewal.
A licensee under this article shall be required to renew his license monthly
during the continuance of the business or sale.
§ 340-30 SCRANTON CODE § 340-31
336:520
ARTICLE IV
Event Licenses
[Adopted 12-1-2016 by Ord. No. 70-2016]
§ 340-32. Event license to encompass multiple peddlers.
§ 340-33. Violations.
Any person, firm, business, corporation, partnership, limited-liability
company, or unincorporated association violating any provision of this
article, shall upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense, and
shall be fined not to exceed $1,000 for any one offense, recoverable with
costs, together with judgment or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or
both. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
A. Multiple peddlers are permitted to sell under one event license for an
event for which the peddler is involved. The event license is only good
for one event. Event licenses are temporary in nature, not annual. It is
the responsibility of those manager(s)/organizer(s) of said event to
obtain the event license and gather the peddlers' information including
the number of peddlers an event is going to have and what the event is
going to be. It shall be at the discretion of the Director of Licensing,
Inspections and Permits to determine if proposed event shall qualify for
an event license.
B. Event license fee.
(1) The manager(s)/organizer(s) of the event is responsible for
payment of the event license fee. The rates for event licenses are as
follows:
5 to 10 peddlers $250
11 to 15 peddlers $300
16 to 20 peddlers $350
21 to 25 peddlers $400
26 to 50 peddlers $500
51 + peddlers $1,000
(2) If an event does not procure an event license, then any peddler
participating in or involved with the event is responsible for
obtaining an individual peddler's license under and pursuant to the
prior ordinances and/or resolutions of the City of Scranton
regarding peddlers.
§ 340-32 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 340-33
336:521
Chapter 343
PERSONAL CARE BOARDING HOME FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Day care — See Ch. 212.
Rooming houses — See Ch. 375.
Zoning — See Ch. 445.
§ 343-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSONAL BOARDING CARE HOME FACILITY — Any premises in which
food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided for a
period exceeding 24 consecutive hours for three or more adults who are
not relatives of the operator and who require assistance or supervision
in such matters as dressing, bathing, diet or medication prescribed for
self-administration, but do not require hospitalization or care in a skilled
nursing or intermediate care facility.
§ 343-2. License required; fee; application.
A. All persons, individuals, associations and businesses located in the City
of Scranton who operate a personal boarding care home shall complete
an application with the City of Scranton at the Bureau of Licensing and
Inspections, Department of Community Development, (hereinafter
"Bureau") each year to obtain a license and pay a fee as required no
later than June 30 or 30 days after entering into business, whichever is
later.
B. Application for a license or for renewal of a license shall be
accompanied by a fee of $100 plus $10 for each bed.
C. No revised license shall be issued by the Bureau, unless a license
application is filed with the Bureau, and an annual inspection by the
Bureau and fire personnel has been passed. The application shall
include the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the
location of the building, the number of beds therein, the zoning
classification and such other information as the Bureau may require by
regulation.
D. No license may be issued or renewed to an owner who is not in
compliance with the city's Building and BOCA Codes, and whose
property tax is delinquent; it shall be a violation of this chapter for an
owner to fail, after written notice, to appear for an inspection
personally or by agent, and there shall be a fine of $100 for each such
violation.
§ 340-33 SCRANTON CODE § 343-2
343:522
§ 343-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $300 per violation, and not more than $600 per violation, plus costs of
prosecution, and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each
day said violation exists constitutes a separate violation. Any person, firm or
corporation found guilty of not remitting the proper license fee for the year,
in addition to any fine, penalties or costs so imposed, shall pay the license
fee.
Chapter 345
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 360.
Sewers — See Ch. 383.
E. The Director of the Department of Community Development or the
Code Official shall have the power to revoke a license for
noncompliance with the BOCA Codes of the City of Scranton or other
Building Code ordinances, if violations thereof are found following an
inspection and the licensee after written notice of violations has failed
to come into compliance within such time as the Bureau may state. The
licensee shall be given written notice of its right to appeal the
revocation to the Housing Appeal Board of the City of Scranton within
20 days from the date of the notice.
F. The Director of the Department of Community Development or the
Code Official may revoke a license for nonpayment of the permit fee
from July 1 each year after written notice.
§ 343-2 PLUMBING § 343-3
345:523

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
§ 345-1. Adoption of standards; amendments. [Amended by Ord.
Nos. 77-1987; 170-1990; 149-1993; 163-1993; 164-1993; 9-23-1998
by Ord. No. 85-1998]
A. Adoption. Certain documents, one copy of which is on file in the Office
of the City Clerk of Scranton, being marked and designated as the
"International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition," as published by the
International Code Council is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of
the City of Scranton in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
International Plumbing Code, 1997, are hereby adopted and made a
part hereof, with changes, if any, to be set out in the following
subsections.
B. Amendments. The following sections of the International Plumbing
Code, 1997 Edition, are amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Plumbing
Code of the City of Scranton," hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
(2) Section 106.5.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as
indicated in § 345-4, as amended.
(3) Section 108.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who
shall violate any provision of this code or shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter
or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of no less than $200
and not more than $600 for each violation or by imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days, or both. Every day that a violation
of this article continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(4) Section 108.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:
§ 345-1 PLUMBING § 345-1
345:525
§ 345-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful, without securing a permit therefor, to do any plumbing
or pipe-fitting work which involves the installation of or the roughing in or
openings for one or more water closets, toilets, sinks, wash-traps, washtubs,
108.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the code official,
work on any plumbing system that is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall
immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property or to the owner's agent or to the
person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under
which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists,
the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior
to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in
or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of
not less than $200 and not more than $600. Every day that the
work continues in defiance of the stop-work order shall be deemed
a separate offense of this section.
(5) Section 306.6 is hereby amended to read as follows:
306.6 Freezing. Water service or waste piping shall be installed
below recorded frost penetration, but not less than four feet below
grade. In climates with freezing temperatures, faulty piping and
exterior building walls or areas subjected to freezing
temperatures shall be protected against freezing by insulation or
heat, or both.
(6) Section 305.6.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
305.6.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private
sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of three feet below
finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building
sewers shall be a minimum of three feet below grade.
(7) Section 903.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
903.1 Main vent required. Every sanitary drainage system
receiving the discharge of a water closet shall have a main vent
that is either vent stack or stack vent with a minimum diameter of
three inches.
(8) Section 917 is hereby amended to read as follows:
917 Air admittance valves. The use of air admittance valves
shall be prohibited within the City of Scranton unless in strict
conformity with the American Society of Sanitary Engineering
(ASSE) Standards 1050 and 1051.
§ 345-1 SCRANTON CODE § 345-2
345:526
washbasins, leader connections, floor drains, septic tanks or other item or
equipment utilizing water or other liquids to carry away waste or sewage or
for any similar purpose or to repair or install water supply pipes or to repair
or install waste or sewage lines, as prescribed by statute, or to cause any
change of major plumbing fixtures.
§ 345-3. Application.
Upon the filing of a written application in such form as the plumbing
inspection shall require and upon payment of the required fee, a permit
shall be issued in duplicate to the master plumber, or owner-occupant, one
copy thereof to be conspicuously posted upon the premises where the work
is being done, until the work is done, has been inspected and approved by
the Plumbing Inspector. "Owner-occupant" in this case is the residence in
which the owner is living and is not to be construed as authorization to do
any type of plumbing in any other structure or upon any other land owned
in whole or in part by said owner-occupant.
§ 345-4. Fees.
§ 345-5. Test and license fees.
A. Plumbing permits may be granted upon the payment of fees based upon
the value of consumer cost estimate of the work to be done as follows:
Value Charge
$0.00 to $500.00 $15.00
$500.01 to $1,000.00 $30.00
$1,000.01 to $75,000.00 $30.00
Plus per $1,000.00 or fraction
thereof
$6.00
Over $75,000.01 $474.00
Plus per $1,000.00 or fraction
thereof
$12.00
B. In addition to the foregoing charges, an additional and separate charge
shall be made and separate permit issued for septic tank work at the
rate of $100 per tank and its connecting tile field.
A. Any person engaged in the business of work of plumbing and housedrainage
shall pay an annual license fee payable in advance by or
before January 1 of each year according to the following classifications:
Type Fee
Master plumbers test fee $50.00
Journeyman test fee $30.00
Master plumber license $150.00
§ 345-2 PLUMBING § 345-5
345:527
§ 345-6. Nonresidents; license required.
No person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of plumbing and
drainage in other places as master or journeyman plumbers, desiring to do
such work in the City of Scranton, shall enter upon such work until he holds
a valid license or certificate granted by the City of Scranton.
§ 345-7. Inspection.
During the progress of work under this article, or within a reasonable time
thereafter, the Plumbing Inspector shall make an inspection to determine
whether or not the work complies with the Plumbing Code, and the statutes
and ordinances governing the same. If the Plumbing Inspector finds that the
work does not so comply, he shall notify the owner of the premises and the
contractor, in writing, and require to remedy the same within seven days
after receipt of such notice, and it shall thereupon be the duty of the owner
or contractor to comply with such notice. Failure to comply will constitute a
violation punishable as set forth in this Article.
§ 345-8. Septic tanks.
Each septic tank serving not more than one toilet outlet shall be connected
to a minimum drainage field constructed of 180 lineal feet of four-inch
vitrified clay tile, plus 90 lineal feet thereof for each toilet above the
minimum, all properly embedded in crushed stone under the tile pipe and
four inches of crushed stone covering the tile pipeland (each such septic
tank system so constructed as to include therein a grease trap to handle all
waste except toilet room facilities).
§ 345-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 170-1990;
149-1993; 164-1993]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate this article or
any provisions of the BOCA National Plumbing Code/1993, Ninth Edition,
or of the BOCA National Plumbing Code Provisions applicable to detached
one- and two-family dwellings, First Edition, or shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or who shall practice in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, plumbing,
appliances and plumbing appurtenances in violation of an approved plan
or directive of the plumbing officer or of a permit and certificate issued
under this Article or the provisions of the aforesaid BOCA Codes/1993,
shall be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine of not more than
$500, plus costs, and, in default of payment thereof of said fine and costs,
Type Fee
Journeymen plumber license $25.00
B. All licenses whether master or journeyman must be renewed by the end
of each calendar year.
§ 345-5 SCRANTON CODE § 345-9
345:528
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 345-9 PLUMBING § 345-9
345:529

ARTICLE II
Plumbing Examining Board
§ 345-10. Establishment; appointment; terms; duties.
§ 345-11. Journeyman or master plumber's license. [Amended by
Ord. No. 149-1993; 9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 85-1998]
§ 345-12. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any person carrying a journeyman or master plumbers license who willfully
and consistently violates the Plumbing Code of the City of Scranton shall
receive one warning from the Plumbing Inspector, and if he continues to
violate the Plumbing Code of the City of Scranton, the Plumbing Inspector
shall then report that person or persons to the Plumbing Examining Board,
which after investigation finds the charges to be true, shall recommend that
his license be suspended for a period of one year from the date that the
investigation was concluded.
§ 345-13. Inactive licenses.
Master plumbers and journeyman plumbers may apply for an inactive
license for the sum of $10 per year. Any master or journeyman plumber
who is issued this inactive license cannot apply for plumbing permits to
install or do any plumbing work. However, they may reactivate their license
A. The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, a Plumbing Examining Board consisting of the Plumbing
Inspector and two master plumbers, licensed by the city to supervise
examinations for masters and journeyman plumbers licenses. The terms
of the members of the Plumbing Examining Board are to run
concurrently with the term of the Mayor, however, the Mayor shall have
the power to discharge any or all members of the Board at any time
during his term of office. All Board members must be residents of the
City of Scranton. The Board shall elect one of the members to serve as
Chairman.
B. The Plumbing Examining Board shall approve the application forms,
prepare and administer examinations, and make all reasonable rules
and regulations pertaining to the examination of applicants.
A. Journeyman. Any person wishing to apply for a journeyman plumber's
license must meet the following requirements:
(1) He shall have served at least five years as an apprentice or a helper
in a duly registered master plumber's shop. The five-year term
must represent at least 10,000 hours of labor performed as an
apprentice plumber.
(2) He must produce his statement of wages, known as a "W-2 form,"
for the five years he worked as an apprentice.
§ 345-10 PLUMBING § 345-13
345:531
by applying to the Plumbing Inspector and paying the full fee for that
particular year.
§ 345-14. Permit restrictions.
No person licensed under the provisions of the Plumbing Code of the City of
Scranton may take out a permit in his own name, for use by a person, firm
or corporation not licensed or registered in the City of Scranton to perform
any plumbing work within the City of Scranton under penalty of forfeiture
of his or its license.
§ 345-15. Temporary contractors license.
The Plumbing Inspector may, at the discretion of the Plumbing Examining
Board, issue one permit to a person holding a master plumbers license
in the city outside of Scranton. Any plumber holding a temporary permit
[license], must take and successfully pass the next applicable plumbers
examination. A temporary plumbers permit [license] which had been issued
prior to an examination shall not be valid after the conclusion of that
examination. The fee for said permit
§ 345-16. Certificate of insurance required by master plumber.
Every master plumber holding a license in the city must furnish the
Plumbing Inspector with satisfactory proof of property damage and public
liability insurance amounting to $100,000 per person and $300,000 per
occurrence and workmen's compensation insurance before any license can
be issued.
§ 345-17. Reexamination.
A reexamination will not be necessary for reregistration unless the licensed
master or journeyman plumbers should have failed to make application for
reregistration at the specified time.
§ 345-18. Copies required for issuance.
No permit will be issued unless a copy of the signed contract between owner
and contractor is furnished with the permit application.
§ 345-13 SCRANTON CODE § 345-18
345:532
Chapter 349
POLES AND WIRES
§ 349-1. Overhead facilities within fire districts a nuisance;
terminal exception.
From and after the first Monday of September 1912, no electric light,
electric power, telegraph, telephone or other electric company, or any
corporation, partnership or individual shall erect, maintain, continue, use,
operate or employ, on any street, avenue, court, lane or alley in that portion
of the city within the fire districts, as such districts are prescribed by
Council, except the westerly side of Mifflin Avenue within such districts,
any pole or any overhead wire, overhead cable or device, over or above the
surface of the ground, by, through, over or by means of which electricity
is, has been or may be in any manner transmitted, conducted or conveyed
for the purpose of electric light, electric power, telegraph, telephone or
other electric service, or keep, continue, maintain, use, operate or employ
any such pole, or any such overhead wire, cables, devices and apparatus,
except as hereinafter provided. All such poles and all such overhead wires,
cables, devices and apparatus shall, after such date, be deemed public
nuisances, except such poles and wires as may be necessary for the purpose
of reaching the place of business, manufacturer and residence at the
terminals of underground wires.
§ 349-2. Right to construct underground facilities; plan approval.
All electric light, electric power, telegraph and telephone companies and
all other corporations, companies or individuals who are, at the date of the
approval of Ord. No. 14, 1909, by the Mayor, engaged in the business of
furnishing electric light, electric power, telephone or other electric service
within the city and have used for that purpose poles, overhead wires,
cables, devices and apparatus above and over the surface of the ground
shall have and are hereby declared to possess the right and power to enter
upon, over and under and use and occupy any of the streets, lanes, alleys
or highways, or parts thereof, within the fire districts of the city, for the
purpose of making and constructing the necessary conduits and subways
and laying, placing and constructing therein the wires, cables, tubes and
other apparatus and the right to erect such terminal poles as may be
necessary to complete an underground and distributing system, by, through,
over and by means of which electricity may be transmitted, conducted or
conveyed for the purpose of electric light, electric power, telegraph and
telephone service, under and subject to the following regulations: Every
such corporation, copartnership, company or individual before entering
upon any of the streets, lanes, alleys or highways, for the purpose of
constructing thereunder any conduits, subways, apparatus, devices or
means for transmitting, conducting or conveying electricity shall file in the
office of the Department of Public Works a full plan, showing the location,
size and details of such proposed conduits and subways and all such plans
shall be subject to the approval of the Director of the Department of Public
§ 345-18 POLES AND WIRES § 349-2
349:533
Works. No corporation, copartnership, company or individual shall enter
upon any of the streets, lanes, alleys or highways or occupy or do any work
upon the same, until the plans have first been approved, in writing, by
the Director of the Department of Public Works, or as may be directed by
Council in accordance with the provisions of § 349-6.
§ 349-3. Construction standards; depth; street excavations;
exception.
All wires, cables, conduits, tubes, subways or other parts of any
underground system constructed by any such corporation, copartnership,
company or individual under the surface of any street, lane, alley or
highway shall be placed not less than three (3) feet beneath the surface
of such street, lane, alley or highway, and as near to the curbline as
practicable. In no event and under no circumstances shall more than two
(2) squares of any street, lane, alley or highway be opened or the pavement
thereof disturbed, at any time, for the construction or repair of any
underground system. Amy corporation, copartnership, company or
individual who shall remove, take up, displace or disturb the pavement of
any street, lane, alley or highway shall promptly replace or renew such
portion in first-class order and condition, under the supervision and
direction of and subject to the control and approval of the Director of the
Department of Public Works. However, the provisions of this section shall
not apply to branch lines laid to houses and terminal poles. Such lines, so
far as depth and location are concerned, shall be subject to the approval of
the Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 349-4. Use of facilities for police and fire systems.
The city shall, at all times, have the right and power to place within any such
underground system, and use and operate therein, all the wires, cables,
devices and apparatus necessary to or used by the city fire alarm, police or
call systems and to place, replace, alter, repair, replenish and maintain the
same.
§ 349-5. Inspection and control.
The entire system used and all the devices, means, appliances and
apparatus, and every part thereof, of any such corporation, copartnership,
company or individual, so far as the same, in the judgment of the Director
of the Department of Public Safety, may relate to or in any way affect or
endanger, or tend to affect or endanger, the safety of the public or the police
or fire apparatus or the lines of the city, shall at all times be open to the
inspection and be under the supervision and subject to the approval and
control of the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 349-6. Plan approval.
In case any such corporation, copartnership, company or individual fails
to secure an approval of any of its plans or devices, in any respect as
§ 349-2 SCRANTON CODE § 349-6
349:534
hereinbefore provided, it shall thereupon have the right to make application
to Council for such approval and Council may, by concurrent resolution or
otherwise, make or grant such approval.
§ 349-7. Connections to terminal poles and wires.
Poles used for terminal purposes and the wires thereon shall not be
connected with any other pole or terminal pole, but all wires on such
terminal poles shall be connected with the place of business, manufacture
or residence for which such wires are to be used.
Chapter 354
POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bowling alleys — See Ch. 181. Dance halls — See Ch. 209.
§ 349-6 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 349-7
354:535

ARTICLE I
Pool and Billiard Rooms
§ 354-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC POOL OR BILLIARD ROOM FOR HIRE — Maintenance more than
one (1) pool or billiard table of seven (7) feet nine (9) inches or longer in
length, or more than two (2) pool or billiard tables seven (7) feet eight (8)
inches in length or less, whether or not the same be automatically operated.
However, the owner or proprietor of a business which has been in operation
for at least one (1) year may install such tables limited in number as above,
for his regular customers if he shall maintain it or them openly and in view
of the public on such premises.
§ 354-2. Enforcement; police reports; revocation; notice.
The Superintendent of Police shall once every three (3) months make a
return to the Department of Public Safety of all public pool or billiard rooms
being used, giving the location of the premises and the number of tables
used there. The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall then
compare this return with the original petitions and if there has been any
change either as to premises or an increase in the number of tables without
the provisions of this Article having been complied with, it shall be his duty
to forthwith serve notice on the licensee, to show cause, on a date fixed not
exceeding ten (10) days from the date of the determination by the Director,
why the licensee's license should not be revoked.
§ 354-3. Inspection by police.
All public pool or billiard rooms shall be subject to inspection by members
of the Bureau of Police at all times.
§ 354-4. License required.
No person shall keep or maintain any public pool or billiard room for hire
without first obtaining a license therefor.
§ 354-5. Petition.
Every person intending to apply for a license under this Article shall file
with the Director of the Department of Public Safety a petition. It shall
not be considered or passed upon until the same shall have been on file
at least three (3) weeks and public notice of the same given and paid
for by the applicant. Such notice shall be given once in two (2) daily
newspapers designated by the Director, such notice to contain the names
of the applicants, their private residences and the location of the place for
which a license is sought and the time and place of the applicants' hearing.
The petition shall contain:
§ 354-1 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 354-5
354:537
§ 354-6. Remonstrance; refusal.
§ 354-7. Qualifications of licensees.
Licenses to keep or maintain any public pool or billiard room shall be issued
only to citizens of the United States of temperate habits and good moral
character.
§ 354-8. Fees.
All persons licensed under this Article to keep and maintain public pool
and billiard rooms for hire shall pay five dollars ($5.) for each and every
table mentioned in the petition upon which the license was granted and
kept upon the premises named in the license. Such fees shall be paid for
the use of the city. If any licensee desires to add an additional table to those
already mentioned in his petition during his current license year, he shall
be privileged to do so on petition filed, paying for each additional table the
sum of five dollars ($5.).
A. The name and address of the applicant and the period of residency
there.
B. The particular place for which the license is desired and the number of
tables to be kept therein.
C. The birthplace of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, where and
when naturalized.
D. The name of the owner of the premises.
E. The signatures of ten (10) reputable citizens of the immediate vicinity
where such premises are situated, stating that they do not object but
favor the granting of the license for the premises mentioned in the
petition and that they are acquainted personally with the applicant and
know him to be a reputable citizen.
A. Any five (5) citizens being of full age, male or female, living in the
immediate vicinity of the place for which a license is applied under this
Article, may file a remonstrance against the application being granted.
The remonstrance shall be filed with the Director of the Department of
Public Safety at least five (5) days before the date fixed for the
applicant's hearing.
B. The Director shall refuse to grant the license whenever in his opinion,
having due regard for the number and character of the petitioners both
for and against the granting of the license, it would be detrimental to
the immediate neighborhood or that the applicant is not a fit person to
whom such privilege should be granted.
§ 354-5 SCRANTON CODE § 354-9
354:538
§ 354-9. Term.
Licenses shall be issued under this Article only by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety and shall be for a period of one (1) year, or
for any fractional part of a year following the issuance of such license and
preceding the first Monday of April then next.
§ 354-10. Transferability.
A license, if granted under this Article, shall not, under any circumstances,
be transferable to any other premises or any other person during the year
or the period for which it is granted, except upon approval of the Director
of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 354-11. Revocation.
The license of any public pool or billiard room shall be revoked by the
Director of the Department of Public Safety if disorderly or immoral
conduct, gambling or the use of profane and vulgar language is permitted
or allowed on the premises by the licensee, or for the frequenting of such
public pool or billiard rooms by disorderly or immoral persons.
§ 354-9 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 354-11
354:539

ARTICLE II
Automatic Pool Tables
§ 354-12. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article certain words are hereby defined as follows:
AUTOMATIC POOL TABLE OR MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE —
A coin-controlled amusement device operated by the insertion of a coin
therein and used for recreation or amusement purposes, similar to the
standard game of pool.
PERSONS — Includes any individual, partnership, association or
corporation keeping or operating such automatic pool tables.
§ 354-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article, in addition to
the revocation of his or its license, shall, upon summary conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days.
§ 354-14. License.
Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or organization
displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any automatic pool
table as herein defined shall be required to obtain a license from the City of
Scranton upon application and payment of the appropriate license fee.
§ 354-15. Application.
Application for such license shall be made to the Director of the Department
of Public Safety upon a form provided by the city for that purpose. The
application for such license shall include the following information:
§ 354-16. Fee. [Amended by Ord. No. 184-1994]
Every person, before being granted a license, shall pay the following annual
license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation a
mechanical amusement device as herein defined: twenty dollars ($20.) per
table. Each license shall be for the period of one (1) year.
A. Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
B. Place where machine or device is to he displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
C. Description of machine to be covered by the license, name of
manufacturer and serial number.
D. Prior convictions of applicant, if any.
§ 354-12 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 354-17
354:541
§ 354-17. Seal.
A seal bearing the same number as the license under this Article shall be
obtained from the Director of the Department of Public Safety and securely
attached to the licensed machine.
§ 354-18. Posting; transferability.
The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. Such license may be
transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon
application to the Director to such effect and the giving of a description
and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one
(1) machine shall be operated under one (1) license and the applicant or
licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine
displayed or operated by him. If the licensee shall move his place of
business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred
to such new location upon application to the Director giving the street and
number of the new location.
§ 354-19. Revocation.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety may for cause and under a
hearing revoke any licenses issued under this Article.
§ 354-17 SCRANTON CODE § 354-19
354:542
Chapter 359
CONDEMNED PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 201.
Contractors — See Ch. 203.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 360.
Zoning — See Ch. 445.
§ 359-1. Establishment and adoption of policy.
The Condemned Property Policy is hereby established and adopted.
§ 359-2. Affidavit required for work on condemned property.
Any owner of a property condemned by the City of Scranton must submit
to the Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits and the Zoning
Bureau of the City of Scranton, City Hall, Fourth Floor, Scranton,
Pennsylvania, telephone (570) 348-4193, a duly executed and notarized
affidavit containing the following information before any work can be
performed on the condemned property:
A. Complete name of the property owner.
B. Complete mailing address of the property owner.
C. Contact information for the property owner, including business and/or
cell phone number.
D. A certified copy of the deed evidencing ownership of the property.
E. A copy of a tax certificate issued by the Lackawanna County Tax Claim
Bureau evidencing that Scranton School District and Lackawanna
County taxes are paid in full.
F. A copy of a tax certificate from the City Treasurer evidencing that City
of Scranton real estate taxes and refuse fees are paid in full.
G. A detailed statement of the work to be completed to rehabilitate the
property, including but not limited to:
(1) The owner's detailed intentions for the rehabilitation of the
property.
(2) A timeline for completion of the rehabilitation work on the property.
(3) A list of licensed contractors engaged to work on the property.
(4) The scope of work of each contractor.
§ 354-19 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 359-3
354:543
§ 359-3. Responsibilities of property owner before commencement
of rehabilitation.
Before commencing the rehabilitation work, the property owner must:
§ 359-4. Requirements after rehabilitation is complete.
When rehabilitation of the condemned property is complete, the following
actions must be taken before the condemned property is released from
condemnation:
Chapter 360
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 193.
Construction codes — See Ch. 201.
Contractors — See Ch. 203.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 215.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 301.
Littering — See Ch. 305.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 313.
Plumbing — See Ch. 345.
Condemned property — See Ch. 359.
Solid waste — See Ch. 400.
Trees and weeds — See Ch. 434.
Abandoned or junk vehicles — See Ch. 438.
A. Secure a performance bond or cashier's check, acceptable to the City of
Scranton, to cover demolition costs. Said bond or check shall remain in
full force and effect at all times until the City issues a certificate of
occupancy for the property.
B. Obtain written approval from the Bureau of Zoning to ensure his/her
intentions for said property meet the requirements allowed by the
Bureau of Zoning.
C. Once the rehabilitation plan is approved by the Bureau of Zoning, any
and all necessary permits must be obtained through the Department of
Licensing, Inspections and Permits before work can commence on the
condemned property.
D. The City of Scranton reserves the right to inspect the property at any
time work is being performed at the property.
A. The owner must contact the Department of Licensing, Inspections and
Permits and schedule a final inspection of the property.
B. The owner must obtain a certificate of occupancy for the property. The
property will not be released from condemnation until a certificate of
occupancy has been obtained.
§ 359-3 SCRANTON CODE § 359-4
354:544
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-31-2014 by Ord. No. 37-201462]
§ 360-1. Adoption of code. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No.
12-2018; 9-30-2019 by Ord. No. 71-2019]
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Scranton, being marked and designated as "The
International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition," as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Scranton in the State of Pennsylvania for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure
that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 360-2 of this article.
§ 360-2. Additions, insertions and amendments.
The following sections of the 2009 Edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code have additions, insertions and amendments as stated
herein:
A. Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Scranton,"
hereinafter referred to as "this Code."
B. (Reserved)63
C. Section 108.5 Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure
condemned and placarded by the code official shall be vacated as
ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded
premises or operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded
premises or operate placarded equipment, before the release of
condemnation by the Office of Licensing, Inspections and Permits shall
be liable to a fine of not less than $1,000 or more than $10,000. Each
day the violation continues will be considered a separate offense.
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Ch. 360, Property
Maintenance, adopted 1-31-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000, as amended.
63.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, Section 103.5 Fees, was repealed 4-23-2018 by Ord.
No. 12-2018.
§ 360-1 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-2
354:545
• Exception: A person(s) may only occupy a recently condemned
building during daylight hours for the purpose of gathering their
belongings.
D. (Reserved)64
E. Section 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches.
All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all
grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs;
provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens.
F. Section 302.4.1 Shrubs and bushes. Bushes and shrubs on all premises
and exterior property shall be maintained and kept in good order.
G. Section 302.4.2 Dangerous trees. Any tree(s) that is (are) considered
dangerous by the Office of Licensing, Inspections and Permits or the
City Forester, due to overgrowth, instability, infestation or harmful
insects or a dead tree, shall be ordered removed or made safe by the
property owner. If the property owner refuses or is unable to remove
the unsafe condition, then the City has the authority to take appropriate
action to make safe the dangerous condition and lien all costs involved
to the property owner. All notices and orders shall comply with Section
107 of the (IPMC) relating to notices and orders. Any person in violation
of this order shall be liable to a fine of not less than $500 or more than
$2,000. Each day the violation continues is considered a separate
offense.
H. Section 304.10 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior
stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached
thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with
proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. No
person shall use interior furniture such as upholstered furniture on
exterior decks, porches and balconies. Only furniture that is
manufactured for outdoor use shall be used.
I. Section 304.14 Insect screens. During the period from May 1 to
October 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service
areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for
human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored
shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than
16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for
insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition.
64.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Section 112.4 Failure to comply, was repealed
4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 12-2018.
§ 360-2 SCRANTON CODE § 360-2
354:546
§ 360-2.1. Appeals. [Added 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 12-2018;
amended 9-30-2019 by Ord. No. 71-2019]
• Exemption: Screens shall not be required where other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect-repellent fans, are employed.
J. Section 308.3.2 Containers. The operator of every establishment
producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized,
approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the
storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
Each garbage container shall be placed/stored in an inconspicuous
location on said premises.
K. Section 309.3 Single occupant. The owner of a one-family dwelling or of
a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest
elimination on the premises.
L. Section 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building
who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on
terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to April 1 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
M. Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces
shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to April 15
to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) during the
period the spaces are occupied.
A. Any owner or agent, as defined in the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, aggrieved by the action or decision of
the code official or authorized deputy or a notice or order issued under
this article or code shall have the right to appeal such decision or order
to the Housing Board of Appeals, provided that a written application for
appeal is filed within 20 days after the day of the decision, or the day
that notice or order was served. Upon completion, all appeal forms
must be submitted with a nonrefundable fee as follows:
(1) To appeal a violation notice/citation fee: a fee of $150; or
(2) To appeal a stop-work order, condemnation, demolition, or any
other matter: a fee of $300.
B. Any person making an appeal to the Housing Board of Appeals will be
notified when to appear before the Board within 30 days. The Board will
hold a public hearing and, upon evidence and testimony submitted, will
render a decision. Any party not in compliance with the decision or
order from the Board shall be subject to the penalties of this article. Any
party who seeks to reschedule or cancel an appeal hearing must
provide prior notice of five business days of the scheduled hearing.
Failure to provide proper notice shall be deemed a violation and subject
§ 360-2 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-2.1
354:547
§ 360-2.2. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-23-2018 by Ord. No.
12-2018]
Any person, persons, corporation, LLC, or partnership which violates any
provisions of this article or code shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$300 and not more than $1,000 for each violation. Each day a violation
continues may constitute a separate offense for which a separate fine may
be imposed.
§ 360-2.3. Severability. [Added 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 12-2018]
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of this article
so long as it remains legally enforceable minus the invalid portion. The City
reserves the right to amend this article or any portion thereof from time to
time as it shall deem advisable in the best interests of the promotion of the
purposes and intent of this article, the effective administration thereof.
to a late fee of $150, payable to the Department of Licensing,
Inspections, and Permits. All late fees must be paid prior to scheduling
another hearing date.
C. Any owner or agent, as defined in the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, aggrieved by a decision of the Board
of Appeals may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Lackawanna
County. Appeals shall be made to the proper court within 30 days after
the Board's decision.
D. Following the filing of an appeal but prior to hearing, if the appellant
should so request in writing, the Director for the Department of
Licensing, Inspections, and Permits, and/or his Deputy or another
authorized representative, shall participate in negotiations to settle the
matter with the appellant within a reasonable amount of time not to
exceed 30 days.
§ 360-2.1 SCRANTON CODE § 360-2.3
354:548
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 12-18-2014 by Ord. No. 64-2014]
§ 360-3. Purpose.
Lack of maintenance of properties, littering, improper storage of trash and
rubbish, storage of inoperable/nonregistered vehicles, vendor operations
without permits, high grass and weeds, graffiti and accumulation of snow
and ice are costly problems that contribute to the deterioration of property
values and general disorder in a community. These problems degrade the
physical appearance of the City, which reduces business and tax revenue,
inhibiting economic development. The quality of life and community pride
of the citizens of Scranton are negatively impacted by the occurrences and
existence of these activities. Recognizing these are community problems,
the purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the City by helping to create a clean environment for the citizens
of Scranton.
§ 360-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall be
defined as follows, unless context clearly indicates otherwise:
AUTHORIZED LITTER RECEPTACLE — A litter collection receptacle which
is placed on the public right-of-way or on public property by the City for
use by the public to deposit small quantities of hand-held trash, but not
household or commercial waste.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle that has a gross vehicle weight
of greater than 6,000 pounds and is primarily used for business purposes,
including, but not limited to, making service calls, transporting equipment
used in a business or in accomplishing physical work as part of a business
(such as hauling material).
DEBRIS — Any material upon the premises that is a residue of structural
demolition, or any other material that is not neatly stored, stacked, or piled
in such a manner so as not to create a nuisance or become a harboring place
or food supply for insects and rodents.
DUMPING — Includes, but is not limited to, depositing of litter, depositing
durable goods (refrigerators, washers, dryers, etc.), small appliances,
furniture, carpets, tires, vehicles, vehicle parts and automotive products,
and other such municipal waste, hazardous waste, residual waste and
construction or demolition debris on public or private property, except as
authorized by law.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste material or a combination of solid,
liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material that, because of its
§ 360-3 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-4
354:549
quantity, concentration, physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics,
may:
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE (HHW) — Waste which would be
chemically or physically classified as a hazardous waste, but is excluded
from regulation as a hazardous waste because it is produced in quantities
smaller than those regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, and because it is generated by persons not
otherwise covered as hazardous waste generators by those regulations.
Such HHW materials meet one of the following four classifications: toxic,
flammable, reactive, or corrosive. HHW consists of numerous products that
are common to the average household, such as: pesticides and herbicides,
cleaners, automotive products, paints, and acids.
INDOOR FURNITURE — Any and all pieces of furniture which are made for
only inside use, including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs and sofas,
etc.
JUNKED VEHICLE —
LITTER — Includes, but is not limited to, all waste material, garbage, trash,
i.e., waste paper, tobacco products, wrappers, food or beverage containers,
newspapers, etc., municipal waste, human waste, domestic animal waste,
furniture or motor vehicle seats, vehicle parts, automotive products,
Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating illness.
A.
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed
of or otherwise managed.
B.
Any vehicle which presents a hazard or danger to the public or is a
public nuisance by virtue of its state or condition of disrepair.
A.
The following conditions, if present, are examples of a state or condition
of disrepair:
Rusted and/or jagged metal on or protruding from the body of the
vehicle.
(1)
(2) Broken glass or windows on or in the vehicle.
(3) Leaking of any fluids from the vehicle or deflated or flat tire(s).
(4) Unsecured and/or unlocked doors, hood, or trunk.
Storage or placement of the vehicle in an unbalanced condition, on
concrete blocks, or other similar apparatus.
(5)
(6) Harboring of rodents, insects, or other pests.
B.
The foregoing examples are not inclusive of all conditions which may
constitute a state or condition of disrepair. See also "motor vehicle
nuisance."
C.
§ 360-4 SCRANTON CODE § 360-4
354:550
shopping carts, construction or demolition material, recyclable material,
and dirt, mud and yard waste that has been abandoned or improperly
discarded, deposited, or disposed.
LOCAL RESPONSIBLE AGENT — Any person residing or working within
the County of Lackawanna designated to accept service on behalf of a legal
owner or operator of a rental dwelling unit.
MOBILE VENDOR — A vendor or seller of food and/or goods from a vehicle
or other conveyance upon the public streets or alleys of the City that does
not typically remain stationary for more than approximately 10 minutes
each hour.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device, capable or at one time
capable of being propelled by a motor, in which persons or property may
be transported upon public streets or highways, and including trailers or
semitrailers pulled thereby.
MOTOR VEHICLE NUISANCE — A motor vehicle with one or more of the
following defects:
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom, or office
waste, and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
A. Broken windshields, mirrors, or other glass, with sharp edges.
B. Broken headlamps, tail lamps, bumpers, or grills with sharp edges.
Any body parts, truck, firewall, or floorboards with sharp edges or large
holes resulting from rust.
C.
D. Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
Missing doors, windows, hood, trunks, or other body parts that could
permit animal harborage.
E.
F. One or more open tires or tubes which could permit animal harborage.
Any vehicle suspended by blocks, jacks, or other such materials in
a location which may pose a danger to the public, property owners,
visitors, or residents of the property on which said vehicle is found.
G.
Any excessive fluids leaking from the vehicle which may be harmful to
the public or the environment.
H.
I. Disassembled body or chassis parts stored in, on or about the vehicle.
J. Vehicles that do not display a current, valid license and registration.
Such other defects which the Fire Department determines to be a
danger to the general public or property.
K.
Motor vehicles parked, drifted, or otherwise located which may
interfere with flow of pedestrian or automobile traffic or impede
emergency efforts.
L.
§ 360-4 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-4
354:551
commercial, or institutional establishments or from community activities,
and which is not classified as residual waste or hazardous waste as defined
herein. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or
organic waste.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION — A written document issued to a person in
violation of a City ordinance which specifies the violation and contains a
directive to take corrective action within a specified time frame or face
further legal action.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure, or improvement which constitutes
a danger or potential danger to the health, safety, or welfare of citizens of
the City or causes a blighting effect in City neighborhoods. See also "public
nuisance."
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, or institution.
PLANTER STRIP — The nonconcrete space in the sidewalk area filled with
dirt and/or grass.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land and the improvements thereon owned by
any person, and includes front, side, and rear yards; vacant lots, buildings,
and other structural improvements; walkways and alleyways; and parking
areas, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential,
industrial, or commercial purposes, whether inhabited, temporary,
continuously uninhabited, or vacant, including any yard, grounds, walk,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to
such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any conditions or premises which are unsafe,
unsanitary or disruptive.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Any police officer, authorized inspector from the
Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits, or public official
designated by the City to enforce the City ordinances.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land used, reserved,
or dedicated as a street, alley, driveway, sidewalk, or utility easement,
including curb and gutter areas.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Material which would otherwise become
municipal waste, which can be collected, separated, or processed, and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products. These materials may include, but not be limited to, aluminum
cans, ferrous and bi-metal cans, glass containers, plastic bottles and
containers, mixed paper, white goods, major appliances, televisions, tires,
and large auto parts.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any discarded material or other waste, including
solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous materials, resulting from
construction, industrial, mining, and agricultural operations, excluding
municipal water and sewer operations.
§ 360-4 SCRANTON CODE § 360-4
354:552
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials.
SHADE TREE — Unless otherwise specified, includes all trees, shrubs, and
woody vegetation in the public right-of-way.
SIDEWALK AREA — The public right-of-way between the property line and
the curbline or the established edge of the roadway.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual, or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or
contained gaseous materials.
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste, and it shall be
presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess of three
months constitutes disposal.
TRACTOR OF A TRACTOR-TRAILER — A truck with a minimum of three
axles that is primarily intended to pull a trailer, as defined below, and not
primarily to carry goods itself.
TRAILER OF A TRACTOR-TRAILER — A commercial vehicle with a length of
20 feet or more that is not self-propelled, that is intended to haul materials,
vehicles, goods, gases or liquids, and that is intended to be pulled by a
tractor, and that is not a "recreational vehicle."
TREE WELL — The nonconcrete area surrounding a shade tree planted in a
sidewalk area.
VEGETATION — Any planting that is cultivated and managed for edible
or ornamental purposes, such as vegetable gardens, trees, shrubs, hedges,
flowers, etc.
VIOLATION TICKET — A form issued by a police officer or public officer to
a person who violates a provision of this article. The violation ticket is an
offer by the City of Scranton extended to a person to settle a violation by
paying the fine in lieu of a citation being issued against the violator.
WEEDS —
All grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, which meet any of the
following criteria:
(1) Exceed eight inches in height.
Exhale unpleasant noxious odors or pollen, such as ragweed,
dandelion, and miscellaneous other vegetation commonly referred
to as "weeds" or "brush."
(2)
May conceal filthy deposits or serve as breeding places for
mosquitoes, other insects, or vermin.
(3)
A.
§ 360-4 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-4
354:553
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure.
§ 360-5. Quality-of-life violations. [Amended 9-30-2019 by Ord. No.
72-2019]
Encroach onto neighboring properties by way of leaders or roots
without the property owners' consent.
(4)
(5) May cause a public nuisance.
Weeds shall not include cultivated and managed vegetation planted
for edible or ornamental purposes, such as vegetable gardens, trees,
shrubs, flowers, etc.
B.
A. Quality-of-life violations are as follows:
(1) Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of waste, trash, rubbish, or garbage.
(2) Animal maintenance and waste/feces cleanup. People owning,
harboring, or keeping an animal within the City of Scranton shall
not permit any waste matter/feces from the animal to collect and
remain on the property so as to cause or create an unhealthy,
unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive living condition. All waste from
animals must be cleaned up on a daily basis.
(3) Disposal of rubbish or garbage/dumping: improper disposal of
rubbish or garbage, or dumping or disposing of rubbish or garbage
on vacant, unoccupied, or other property.
(4) High weeds, grass or plant growth. All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in
excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, and
vegetation. Cultivated flowers, gardens, trees, and shrubs shall not
be included as a violation of this article.
(5) Littering or scattering rubbish. No person shall throw, dump, place,
sweep, or dispose of any waste, trash, garbage, or rubbish upon
any public sidewalk, alley, street, bridge, public passageway, public
parking area, or on any public property.
(6) Motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful to store, park, or place any
unregistered, uninspected, inoperative, unlicensed, or nuisance
motor vehicle on any premises. No vehicle shall at any time be in a
state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being
stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless
conducted inside an approved spray booth.
(7) Outside placement of indoor appliances/furniture. It is prohibited
to store or place any/all appliances or furniture, including, but not
limited to ranges, refrigerators, air conditioners, ovens, washers,
§ 360-4 SCRANTON CODE § 360-5
354:554
dryers, microwaves, dishwashers, mattresses, recliners, sofas,
interior chairs, or interior tables on the exterior of any property for
the purpose of sale or any other reason, except for the temporary
purpose to perform maintenance on said property. If maintenance
is being performed, or if the items are actively being sold in a yard
sale, the items shall not be left unattended.
(8) Ownership presumption of waste, trash, and/or recyclables for
illegal dumping and illegal hauling. It shall be the responsibility of
every owner and/or occupant to dispose of their waste, trash, or
recyclables in a proper manner. Any business or person who is
unable to show proof that they have legally disposed of any waste,
trash, or recyclables will be in violation of this article. Should any
person or business use an unlicensed hauler to dispose of their
waste, trash, or recyclables, said person or business shall be in
violation of this article. Upon request of the public officer, any
owner or occupant must show proof of their appropriate trash and/
or recyclable hauler. If any parts are found within a municipal
waste container, recycling container, garbage bag, or loose trash/
waste displaying the name and/or address of a person and/or
persons, that trash or waste shall be presumed to be the property
of such person and/or persons. It shall be unlawful for any person,
business, partnership, or entity to remove or haul waste, trash, or
recyclables without the proper approval or license. Any waste,
trash, or recyclables found not to be disposed of in accordance with
this article will be a violation of this article.
(9) Placement or littering by private advertising matter. No person
shall throw, place, sweep, or dispose of litter or private advertising
matter upon any public sidewalk, alley, street, bridge, public
passageway, public parking area, or any public property. No
person, group, organization, or entity will hang, place, or advertise
on any public property in any manner. No person, group,
organization, or entity will hang, place, or advertise on any
property that they do not have any ownership rights to without the
written approval of said owner.
(10) Snow and ice removal from sidewalks. Every owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee, property agent, or any other person who is
responsible for any property within the City of Scranton, is
required to remove any snow or ice from their sidewalk within 24
hours of the cessation of said snow and ice falling. Furthermore,
they must create a path, free from any snow or ice, of three feet on
said sidewalk. Should any property be a place of business within
the City of Scranton, all snow and ice must be removed within four
hours of the cessation of said snow and ice falling. Any property
that is deemed a business must have the entire sidewalk free from
any snow and ice. If and/or when the snow and/or ice cessation
happens during the hours of darkness, the time limit of removal of
all snow and ice begins at daybreak.
§ 360-5 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-5
354:555
§ 360-6. Authority for issuance of violation ticket.
Upon finding a quality-of-life violation, any public official, as previously
defined herein, may issue quality-of-life violation ticket(s) to the owner and/
or occupant of the property at issue or to the individual(s) known to have
violated this article.
(11) Storage containers for waste or trash. The owner of every premises
shall supply approved containers for waste/trash, as well as be
responsible for the removal of rubbish. All containers that store
waste or trash shall be durable, watertight, and made of metal or
plastic. Containers must have tight-fitting covers, and must be kept
clean and odor free at all times. All containers must be stored in the
rear of every property so said containers are not visible from the
public right-of-way. Waste/trash containers may only be placed in
front of any property when darkness occurs the night before the
day of the scheduled waste/trash pickup day. Once the licensed
hauler removes the waste/trash from any property, all containers
must be returned to the rear of any property before daybreak on
the day following pickup. (Example: Jim Smith's trash collection
day is Wednesday. Jim Smith may place his trash containers in front
of his property on Tuesday night, once night falls. Jim Smith must
place his trash containers in the rear of his yard before daybreak on
Thursday morning.)
(12) Storing of recyclables. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
all residential, commercial, and industrial property to ensure
storage, collection, and disposal of all recyclables from their
property in such a manner not to create a public nuisance. Storage
of recyclables is only allowed in approved containers, which must
be kept clean and sanitary at all times.
(13) Shrubs and bushes. Bushes and shrubs on all premises and exterior
property shall be maintained and kept in good order.
(14) Dangerous trees: any tree that is considered dangerous and unsafe
to the public by the office of Licensing, Inspections and Permits or
the City Forester, due to overgrowth, instability, infestation,
harmful insects or a dead tree.
(15) Commercial/junk vehicles in a residential area. No commercial/
junk vehicles shall be parked or stored in a residential district as
defined in the City of Scranton Zoning Ordinance.
(16) Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly
damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or
building on any private or public property by placing thereon any
marking, carving or graffiti.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said
surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
§ 360-5 SCRANTON CODE § 360-7
354:556
§ 360-7. Enforcement.
§ 360-8. Service of violation ticket.
A violation ticket shall be served upon a violator by handing it to the
violator, by handing it at the residence of the person to be served to an
adult member of the household or other person in charge of the residence,
by leaving or affixing the notice or violation ticket to the property where
the violation exists, by handing it at any office or usual place of business of
the violator to his/her agent or to the person for the time being in charge
thereof, or by mailing the notice to the violator's address of record.
§ 360-9. Separate offense.
Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue may constitute a
separate offense for which a separate fine may be imposed.
§ 360-10. Abatement of violation.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Licensing,
Inspections and Permits Department, or any public official, as
previously defined herein.
B. Any violation of the provisions of this article may be cause for a citation,
a violation ticket, and/or a notice of violation to be issued to the violator.
A. Any person or business violating this article is hereby directed to satisfy
the City of Scranton and its citizens, upon issuance of a quality-of-life
ticket, by correcting the violation in question. A public officer is
authorized and empowered to cause a violation to be corrected. The
cost shall be determined by the City Code Enforcement Officer in order
that the City shall be compensated for both direct and indirect costs
and expenses incurred.
B. The City of Scranton and/or its contractor, per the direction of the City,
reserves the right to abate the violation in question at the expense of
the owner. If the City has effected the abatement of the violation, the
total cost thereof, to include hourly wages and all items and materials
used, may be charged to the owner of the property, tenant, or offending
party. A bill/invoice will be generated to the violator for payment
separate from the quality-of-life ticket, which will also be paid
separately.
C. In all instances where the City abates the violation, in addition to the
fine set forth in the quality-of-life ticket, the City is authorized to
recover from the offending party, the owner of the property, or tenant
the abatement charges and such other charges established by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the rules and regulations.
D. City of Scranton cleanup. The City reserves the right to perform any
necessary work to abate any violation once 48 hours passes from the
date of issuance of the quality-of-life ticket. Should the violation, at the
§ 360-7 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-10
354:557
§ 360-11. Fines and penalties. [Amended 9-30-2019 by Ord. No.
72-2019]
discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, present imminent danger
and/or pose a health hazard and/or risk, the City reserves the right to
perform the abatement immediately. The City will perform this work at
a rate of $75 per hour, per man, and forward the cost of any material
necessary for the abatement. The City reserves the right to charge an
additional 20% on all material purchases to cover all miscellaneous
expenses, such as wear and tear on equipment.
E. Contractor cleanup. The City reserves the right to direct a contractor to
perform the abatement of the violation in question once 48 hours
passes from the date of issuance of the quality-of-life ticket. Should the
violation present imminent danger and/or pose a health hazard and/or
risk, the City reserves the right to direct the contractor to perform the
abatement immediately. The contractor will submit a bill for its work to
the City of Scranton, and the City will forward these costs to the
violator. The City reserves the right to add a thirty-percent processing
fee in addition to the cost of the contractor.
A. Any person who violates this article shall pay a fine as set forth herein
for each offense, plus all direct and indirect costs incurred by the City
for the cleanup and abatement of the violation.
Violation Description Fine Payment Due
QOL-001 Accumulation of
rubbish or
garbage
$25 48 hours
QOL-002 Animal
maintenance
and waste/feces
cleanup
$25 48 hours
QOL-003 Disposal of
rubbish or
garbage
dumping
$25 48 hours
QOL-004 High weeds,
grass or plant
growth
$25 48 hours
QOL-005 Littering or
scattering
rubbish
$25 48 hours
QOL-006 Motor vehicles $25 48 hours
§ 360-10 SCRANTON CODE § 360-11
354:558
Violation Description Fine Payment Due
QOL-007 Outside
placement of
indoor
appliances/
furniture
$25 48 hours
QOL-008 Ownership
presumption of
waste, trash
and/or
recyclables for
illegal dumping
and illegal
hauling
$25 48 hours
QOL-009 Placement of
littering by
private
advertising
matter
$25 48 hours
QOL-010 Snow and ice
removal from
sidewalks
$25 48 hours
QOL-011 Storage
containers for
waste or trash
$25 48 hours
QOL-012 Storing of
recyclables
$25 48 hours
QOL-013 Shrubs and
bushes
$25 48 hours
QOL-014 Dangerous trees $25 48 hours
QOL-015 Commercial/
junk vehicles in
a residential
area
$50 48 hours
QOL-016 Defacement of
property
$25 48 hours
B. Failure to remit payment within the time frame listed above shall result
in a late fee being imposed in the amount of 10% of the ticket amount
per day up to 10 days.
C. Failure of the person to make payment within 10 days of the date of a
violation ticket shall result in the filing of a citation, for failure to pay,
with the Magisterial District Judge.
§ 360-11 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-11
354:559
§ 360-12. Citation fines. [Amended 9-30-2019 by Ord. No. 72-2019]
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply
with any of the terms or provisions of this article, or of any regulation or
requirement pursuant hereto and authorized hereby, shall, upon conviction
before the Magisterial District Judge, be ordered to pay a fine of not less
than $150, and not more than $1,000 on each offense, or be imprisoned no
more than 90 days, or both.
§ 360-13. Restitution, costs and attorneys' fees.
The Magisterial District Judge may order the violator to make restitution
where appropriate, to pay the City's costs of collection/citation proceedings,
and to pay the City's reasonable attorneys' fees associated with the
prosecution of the same.
§ 360-14. Effect on other provisions.
§ 360-15. Severability; amendment.
§ 360-16. Effective date.
This article shall be effective January 1, 2015.
D. If violations are continuous or egregious, code officials have the right to
issue citations without first issuing tickets, provided notice has been
given.
A. All relevant ordinances, regulations, and policies of the City of
Scranton, Pennsylvania, not amended shall remain in full force and
effect.
B. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this article shall be subordinate to this article to the extent of such
conflict, and the language contained in the article shall control.
A. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion
of this article so long as it remains legally enforceable minus the invalid
portion.
B. The City reserves the right to amend this article or any portion thereof
from time to time as it shall deem advisable in the best interests of the
promotion of the purposes and intent of this article and the effective
administration thereof.
§ 360-11 SCRANTON CODE § 360-16
354:560
ARTICLE III
Abandoned Real Property
[Adopted 4-7-2016 by Ord. No. 19-2016]
§ 360-17. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, herein, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this article, except where a different meaning is clearly
indicated.
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY — Any real property located in the City,
whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage, has had a lis
pendens filed against it by the lender holding a mortgage on the property;
is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the lender, is subject to
an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor's lien sale, or has
been transferred to the lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The
designation of property as "abandoned" shall remain in place until such time
as the property is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure action
has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, or other enclosure, or
a structure that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow
access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES — Includes, but is not limited to, the City of Scranton
codified ordinances (City Code) and the Pennsylvania Building Code.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY — Includes, but is not limited to:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement officer, building code
official, zoning officer, code enforcement officer, fire inspector, building
inspector, or other person authorized by the City to enforce the applicable
ordinances or codes.
OWNER — Any person, legal entity, or other party having any ownership
interest, whether legal or equitable, in real property. This term shall apply
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors,
walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or
A.
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties, causing a decrease in
value of the neighboring properties; or
B.
C. Properties cited for a violation of City ordinances or codes;
Properties that endanger the public health, safety, welfare, because
the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated,
violate minimum health and safety standards or lack maintenance as
required by City ordinance or Code, including zoning codes and
standards.
D.
§ 360-17 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-17
354:561
to any person, legal entity, or agent responsible for the construction,
maintenance, or operation of the property involved.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local or regional manager,
property maintenance company, or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of abandoned real property.
VACANT — Any building not legally occupied.
§ 360-18. Establishment of registry of abandoned real property.
Pursuant to the provisions of this article, the City or its designee shall
establish a registry cataloging each abandoned property within the City
limits, containing the information required herein.
A. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the City of Scranton limits shall perform or have performed an
inspection of the property to determine vacancy or occupancy, upon
default by the mortgagor. The mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the
inspection, register the property with the City's Department of
Licensing, Inspections and Permits on forms or through a City website,
and indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate
registration is required for each property, whether it is found to be
vacant or occupied.
B. If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected
by the mortgagee or designee monthly until the mortgagor or other
party remedies the default, or it is found to be vacant or shows evidence
of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee
shall, within 10 days of that inspection, update the property registration
to a vacancy status on forms provided by the City.
C. Registration pursuant to this article shall contain the name of the
mortgagee and the server, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee
and the server, a direct contact name, telephone number, facsimile
number, and e-mail address for both parties, the folio or tax number,
and the name and twenty-four-hour contact number of the property
management company or designee responsible for security and
maintenance of the property.
D. A nonrefundable annual registration fee in the amount of $200 shall be
assessed and shall accompany the registration form, per registration.
E. All registration fees must be paid directly by or from the mortgagee,
servicer, trustee, or owner. Third-party registration fees are not allowed
without the consent of the City and/or its authorized designee.
F. This article shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a
foreclosure sale, where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred
under a deed in lieu of a foreclosure/sale.
§ 360-17 SCRANTON CODE § 360-18
354:562
§ 360-19. Maintenance requirements.
All abandoned real properties are subject to maintenance as required by
City ordinances and property codes.
§ 360-20. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this article does not relieve any person, legal entity, or agent
from any other obligations set forth in any applicable ordinance or code(s)
which may apply to the property. Upon sale or transfer of title to the
property, the owner shall be responsible for meeting with the City's
Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits for the required
inspection.
§ 360-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article may be
cited and fined pursuant to § 360-18I above.
G. Properties subject to this article shall remain under the annual
registration requirement and the inspection, security, and maintenance
standards of this article as long as the properties remain vacant or in
default.
H. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
article must report any change of information contained in the
registration filing within 10 days of the change.
I. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to modify
the registration form/filing from time to time to reflect a change of
circumstance as required by this article is a violation of this article and
shall be subject to enforcement and a $300 fine.
J. Pursuant to a determination that any property is in violation of this
article, the City may take the necessary action to ensure compliance
with and place a lien on the property for the cost of the work performed
to benefit the property and bring it into compliance.
§ 360-18 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS § 360-21
354:563
Chapter 366
RECORDS
§ 366-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Municipal Records Law."
§ 366-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have
the following meanings unless the context clearly states otherwise:
CITY ARCHIVIST — That person who is originally appointed by the Mayor
of the city and shall have the power and responsibilities of overseeing the
enactment and enforcement of this chapter.
CITY ARCHIVIST REPORT — Contains any and all records determined by
the city archivist, in accordance with the Records Retention Schedule, to be
subject to destruction.
CURRENT RECORDS — Records of that year and/or records of a policy
nature. All current records should be maintained by the Department or
Bureau of their origin. Records that are of a policy nature must be retained
in their original until they are superseded.
HISTORICAL RECORDS — Any information which is, will be or could be
important to the economic, political or social historian.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania, and any municipal
authority created by the city.
NONRECORDS — Those records of an ephemeral nature which are created
for convenience in the day-to-day operation of the city and which do not
affect the rights of the public. Examples of such records are suggested in
the following list, which is not intended to be inclusive:
PUBLIC RECORDS — Any papers, books, maps, photographs or other
documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
made or received by a municipality or a municipal government agency
Copies of filed papers, the originals of which are retained in another
office.
A.
B. Duplicate copies of documents retained in the same office.
C. Shorthand notes and stenotapes which have been transcribed.
Drafts of letters and reports, interdepartmental memos, personal
correspondence, etc.
D.
E. Unused forms which have been revised or superseded.
F. Catalogs, magazines and published material kept for office use only.
§ 360-21 SCRANTON CODE § 366-2
366:564
in pursuance of law or in connection with the exercise of its legitimate
functions and the discharge of its responsibilities.
RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE — That schedule which is included in
§ 366-11, and any and all amendments, deletions or corrections thereto.
§ 366-3. Certain records to be disposed of.
Certain public records, archives or printed public documents in the custody
of any person or office shall be destroyed, sold or otherwise disposed of
if the disposition is in conformance with schedules and regulations which
shall be made and promulgated by the City Archivist with the approval of
City Council.
§ 366-4. Procedure for disposal.
Disposition of city records shall be by the following procedure:
A. The City Archivist shall determine in accordance with the Records
Retention Schedule which records should be destroyed, microfilmed,
preserved or otherwise; and shall be required to compile a report as to
those records which are subject to destruction. The City Archivist's
report shall contain as to each record subject for destruction:
(1) A description of the record sufficient for identification.
(2) Date of the record.
(3) Intended date of destruction.
(4) Method of destruction.
B. The City Archivist shall forward his report to all department heads for
review. A department head will have twenty (20) days from receipt of
this report in which to advise the City Archivist that he does not wish a
certain record within the report to be destroyed. Failure to respond
within said twenty-day period will be deemed an approval of the City
Archivist report.
C. The City Archivist shall submit his report to the City Council for their
approval. The City Council will have thirty (30) days from receipt of this
report in which to approve or disapprove said report. Failure on the
part of the Council to disapprove the report within said time period will
be deemed approval of the same.
D. All records that have been classified unnecessary and subject to
destruction by the City Archivist will be listed in the City Archivist
report and available for public inspection during the same thirty-day
period in which said report is before the City Council.
E. The City Archivist shall advertise in two (2) public newspapers of
general circulation as to the contents of his report, and when and where
said report can be examined.
§ 366-2 RECORDS § 366-4
366:565
§ 366-5. Review and approval of schedule.
No such retention schedule, amendments, deletions or corrections shall be
operative, unless reviewed by the City's Law Department and approved by
City Council.
§ 366-6. Failure to approve.
If the City Council fails to approve the retention schedule or any
amendments, deletions or corrections thereto within a thirty-day period
after being submitted to the City Council, that schedule or its amendments,
deletions or corrections shall automatically become law.
§ 366-7. Historical documents.
Any historical document shall be retained in its original after microfilming
and stored by either the city or an agency deemed appropriate by the city.
The city retains the ownership rights to any document which is stored by an
outside agency. The City Archivist will make the determination as to what is
an historical document.
§ 366-8. Public inspection; exception.
For purposes of public inspection, the "right-to-know law" has defined what
public records shall mean. Any record of public expenditures, be they
money or services, is subject to disclosure, as are those records which fix
the personal or property rights of an individual or group of individuals.
The law excludes from public disclosure those records which may harm a
person's reputation or security. This means that only when it is clear that
such disclosure would come within the exclusion described can a request to
inspect public records be denied. If any doubt exists, the question should
be resolved in favor of disclosure. It should be noted that where public
records are involved, no special reason need be given by the inquiring party
to inspect such; a simple expression of interest will suffice.
§ 366-9. Records used as evidence in court.
In the event of any such destruction or other disposition of any public
records under the provisions of this chapter, the photograph,
microphotograph or microfilm or a certified copy of said photograph,
microphotograph or microfilm shall be receivable as evidence in any court
or proceedings, and shall have the same force and effect as though the
original record had been produced and proved.
F. The City Archivist, after receiving approval of the report from City
Council, shall file it in the Office of Judicial Records of Lackawanna
County and shall maintain a certified copy of said report as an official
city record.
§ 366-4 SCRANTON CODE § 366-10
366:566
§ 366-10. Liability of municipal officials.
No municipal official shall be held liable on his official bond or in the way
of damages for loss or in any other manner, civil or criminal, because of the
disposition of public records pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 366-11. Record retention schedule.
A. Interpreting. The following procedures are to be used in interpreting
the municipal record retention schedule:
(1) Any record which has exceeded the maximum retention period
should no longer be considered an official city record.
(2) Records which have exceeded the maximum retention period do
not have to be microfilmed. They must only be listed for disposition.
Example: Police complaints of 1945. These records have
exceeded the maximum retention period ten (10)
years and are therefore no longer official city records.
(3) Records which are within the retention schedule may be
microfilmed and/or destroyed as per the procedure described and
governed by the City Archivist, this chapter and the Records
Retention Schedule.
B. Classes of records. Municipal records have been arranged into the
following nine (9) classes: legislative affairs; general administration and
legal; public safety; public works; public health; building and zoning
regulations; recreation, shade trees and libraries; planning and
development; authorities (general municipal records pertaining to
authorities; as units of local government, authorities follow the same
retention and disposition schedules as other).
(1) Legislative affairs:
Type Retention Period
Minutes of legislative body Permanent
Ordinances and resolutions Permanent
Bylaws and rules of order Until suspended, plus 5
years
Public hearings, notice and
transcript
Current, plus 10 years
Legislative investigations, reports Current, plus 10 years
Executive veto and message Current, plus 10 years
Committee minutes, reports,
transcripts of committee hearings
Current, plus 5 years
Draft proposals for legislative
enactment
Current, plus 5 years
§ 366-10 RECORDS § 366-11
366:567
Type Retention Period
Reports to legislative body of
executive and administrative
officers, departments, boards and
commissions
Current, plus 2 years
Petitions, complaints, inquiries and
routine notices and correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
(2) General administration and legal records:
Type Retention Period
Charter, charter amendments and
corporate name changes:
Formal records Permanent
Charter commission minutes,
hearing transcripts and reports
10 years
Annexation, consolidation and
boundary change records
Formal records Permanent
Petitions, correspondence, notices,
public hearing transcripts, etc.
Date of action, plus 5 years
Deeds and related land records Permanent
Bonds, municipal
Bond ordinance and register Permanent
Opinions, approvals and
redemptions
Issue closeout, plus 5
years
Bonds, performance and security, and
insurance policies
Expiration date, plus 10
years
Franchises, leases and licenses
Permanent or continuing Permanent
Annual or short-term Expiration date, plus 5
years
Court petitions, decrees and orders Permanent
Solicitor's opinions
Basic law Permanent
Temporary in character Current, plus 5 years
Litigation, records pertaining to Close of case, plus 20
years
Lien dockets Date of settlement, plus 5
years
Bids and contracts
§ 366-11 SCRANTON CODE § 366-11
366:568
Type Retention Period
Formal Current, plus 10 years
Informal Current, plus 5 years
Notices, correspondence, purchase
orders, etc.
Current, plus 5 years
Property and supply inventory Current, plus 5 years
Administrative studies, surveys and
reports
Current, plus 10 years
Operating reports of departments Current, plus 2 years
Executive proclamations and reports Current, plus 2 years
Financial records
Budgets and budget messages Current, plus 5 years
Annual financial reports Current, plus 10 years
Tax duplicates, appeals,
settlements
Current, plus 5 years
Canceled checks and bank
statements
Current, plus 5 years
Daily cash records Until audited
Journals and ledgers Current, plus 10 years
Miscellaneous records Until audit, plus 1 year
Notices and correspondence Current, plus 2 years
Personnel records
Individual employee records Until retirement, plus 10
years
Pension plans and transactions Permanent
Classification and pay plans,
personnel rules and regulations
Until superseded or
canceled, plus 5 years
Payrolls and payroll transactions Current, plus 10 years
Applications for employment (not
hired)
Current, plus 1 year
Civil service commission
Minutes Permanent
Appeals, removals, etc. Current, plus 5 years
Notices and routine correspondence Current, plus 2 years
Routine notices and correspondence Current, plus 2 years
(3) Public records:
§ 366-11 RECORDS § 366-11
366:569
Type Retention Period
Police records:
Complaints and investigations Current, plus 10 years
Arrests, detentions and hearing
dockets
Current, plus 20 years
Probation and parole reports Current, plus 20 years
Radio and television logs Current, plus 2 years
Traffic and parking violations Current, plus 2 years
Dog law enforcement Current, plus 2 years
Bicycle registration Current, plus 2 years
Traffic surveys and signals Current, plus 10 years
Personnel education and training:
Individual records Retirement, plus 5 years
Materials and course outlines Current, plus 5 years
Routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Fire records
Fire-fighting log and records Current, plus 10 years
Fire investigations Current, plus 20 years
Special reports and investigations Current, plus 10 years
Fire prevention activities Current, plus 5 years
Fire prevention code See ordinances
[§ 366-11B(1)]
Personnel education and training
Individual records Retirement plus 5 years
Materials and course outlines Current, plus 5 years
Routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
(4) Public works:
Type Retention Period
Streets, bridges, storm sewers and
sidewalks
Engineering and survey notes and
drawings
Permanent
Opening orders and deeds of
dedication
Permanent
§ 366-11 SCRANTON CODE § 366-11
366:570
Type Retention Period
Construction plans and
specifications
Until reconstruction or
abandonment
Construction bids received Until audited, then destroy
Construction testing and inspection
reports
Acceptance of project, plus
20 years
Maintenance records Until reconstruction or
abandonment
Street opening permits Current, plus 5 years
Equipment records Life of equipment
Complaints, routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Refuse collection and disposal
Engineering notes and drawings Permanent
Construction plans and
specifications
Until reconstruction or
abandonment
Construction bids received Until audited, then destroy
Maintenance records Until reconstruction or
abandonment
Refuse volume or weight records Current, plus 2 years
Equipment records Life of equipment
Licenses and permits
Annual Current, plus 5 years
Continuing or permanent Permanent
Complaints, routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Public buildings
Construction plans and
specifications
Until reconstruction or
abandonment
Maintenance records
Structural Until reconstruction or
abandonment
Routine Current, plus 5 years
Space allocation and use records Current, plus 10 years
Routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Sanitary sewers and sewage disposal
Engineering and survey notes and
drawings
Permanent
§ 366-11 RECORDS § 366-11
366:571
Type Retention Period
Sewer rights-of-way and easements Permanent
Construction plans and
specifications
Permanent
Construction bids received Until audited, then destroy
Construction testing and inspection
reports
Acceptance of project, plus
discretion of agency
Maintenance records Current, plus 10 years
State permits and approvals Permanent
Plant operation records Daily, current, plus 2 years
Monthly, current, plus 10
years Yearly, permanent
Equipment records Life of equipment
Sewer assessment records Current, plus 20 years
Sewer rental records Current, plus 20 years
Complaints, routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Water supply and distribution
Engineering and survey notes and
drawings
Permanent
Deeds and easements Permanent
Construction plans and
specifications
Until reconstruction or
abandonment
Construction bids received Until audited, then destroy
Construction testing and inspection
reports
Acceptance of project, plus
discretion of agency
Maintenance records Current, plus 10 years
State permits and approvals Permanent
Plant operation records Daily, current, plus 2 years
Monthly, current, plus 10
years Yearly, permanent
Equipment records Life of equipment
Water line assessment records Current, plus 20 years
Water meter readings and billings Current, plus 5 years
Complaints, routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Other utilities (Parallel to sanitary
sewers and sewage disposal and
water supply and distribution with
changes applicable to function)
§ 366-11 SCRANTON CODE § 366-11
366:572
Type Retention Period
Engineering and survey bids and
drawings
Permanent
Deeds, rights-of-way and easements Permanent
Construction plans and
specifications
Permanent or until
reconstruction or
abandonment (depending
on function of utility)
Construction bids received Until audited, then destroy
Construction testing and inspection
reports
Acceptance of project, plus
discretion of agency
Maintenance records Current, plus 10 years
State permits and approvals Permanent
Plant operation records Daily, current, plus 2 years
Monthly, current, plus 10
years Yearly, permanent
Equipment records Life of equipment
Assessment records Current, plus 20 years
Rental records Current, plus 20 years
Readings and billings
Complaints, routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
(5) Public health:
Type Retention Period
Board of health
Minutes Permanent
Rules, regulations and orders Until superseded or
voided, plus 5 years
Reports and recommendations Current, plus 10 years
Department of health
State permits and approvals Permanent
Reports to state departments and
agencies
Current, plus 10 years
Complaints and investigations Current, plus 5 years
Health inspections
Routine reports Current, plus 2 years
Compliance notices Current, plus 10 years
Licenses and permits
§ 366-11 RECORDS § 366-11
366:573
Type Retention Period
Annual Current, plus 5 years
Continuing and permanent Permanent
Routine notice and correspondence Current, plus 2 years
Housing code enforcement
Complaints and investigations Current, plus 2 years
Orders and appeals Current, plus 10 years
Reports and recommendations Current, plus 5 years
Routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
(6) Building and zoning regulations:
Type Retention Period
Applications for building and zoning
permits
Current, plus 20 years
Building plans, permits and
inspections
Until demolition
Occupancy and use permits Until revocation
Zoning board of adjustment
Minutes Permanent
Hearing transcripts Permanent
Decisions on appeals Permanent
Records in court cases Current, plus 20 years
Routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Routine notices and correspondence Current, plus 2 years
(7) Recreation, shade streets and libraries:
Type Retention Period
Parks and playgrounds
Park and recreation board
Minutes Permanent
Rules and regulations Until revocation
Recommendations and reports Current, plus 5 years
Routine correspondence Current, plus 2 years
Program records Current, plus 5 years
Facilities
Construction plans and
specifications
Permanent
§ 366-11 SCRANTON CODE § 366-11
366:574
Type Retention Period
Operation and maintenance
records
Current, plus 5 years
Shade tree commission
Minutes Permanent
Rules and regulations Until revocation
Operation and maintenance records Current, plus 10 years
Routine notices and
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Libraries
Library commission
Minutes Permanent
Rules and regulations Until revocation
Recommendations and reports Current, plus 5 years
Libraries
Construction plans and
specifications
Permanent
Operating and maintenance
records
Current, plus 10 years
Book inventory Kept current
Book purchases and disposal Current, plus 10 years
Records of library use Current, plus 5 years
(8) Planning and development:
Type Retention Period
Planning
Planning commission or
department
Minutes or committee actions Permanent
Basic studies Permanent
Comprehensive or master plans Permanent
Special reports and
recommendations
Current, plus 10 years
Routine correspondence Current, plus 2 years
Land subdivision control
Rules and regulations Until superseded
Subdivision applications, plans and
permits
Permanent
§ 366-11 RECORDS § 366-11
366:575
Chapter 371
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
§ 371-1. Abandonment of airtight containers.
Type Retention Period
Improvement installation
agreements
Current, plus 20 years
Notices and routine
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Real estate registry
Basic plans, registry book and
formal change of ownership
records
Permanent
Notices and routine
correspondence
Current, plus 2 years
Community development programs
Low cost and public housing
programs
Proposals Current, plus 5 years
Projects Permanent
Neighborhood improvement
programs
Proposals Current, plus 5 years
Projects Permanent
Urban renewal programs
Proposals Current, plus 5 years
Projects Permanent
(9) Authorities (as units of government):
Type Retention Period
Authority
Formal organizational and financial
agreements
Permanent
Municipal copies
Authority minutes Permanent
Authority financial statements Current, plus 10 years
Authority reports Current, plus 5 years
Routine correspondence Current, plus 2 years
§ 366-11 SCRANTON CODE § 371-1
371:576
Chapter 373
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 193.
Construction codes — See Ch. 201.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
Housing discrimination — See Ch. 296.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 313.
Noise — See Ch. 317.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 336.
Personal boarding care home facilities — See
Ch. 343.
Plumbing — See Ch. 345.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 360.
Rooming houses — See Ch. 375.
Zoning — See Ch. 445.
A. No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling, or leave
abandoned in any area which may be accessible to children, any icebox,
refrigerator or any other container which has an airtight door and
locking device that prohibits the opening of such door from the inside.
B. Prior to the abandonment of any icebox, refrigerator or other container
by any person, all doors and locking devices shall be removed from the
same.
§ 371-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 371-1
371:577

ARTICLE I
Landlord Registration, Licensing and Occupancy
[Adopted 3-22-2012 by Ord. No. 17-201265; amended 11-10-2016 by
Ord. No. 58-2016]
§ 373-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipality of
Scranton Landlord Registration, Licensing and Occupancy Ordinance of
2016."
§ 373-2. General.
It is the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the administration and
the City Council of the Municipality of Scranton to protect and promote
the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens and, in furtherance of
those objectives, to establish registration and licensing requirements for
landlords of real property in the Municipality of Scranton, to establish and
maintain a current record of all rental properties and tenants occupying
such properties, to reduce blight within the Municipality of Scranton and
to establish an enforcement mechanism to effect the aforementioned
objectives.
§ 373-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDLORD — One or more persons, as defined by this section, jointly or
severally, in whom all or part of the legal title to the premises is vested
as documented by the most current deed on record with the Recorder
of Deeds of Lackawanna County and/or holds all or part of the beneficial
ownership and rights to the present use and enjoyment of the premises. This
definition includes a mortgage holder in constructive or actual possession
of a residential rental unit.
LICENSE YEAR — A period of time beginning January 1 and expiring
December 31.
MUNICIPALITY OF SCRANTON or MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of
Scranton, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania, a home rule municipality.
OCCUPANCY LICENSE — The license issued to the landlord of residential
units under this chapter, which is required for the lawful rental and
occupancy of residential rental units.
OWNER — One or more persons, as defined by this section, jointly or
severally, in whom all or part of the legal title to the premises is vested
as determined by the most current deed on record with the Recorder
65.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Registration of Residential Rental Property, adopted
12-3-2001 by Ord. No. 88-2001, amended in its entirety 7-26-2007 by Ord. No. 105-2007,
was repealed 3-22-2012 by Ord. No. 26-2012.
§ 373-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 373-3
371:579
of Deeds of Lackawanna County and/or hold all or part of the beneficial
ownership and rights to the present use and enjoyment of the premises. This
definition includes a mortgage holder in constructive or actual possession
of a residential rental unit.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited partnership, trust or any other entity.
POSSESSION — Control and/or access to a premises under lease, contract
or the provisions of a mortgage.
PROPERTY MANAGER — A natural person, partnership, corporation,
unincorporated association, limited partnership, trust or any other entity
appointed by a landlord or owner whose duty it is to ensure that a structure
and the residential rental units contained therein remain in compliance with
all statutes and ordinances of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
Municipality of Scranton.
RENTAL ESCROW ACCOUNT — An account established by the Municipality
of Scranton at a bank of its choosing with an office within the Municipality
which account is limited to the deposit of rental funds collected pursuant
to the Municipality of Scranton Landlord Registration, Licensing and
Occupancy Ordinance of 2016. This account shall be a noninterest-bearing
account.
RENTAL REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE STICKER — A
sticker which is issued with the rental registration certificate of compliance
which shall be prominently displayed on the main-entrance side of the
building facing the most accessible road, street, or alleyway, and which shall
contain the number of rental units the structure has registered with the
Municipality and the year of compliance; issuance of the rental registration
certificate of compliance sticker does not in any way signify that the
structure lawfully contains the number of units represented to actually exist
in a structure and does not change the status of any and all zoning permits
or other preexisting legally binding documents issued by the Municipality.
RENTAL REGISTRATION CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE — A document
issued by City of Scranton Department of Licensing and inspection for the
number of units registered and the year of registration.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — Any structure or apartment within the
Municipality of Scranton occupied by a tenant as defined in this chapter,
this being someone other than the owner of the real estate as determined
by the most current deed and for which the owner of the said parcel of
real estate receives any value, including but not limited to money, or the
exchange of services. Each apartment within a building is a separate unit
requiring a license.
SAFETY INSPECTION — The process that any residential rental unit or
structure found to be in noncompliance with the Municipality of Scranton
Landlord Registration, Licensing, and Occupancy Ordinance of 2016 shall
submit to an inspection, the sole purpose of which is to determine that
the structure and residential rental unit contained therein shall include an
appropriate means of egress, smoke detection, hot and cold running water,
§ 373-3 SCRANTON CODE § 373-3
371:580
heat and electricity, carbon monoxide detection, kitchen and bathroom
facilities, operational heating and ventilation systems, electrical systems,
plumbing systems, removal of peeling paint, debris and overgrown
vegetation that would create a hazard to the tenants or surrounding citizens
and buildings with such inspection to be performed by either the proper
employees of the City of Scranton Licensing, Inspections and Permits
Department or by a third party agency contracted to conduct business
within the City.
TENANT — An individual who resides in a residential rental unit, with whom
a legal relationship with the owner/landlord is established by a lease or by
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A tenant does not include:
§ 373-4. Owner/landlord's duties.
A. A patient in a residential treatment hospital or facility.
A resident in a drug, alcohol or other dependency treatment facility,
halfway house, residence (or other facility) devoted to monitoring and
promoting a sober or substance-free lifestyle.
B.
C. A resident in a nursing, physical therapy or assisted living facility.
D. An occupant of a hotel, motel or bed-and-breakfast facility.
A resident in a community/group home facility licensed as such by the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
E.
A resident of a facility owned and operated by the Scranton Housing
Authority.
F.
A resident of an apartment or single family home who is a child of the
owner or a parent of the owner.
G.
An occupant of a rental unit in a double or duplex home or two single
units on one deed which is occupied in the remaining unit by the owner
of the double or duplex home, or two single units on one deed during
the license year. [Added 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
H.
A. Registration. Every owner/landlord of a residential rental unit must
register the unit with the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with
the following schedule:
(1) All owners/landlords of residential units must register the units
with the Municipality of Scranton by November 1 of each license
year. [Amended 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 62-2019]
(2) Any individual, entity or firm which converts any structure to a
residential rental unit or units shall register the residential rental
unit or units with the Municipality upon the earliest occurrence of
the following events:
(a) Within 30 days of the completion of the conversion;
§ 373-3 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 373-4
371:581
(b) Within 30 days of the time when any rent, including the
exchange of other services, for the unit or units is obtained;
(c) Within 30 days of the date which a tenant or tenants occupies
the unit or units.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the grantee and the grantee's agent
to notify the Municipality of Scranton within 10 days of any
purchase or transfer of a rental unit.
(4) Registration information shall be provided by all owners on a form
prescribed by the Municipality and shall include, at minimum, the
following information for each residential rental unit:
(a) Owner's name, address and telephone number.
(b) Property manager's name, address and telephone number if
applicable.
(c) Property address and unit number for each rental registration
unit.
(d) Maximum occupancy for the registered rental unit.
(e) Emergency telephone number sufficient to allow telephone
contact by Scranton Police, Fire, Public Works and
Administration, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
(f) Actual number of occupants in the registered unit.
(g) Names of current tenants in the registered rental unit.
(5) The owner of a residential rental unit must update the registration
information on record with the Code Enforcement Officer within 10
days of any changes of the information set forth above.
(6) The registration for each unit shall be verified and/or subject to the
provisions of Pennsylvania Statute, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to
unsworn falsification to authorities.
B. License requirement.
(1) As a prerequisite to a tenant occupying a residential rental unit
(except as provided in Subsection B(3) below), the owner/landlord
of every such residential rental unit shall be required to apply for
and obtain a residential rental unit license from the City of
Scranton Licensing, Inspections and Permits Department. No
residential rental contract for property within the Municipality of
Scranton shall be legal without the prior registration of the unit
and the issuance of a license for said unit. [Amended 4-15-2019
by Ord. No. 62-2019]
(2) The cost of a license shall be as follows: 4-15-2019 by Ord. No.
62-2019
§ 373-4 SCRANTON CODE § 373-4
371:582
(a) In calendar year 2019: $50 payable on or before November 1,
2019.
(b) In calendar year 2020: $45 payable on or before November 1,
2020.
(c) In calendar year 2021: $45 payable on or before November 1,
2021.
(3) The cost of a license may be amended by resolution of Council and
Mayor from time to time.
(4) A license shall be required for all residential rental units, whether
occupied or not occupied.
(5) The following categories of properties shall not require licenses,
and thus shall not, therefore, be subject to Subsection A(1) and (2)
of this section:
(a) Residential rental units occupied by immediate members of the
owner's family, provided that not more than two unrelated
individuals, in addition to the immediate members of the
owner's family, occupy the dwelling unit at any given time.
(b) Those properties occupied by individuals who are not tenants
as defined by this chapter.
(6) The owner and/or landlord of a residential rental unit within the
Municipality of Scranton shall be subject to the Rental Escrow
Program as set forth in § 373-10.
C. General.
(1) It shall be the duty of every owner/landlord to keep and maintain all
rental units in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and ordinances of the
Municipality of Scranton and to keep such property in good and
safe condition. The owner/landlord shall be responsible for
regularly performing all maintenance, including lawn mowing and
ice and snow removal, and for making any and all repairs in and
around the premises in conformity with the Scranton Property
Maintenance Code, Chapter 135 of the Scranton Municipal Code.
The delegation of the aforementioned duties to tenants (or any
other person or entity) shall not excuse the owner/landlord from
these responsibilities.
(2) The owner/landlord shall be responsible for the management of his/
her property in conformity with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the ordinances of the Municipality of Scranton,
including, but not limited to, the Scranton Property Maintenance
§ 373-4 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 373-4
371:583
§ 373-5. Certificate of compliance.
Upon completion of rental registration by a landlord of any rental unit or
units he shall receive from the City of Scranton Department of Licensing
and Inspection a certificate of compliance and a sticker indicating such
compliance.
§ 373-6. Appointment of property manager.
Code,66 the Refuse Disposal Ordinance, and the Mandatory
Recycling Law of the Municipality of Scranton.67
(3) Owners/landlords must be proactive in managing their property
and are expected to utilize all legal means available to them to evict
tenants who routinely engage in disorderly conduct, disturb the
public peace, create excessive noise as regulated by Chapter 317
or violate those criminal laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania relating to the illegal distribution of drugs. The term
"routinely engage" is defined as three or more violations of any of
the foregoing in any sixty-day period or more than eight times in
any period of 12 consecutive months. Violations by either tenants
or landlords/owners shall be added together in compiling violations
for a property.
(4) Owners/landlords must enforce the provisions of 68 P.S.
§ 250.505-A, relating to the use of illegal drugs.
A. Every owner/landlord residing further than 20 miles from the corporate
boundaries of the Municipality of Scranton must designate a property
manager or person responsible for the care of all rental property. The
property manager or person responsible for taking care of rental
property must reside or have its corporate offices within 20 miles of the
corporate boundaries of the Municipality of Scranton. The property
manager shall be the designated recipient of all correspondence and
violation notices from the Municipality. The property manager shall be
the direct point of contact for disruptive conduct, emergencies, and any
other occurrence that may be of a time-sensitive nature. The property
manager shall be the agent of the property owner and by his, her or its
appointment shall be authorized and empowered to accept service of all
correspondence, violation notices, citations, court complaints and
pleadings on behalf of the landlord. The appointment of a property
manager shall remain in effect and shall be considered as legally
binding on both the principal and agent until revoked and notice of
revocation is provided by the owner/landlord to the Municipality.
B. Every owner/landlord residing further than 20 miles from the corporate
boundaries of the Municipality of Scranton must appoint a property
manager within 45 days of enactment of this chapter. The owner/
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Property Maintenance.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Solid Waste.
§ 373-4 SCRANTON CODE § 373-6
371:584
§ 373-7. Enforcement and violations.
§ 373-8. Housing Appeals Board.
landlord must provide the Municipality with the property manager's
name, address, and all pertinent contact information. The owner/
landlord must also provide the Municipality with his/her name, address,
and all pertinent contact information. The owner/landlord of the
property shall be responsible for all of the duties of the property
manager in the event that the Municipality is unable to communicate
with the property manager. Contact information shall be updated on a
yearly basis by April 1 of each year or within 10 days in conformity with
Subsection A above.
A. This section shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Municipality of Scranton.
B. Any owner/landlord that fails to comply with the registration
requirements of this chapter is in violation of this chapter.
C. Any owner/landlord that rents a residential rental unit requiring a
license without a valid, current license, issued by the Municipality of
Scranton authorizing such use, is in violation of this chapter.
D. Any owner/landlord that resides or has its corporate offices farther than
20 miles from the corporate boundaries of the Municipality who fails to
appoint a property manager is in violation of this chapter.
E. Any owner/landlord that fails to maintain his/her property in conformity
with municipal ordinances, including, but not limited to, the Scranton
Property Maintenance Code, is in violation of this chapter. (NOTE: See
Ch. 360-1 through 360-16, Property Maintenance and their Quality of
Life Ordinance File of the Council No. 64, 2014 (as amended)). A record
of any unpaid citations for property maintenance violations shall be
conclusive evidence of a violation of this chapter and shall prevent and
preclude the issuance of any license pursuant to this chapter.
F. Any owner/landlord who fails to fulfill his or her duties as defined in
§ 373-A and C shall have their rental registration license suspended for
a period of six months.
G. If the landlord fails to comply with or is in violation of any section of this
ordinance he would then be subject to suspension of their license for
the property that is not in compliance for a period of six months. The
City of Scranton prior to relicensing shall perform a safety inspection
for all properties deemed in noncompliance.
A. Any owner or landlord aggrieved by the action or decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer, excepting those matters that have become the
subject of citations and thereby have been submitted to the jurisdiction
of the District Magistrate for the Municipality of Scranton, may take an
appeal to the Registration/Licensing Housing Appeals Board within 10
§ 373-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 373-8
371:585
§ 373-9. Violations and penalties.
municipal working days from the date of the action or decision being
appealed. The Registration/Licensing Housing Appeals Board shall
convene a hearing as prescribed in this section.
B. All appeals under this chapter must be made, in writing, to the Housing
Appeals Board and directed to them, director of licensing and
inspection, addressed to the municipal building. Such appeals shall be
made in writing and received by the Housing Appeals Board as
indicated above no later than the 10th municipal business day from the
date the aggrieved decision is mailed. Said written appeal must specify
the decision that is being appealed and state the reason or reasons
therefor and specify any facts in support of said appeal. This written
appeal must be accompanied by a sworn affidavit. Also, the appeal must
be accompanied by a fee of $150, payable in advance to the
Municipality of Scranton for each appeal taken, to cover the costs of the
notices of hearing, the hearing, and the cost of a stenographic record of
the hearing. This fee shall be refundable to the appellant in such
instances where the Housing Appeals Board reverses the decision of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. The Housing Appeals Board shall schedule a hearing within 30 days
after a notice of appeal has been filed as stated above. The appellant or
his representative shall have the right to appear and be heard. Any
member of the Hearing Board shall have the authority to administer
oaths to any person who is to give testimony at any hearing before the
Board. A stenographic record of the hearing shall be made by the
Hearing Board; however, a transcript of the proceeding shall only be
made upon the payment for same, in advance, by the appealing party. A
written decision shall be made by the Appeals Board within 20
municipal business days after the conclusion of said hearing. The
decision of the Appeals Board on such appeals shall be in writing and
contain findings of fact and conclusions of law. Said decision shall be
served on the appellant and the Code Enforcement Officer. Service of
said decision can be made by personally handing a copy to the
individuals or by regular mail, postage prepaid.
D. Appeals from the Board can be taken within 30 days of the date of the
decision of the Board to the Court of Common Pleas of Lackawanna
County. Said appeal to the Court of Common Pleas will be limited to the
Court reviewing the record made at the hearing given by the Appeals
Board, and the scope of review shall be limited to whether or not the
Appeals Board abused its discretion in rendering its decision. The
Appeals Board can only be reversed by the Court of Common Pleas of
Lackawanna County if it is determined by said court that the Appeals
Board had in fact abused its discretion. Appeals beyond the Court of
Common Pleas of Lackawanna County shall be governed by the
applicable rules and laws pertaining to the same.
§ 373-8 SCRANTON CODE § 373-9
371:586
§ 373-10. Rental escrow program.
In addition to all other penalty and enforcement remedies established by
this chapter or by any other Scranton ordinance, including, but not limited
to, the Property Maintenance Code68 owners/landlords of residential rental
units within the Municipality of Scranton shall be subject to the
Municipality of Scranton Rental Escrow Program, which is hereby
established by this chapter.
A. Any landlord or owner of a residential rental unit that violates any
provision of § 373-4A herein, with all of the subsections thereunder,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine no less than
$100 and up to $500 for each and every offense. Each day an owner
operates a rental unit in violation of § 373-4A herein shall be treated as
a separate offense.
B. Any landlord or owner of a residential rental unit who violates § 373-4A
herein shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of no less than
$100 up to $500. Each day an owner operates a rental unit in violation
of § 373-4A herein shall be treated as a separate offense.
C. No landlord or owner with outstanding fines resulting from violation of
municipal ordinances, as well as delinquent taxes, and/or garbage fees
shall be eligible to obtain a license to rent residential real estate in the
Municipality of Scranton unless such fines, taxes and fees are paid in
full.
D. Fines imposed through this chapter shall be collected by any means
allowable by law.
E. Each day an owner of a residential rental unit violates any provision of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
F. This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit
or deny the right of the Municipality of Scranton, its agents and
representatives from seeking any other equitable or legal remedies that
may otherwise exist under applicable law.
G. In addition to the fines set forth herein, the Municipality of Scranton
shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs of collection
incurred in enforcing this chapter. Said fees shall be added to any
penalties set forth above.
H. Any landlord who timely registers their property or properties by June
1, 2016, shall receive an abatement of all post garbage fee and
penalties therefore.
A. Owners/landlords of residential rental units that have not been
registered by November 1 of the license year pursuant to this chapter
shall be sent written notice of noncompliance by registered or certified
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Property Maintenance.
§ 373-9 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 373-10
371:587
mail, addressed to the record address of such property on the tax
records of the County of Lackawanna. Failure to receive said notice
shall not affect the effectiveness of the transmittal of said notice.
[Amended 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 62-2019]
B. Effective with the next monthly rental period following transmittal of
said notice, the owner/landlord is prohibited from receiving rents from
the unregistered residential rental unit.
C. Effective with the next monthly rental period following transmittal of
said notice, the Scranton Code Enforcement Officer is to inspect the
unregistered unit for the purpose of determining if a tenant or tenants
are residing in an unregistered unit.
D. Should tenants be found to be residing in an unregistered unit, the
tenant or tenants shall be provided with a copy of this chapter, together
with a written directive from the Code Enforcement Officer that rent for
the first calendar month following his inspection and for the ensuing
calendar months is to be paid to the Municipality of Scranton for
deposit into the Scranton Rental Escrow Account until otherwise
directed.
E. If tenants are subject to a lease whereby they are paying for their
utilities (water, electric, gas) to their landlord, upon proof of this
contractual provision to the Scranton Code Enforcement Officer, they
may retain such sums for payment by them for such essentials directly
to the provider of such services or to the landlord for payment for these
purposes. This provision shall ameliorate any negative effects that may
be imposed upon the tenant by virtue of the nonpayment of utilities by
the owner/landlord and shall enhance the rights and protections
enjoyed by tenants under the Utility Service Tenants Rights Act, 68 P.S.
§ 399.1 et seq.
F. All other rent shall be paid to the Municipality of Scranton for deposit to
the Scranton rental escrow account, to be held in said account until the
owner/landlord properly registers the residential rental unit. Upon
registration, the escrowed amount shall be released to the owner/
landlord, net of fees, liens, fines, service fees and other assessments
payable to the Municipality of Scranton and a service charge of 20%
payable to the Municipality of Scranton on escrowed funds.
G. Payment of rent by a tenant to the Municipality of Scranton for deposit
to the Scranton rental escrow account shall be considered to be an
absolute defense to any proceeding for collection or eviction by the
owner/landlord against the tenant.
H. No residential rental unit shall be registered until all fees, liens, fines,
service fees and other assessments payable to the Municipality of
Scranton or the District Magistrate are paid in full. The funds within the
Scranton rental escrow account may be utilized for said purposes.
Disbursements from the Scranton rental escrow account in payment of
§ 373-10 SCRANTON CODE § 373-10
371:588
fees, liens, fines, service fees and other assessments payable to the
Municipality of Scranton and the District Magistrate shall be made only
after written notice sent to the owner/landlord and after the expiration
of 30 days thereafter.
I. In addition to the foregoing, the Scranton rental escrow account may be
utilized by the Municipality for the payment of enforcement and legal
fees necessary to pursue the enforcement objectives of this chapter
against the landlord/owner. These fees shall be paid only after written
notice sent to the owner/landlord and after the expiration of 30 days
thereafter.
J. Any landlord aggrieved by the action or decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer, excepting those matters that have become the
subject of citations and thereby have been submitted to the jurisdiction
of the District Magistrate with jurisdiction for Scranton, may take an
appeal to the Registration/Licensing Board of Appeals within 10
municipal working days from the date of the action or decision being
appealed. The Registration/Licensing Board of Appeals shall convene a
hearing as prescribed in § 373-7 of this chapter.
§ 373-10 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 373-10
371:589
Chapter 375
ROOMING HOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing discrimination — See Ch. 296.
§ 375-1. Terms defined.
The words "rooming house," when used in this chapter, shall mean any
rooming house, motel, hotel or tourist home in the city.
§ 375-2. Operator to keep record of occupants.
The operator of each rooming house shall keep a list of all occupants
in a permanent record book which shall be available for inspection by
representatives of the Licensing Bureau.
§ 375-3. License required.
All persons located in the city who operate a rooming house shall register
with the city at the Bureau of Licensing, each year, no later than thirty (30)
days after entering into the business.
§ 375-4. Fee. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 3-1981; 10-1987; 185-1994]
The fee for each permit hereunder shall be as follows:
§ 375-5. Transferability.
No transfer of a license issued under this chapter shall be made, and new
owners or operators shall notify the housing officers within twelve (12) days
of new ownership of any such rooming house.
§ 375-6. Expiration and renewal.
The license shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which it is issued
and shall be renewed annually at the rate established for the initial fee.
§ 375-7. Posting.
The license obtained under this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the rooming house.
A. One (1) to fifty (50) rooms, per room: twenty-five dollars ($25.).
B. Fifty-one (51) or more rooms: two thousand dollars ($2,000.).
§ 373-10 SCRANTON CODE § 375-8
375:590
§ 375-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-2-1996 by Ord. No.
110-1996]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than six hundred dollars ($600.) per violation and not less than three
hundred dollars ($300.) per violations and/or imprisonment not to exceed
ninety (90) days. Each day said violation exists constitutes a separate
violation. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of not remitting the
proper permit fee for the year, in addtion to any fine imposed, shall pay the
fee.
Chapter 379
SECONDHAND GOODS AND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 301. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 340.
§ 379-1. License required.
No person shall use, exercise or carry on the business, trade or occupation
of buying scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, clothing, home electronics/
audio and visual equipment, including musical instruments, telephones and
telephonic equipment, scales, computers, computer hardware and software,
typewriters, word processors, scanners, sporting goods of all kinds,
antiques, silver, platinum, all other precious metals, tools of all kinds,
televisions, VCRs, camcorders, car stereos, firearms or other valuable
articles, hereinafter referred to as "secondhand goods or articles," or being
a secondhand dealer within the City of Scranton without having first
obtained a license from the Department of Licensing, Inspections and
Permits as hereinafter provided. A "secondhand dealer" is defined as a
person, association, corporation or partnership, or other entity, who, wholly
or in part, engages in or operates the trade or business of buying or
acquiring any article mentioned above, or other valuable articles, except
from a regularly established wholesale dealer.
§ 379-2. Application; fee.
The Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits shall, from time
to time, give and grant licenses to all proper persons, except persons
convicted of receiving stolen goods, theft or burglary, who may apply for the
same to use, exercise and carry on the trade or business or occupation of
buying secondhand goods or articles, or being a secondhand dealer, which
said license shall state where said business is to be carried on and shall
continue in force for one year (unless sooner suspended or revoked) and
no longer; and each person applying for such license, if his application
be approved in writing by the Department of Licensing, Inspections and
§ 375-8 ROOMING HOUSES § 379-2
375:591
Permits, shall pay to the said official for the use of the City the sum of $100,
and receive from the said official a license to carry out the said business.
The license so granted shall only be valid for one place of business.
§ 379-3. Use of public grounds.
No person shall use the streets, lanes, courts, alleys, highways, buildings,
houses, public squares or grounds of the City for the purposes of purchasing
or trading in secondhand goods or articles, or act as a secondhand dealer
thereat, until a license for that purpose granted by the Department of
Licensing, Inspections and Permits shall have first been issued.
§ 379-4. Rules and regulations.
All licensees shall conduct their business in conformity with the following
procedures:
§ 379-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Each and every person licensed shall carry said license on his or her
person for inspection by any policeman or other City inspector. The
licensee shall also keep a book in which shall be legibly written in the
English language the name of the person from whom such secondhand
goods or articles shall have been purchased, his or her address, age, the
date and time when purchased, the amount of money paid therefor, a
copy of a photo identification of the seller of the secondhand good or
article or a photo of such person, and a close-up photo of the entire
good or article. The book shall be available for review by the
Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits or detectives or any
and all Scranton police officers.
B. All licensees shall fill out, at the time of the transaction, the forms
furnished by the Scranton Police Department, such forms to be handdelivered
weekly on Friday to the Detective Division, not faxed.
C. All goods purchased by licensees under this article must be retained in
the possession of the licensee for at least 30 days.
D. No licensee shall purchase such secondhand goods or articles or other
article of value from any person under 18 years of age, or from any
intoxicated person or any person known to be a thief or associate of
thieves, or receiver of stolen property, or any person whom the licensee
has reason to suspect or believes to be such.
E. The Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits and the
Superintendent of Police are hereby authorized to make any other rules
and regulations necessary, in their opinion, for the proper conduct of
the person or business licensed and must report such rules to the
Mayor and City Council, after review and approval by the City Solicitor.
A. Any licensee failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the
above provisions of this article shall be fined a sum of $300 for the first
§ 379-2 SCRANTON CODE § 379-5
375:592
§ 379-6. Revocation.
If any licensee shall be convicted of receiving stolen goods or shall have
been convicted of violation of this article for failure or refusal to handdeliver
required daily or weekly reports to the Detective Division, the
Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits and Scranton Police
Department are hereby authorized to revoke forthwith the license of any
such person.
Chapter 383
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Plumbing — See Ch. 345.
Solid waste — See Ch. 400.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 405.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 412.
offense, plus costs, and shall have his or her license suspended for the
period of 10 days. Each subsequent offense shall add an additional fine
of $300 and an additional ten-day suspension. Both fine and suspension
shall be mandatory and are not to be waived.
B. Every day that a violation continues shall be a separate violation. Each
violation shall result in an additional ten-day suspension. A person or
entity who violates the provisions of this article four times in a threehundred-
sixty-five-day period shall have his license revoked for one
year.
C. The Department of Licensing, Inspections and Permits or Scranton
Police Department, if a third violation of the above provisions of this
article occurs, may proceed to charge in accordance with 53 P.S.
§ 25257.
§ 379-5 SEWERS § 379-6
383:593

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Secs. 33-1 and 33-2 of the 1979 Code]
§ 383-1. Connections required prior to paving; notice; exceptions.
All persons owning property upon streets where paving is to be laid shall
lay connecting pipes from the sewer, gas and water mains to the curbline,
under the direction of the City Engineer, where not already provided, at
their own expense. If such connections are not made within 20 days after
service of notice, the same shall be done by the City and the cost collected,
with a penalty of 10%, from the owner as a municipal lien against real
estate. However, this shall not apply to those persons who already have
effective water and gas connections or who now have, or are about to have,
sewerage to other adjoining streets or alleys than the one to be paved.
§ 383-2. Unlawful drain discharge.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or use any drain in such a way
that the same is discharged upon any public street, alley or highway of the
City, except in unsewered districts.
§ 383-1 SEWERS § 383-2
383:595

ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 33, Art. II, Div. 1, of the 1979 Code]
§ 383-3. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 54-1984]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of the terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Sewer Authority of the City, a Pennsylvania municipality
authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Dunmore, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any improved property to the lateral of a sewer.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the City upon which there
is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any nonresidential establishment
discharging industrial wastes.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curbline, or if there be no curbline, to the edge of the pavement or to the
edge of the cartway, if not paved, or, if no such lateral shall be provided,
then "lateral" shall mean that portion of, or place in, a sewer which is
provided for connection thereto of any building sewer.
NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment now or
hereafter served by the sewer system other than a residential
establishment.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the City.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — Property which abuts
on, or adjoins, either the sewer system or any part thereof, or any street,
road, alley or way in which there is a sewer.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment used wholly or in
part for residential purposes.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any residential establishments and nonresidential establishments.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All the facilities now or hereafter owned by the
Authority and now existing or hereafter to be constructed in the City and
in the borough for the collection and treatment of sanitary sewage and
acceptable industrial wastes emanating from the City and borough.
§ 383-3 SEWERS § 383-3
383:597
WATER SUPPLIER — The Pennsylvania Gas and Water Company serving
water in the City and borough.
§ 383-4. Conveyance to the Authority; easements and rights-of-way.
§ 383-5. Connection required.
§ 383-6. Notice to connect.
After the expiration of the applicable period specified in § 383-5, if any, if the
owner of improved property accessible to the sewer system shall have failed
to connect such property with the sewer system as required by § 383-5, the
City shall cause to be served on the owner of such property, so failing to
connect, and also upon the occupants of the buildings in question, a written
or printed notice requiring such connection to be made, and such notice
shall further state that the requirements of this article shall be complied
with within not less than 30 days from the date thereof.
A. The City hereby authorizes and directs that the existing sewer system
be conveyed, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the
Authority, and the proper officers of the City are hereby authorized to
execute a deed or deeds in the name and on behalf of the City and to
affix thereto the Seal of the City and to acknowledge the same on behalf
of the City and make delivery thereof to the Authority and to do such
other acts and things as may be necessary and proper to accomplish the
conveyance referred to herein.
B. The City hereby grants to the Sewer Authority of the City, all and every
easement, right-of-way and any and all other rights necessary or
desirable on, over and under the public streets, sidewalks and alleys in
the City, for the purposes of construction of the sewer system and any
portion thereof.
A. All persons owning any improved property accessible to the sewer
system shall, at their own expense, connect such improved property
with the sewer system within 45 days after written notice to such
persons from the City requiring such connection.
B. All persons owning any property accessible to the sewer system upon
which a building is hereafter erected which shall cause the property to
become improved property shall, at the time of the erection of such
building and at their own expense, connect the same with the sewer
system.
C. All persons owning any improved property which hereafter becomes
accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own expense, connect
such property with the sewer system within 45 days after written notice
to do so from the City.
§ 383-3 SCRANTON CODE § 383-7
383:598
§ 383-7. Connection charge.
There is hereby imposed upon each owner of property connecting to the
sewer system after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
section was derived a connection charge of $25 for each connection to be
made to a lateral of the sewer system at the curbline or edge of road or
right-of-way line, where there is no curbline, or other place in a sewer which
shall be provided for connection of any building sewer. Such connection
charge shall be payable upon application for permit to make such
connection.
§ 383-8. Assessment payment prior to connection; permit;
exception.
§ 383-9. Corner lot connections.
In cases where corner lots have been divided so that an owner of part of
such lot does not front upon the line of the sewer, he may be allowed to
connect through the portion of such lot as fronts upon such sewer by paying
a proportionate share of the assessment of the portion of lot fronting on the
sewer and obtaining the permission of the owner of such fronting portion.
Connection through any other lot than such portion of the original shall not
be permitted except by special permission of Council and the Mayor.
§ 383-10. Connection to sewers in another district; enforcement
authority.
Property owners in one sewer district shall not be permitted to connect with
a sewer in any other district except for temporary convenience, and then
only by permission of Council. It shall be the duty of the Director of the
Department of Public Works to see that this section is enforced.
§ 383-11. Private disposal; nuisances.
A. In all cases where lateral or main sewers are constructed by the City, no
parties shall be allowed to connect with the same until the assessment
against the lot with which connection is to be made has been paid. No
such connection shall be made without a permit from the Director of the
Department of Public Works, whose duty it shall be to see that this
provision is enforced.
B. However, if the Director of the Office of Public Health shall certify that
sanitary conditions require immediate connection with the sewer, a
permit shall be issued for such connection without the assessment first
being paid.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to
the sewer system to erect, construct, use or maintain or cause or permit
to be erected, constructed, used or maintained, any privy, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or other receptacle on such premises for receiving
sewage, after the expiration of the particular period specified in § 383-5
§ 383-7 SEWERS § 383-11
383:599
§ 383-12. Unlawful connections.
No connection shall be made to the sewer system except in compliance with
the ordinances and resolutions, as well as the rules and regulations as may
from time to time be enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by the
City. No connection shall be made, nor shall any connection continue to the
sewer system for the purposes of discharging sewage or industrial wastes69
or both therefrom which would impede, prejudicially affect, interfere with
or endanger the sewer system, or any part thereof, or the functioning of the
processes of sewage treatment or which would create a hazard to human or
animal life or to the waters receiving treatment effluent.
or at any time to erect, construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit,
drain or other facility for the discharge of sewage except into the
sewer system. It shall be unlawful for any person to make a connection
to the sewer system from any cesspool, privy, vault, cistern or other
depository.
B. Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or other receptacle for receiving sewage, or
erects, constructs, uses or maintains any pipe, conduit, drain or other
facility for the discharge of sewage, in violation of this article, shall be
deemed and shall be declared to be erected, constructing, using and
maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the City by its proper officers is
hereby authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided by law.
69.Editor's Note: See also Art. III, Industrial Wastes, of this chapter.
§ 383-11 SCRANTON CODE § 383-12
383:600
ARTICLE III
Rates
[Adopted 7-23-1997 by Ord. No. 70-199770]
§ 383-13. Definitions.
Unless the content specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of the terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Sewer Authority of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania,
a Pennsylvania municipality authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Dunmore, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania.
CITY — The City of Scranton, Lackawanna County, or its duly authorized
representatives or agents. Such agents may include but shall not be limited
to the Sewer Authority of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania, as
appropriate.
FAMILY — A collective body of related persons living together.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substances,
waterborne waste or form of energy discharged or escaping in the course
of an industrial, manufacturing, commercial, trade, business or research
process or in the course of development, recovering or processing of natural
resources, but not sanitary sewage.
NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment now or
hereafter served by the sewer system other than a residential
establishment.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, government
entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, and shall
include schools, churches, hospitals and all agents or assigns, charitable
institutions. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular
shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment used wholly or in
part for residential purposes.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
waste from residential establishments and nonresidential establishments,
excluding, however, the effluent from septic tanks or cesspools, rain,
stormwater and groundwater, as well as roof or surface water, drainage
or percolating or seeping waters, or accumulation thereof, whether
underground or in cellars or basements.
SERVICE PERIOD — For sewer service charges purposes, the length of time
for which sewer service charges are billed.
SEWER SYSTEM — All the facilities now or hereafter owned by the
Authority and now existing or hereafter to be constructed in the City and
70.Editor's Note: This ordinance supersedes former Art. III, Rates, adopted as Ord. No.
53-1984 (Ch. 33, Art. II, Div. 2, of the 1979 Code), as amended.
§ 383-13 SEWERS § 383-13
383:601
the borough for collection and treatment of sanitary sewage and acceptable
industrial wastes emanating from the City and borough. For the purposes
of this article, sewer system shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewater to the sewer system from persons who are, by contract or
agreement with the City or Authority, users of the sewer system.
TENANT — A person or persons living in a defined area which is owned by
another by the terms of an agreement or contract.
WATER SUPPLIER — The Pennsylvania American Water Company serving
water in Scranton and Dunmore.
§ 383-14. Charges.
Sewer service charges effective for periods noted in this section are hereby
imposed upon all owners of property in the City and the borough now
or hereafter served by the sewer system (which charges have been
determined, to the extent required by law, by the Authority), payable for
each service period as provided in § 383-16 hereof for the use, whether
direct or indirect, of such sewer system, based upon quantity of water used,
as follows:
A. Residential establishment.
(1) Effective August 1, 2003, the sewer service charges are $3.64 per
1,000 gallons of water consumed during a two-month period or
$21.84 per family or tenant on each such residential establishment
bimonthly, whichever is greater. [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 191-2003]
(2) Multiple minimum sewer rental charges shall be billed to
residential establishments having two or more families or tenants
served by one water meter.
B. Nonresidential establishments.
(1) Basic charges shall be made in accordance with the following
schedule: [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 191-2003]
(a) Effective August 1, 2003, the basic charges are as follows:
[1] Commercial monthly charges:
Gallons Of Water
(per month)
Rate
(per month)
First 25,000 gallons $3.64 per 1,000 gallons of
water
Next 225,000 gallons $3.53 per 1,000 gallons of
water
Next 2,250,000 gallons $3.36 per 1,000 gallons of
water
§ 383-13 SCRANTON CODE § 383-14
383:602
Gallons Of Water
(per month)
Rate
(per month)
Over 2,500,000 gallons $2.49 per 1,000 gallons of
water
[2] Or a minimum monthly charge of $10.92, whichever is
greater.
(2) Additional charges.
(a) An additional charge shall be made for discharge or wastes of
excess strength as follows: Nonresidential establishments
discharging sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes to the
sewer system having an average five-day biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) greater than 330 parts per million (ppm), a
suspended solids content greater than 350 ppm, a suspended
nitrogen content greater than 23 ppm shall pay a strength of
waste surcharge, in addition to applicable volume charges. The
strength of waste surcharge shall be computed for the
specified period according to the following formulas:
Effective September 1, 1997:
Surcharge = Q
[(BOD-330) (0.0029) + (SS-250) (0.0018) + (NH-23) (0.0040)]
Where:
Q = Water consumed per month in thousand
gallons
BOD = Average five-day biochemical oxygen demand
of the waste discharged in parts per million
SS = Average suspended solids content of the waste
discharged in parts per million
NH = Average ammonia nitrogen concentration of
the waste discharged in parts per million
Surcharge = Amount in dollars to be charged monthly
(b) Any number in parenthesis that calculates to be negative shall
be considered zero.
(c) The strength of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes to be
used for establishing the amount of surcharge shall be
determined at least once annually by suitable sampling and
analysis of the wastes for a three-day period during which time
strength of waste discharges or production is at a maximum; or
by relating production and waste strength at the time of
sampling to waste strength at maximum production if sampling
is not performed at the time of maximum production; or from
estimates made by the City; or from known relationships or
§ 383-14 SEWERS § 383-14
383:603
§ 383-15. Determination of water volume used; meters.
The determination of volume of water used for billing purposes shall be
made as follows:
products produced to strengths of waste for those
establishments where such factors have been established. In
establishing waste strength for surcharge purposes, analysis
shall be made in accordance with procedures outlined in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public
Health Association. Such analysis may include sanitary sewage
when combined with the industrial waste discharge.
A. Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the water supplier
discharges sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the sewer
system, the volume of water consumed, as determined from the meter
readings of the water supplier, shall be used in computing the sewer
service charge.
B. In cases where residential or nonresidential establishments have
sources of water supply in addition to, or other than, that of the water
supplier, such establishments shall provide a meter on such additional
or other source of water supply. The total amount of water consumed,
as shown by reading of all water meters, shall be used in computing the
sewer charge.
C. Methods.
(1) In cases where nonresidential establishments received water from
the water supplier and/or from an independent supply, and such
water is not discharged into the sewer system, the quantity of
water used to determine the sewer service charge shall be
computed by one of the following methods:
(a) Method No. 1: by placing the meter or measuring device on the
sewer connection. The reading from this meter or measuring
device multiplied by factor of 1.15 shall be used in computing
sewer service charge; or
(b) Method No. 2: by placing the meter or measuring device on the
effluent not discharging into the sewer system. The readings
from this meter or measuring device will then be deducted
from the total water meter reading, and the remainder
multiplied by a factor of 1.15 shall be used in computing the
sewer service charge.
(2) Under no circumstances shall the sewer service charge determined
by either of the above methods exceed the service charge
computed by using 100% of the total water readings.
§ 383-14 SCRANTON CODE § 383-15
383:604
§ 383-16. Service period.
The service period for purposes of billing for sewer service charges shall
be monthly or bimonthly in duration with respect to nonresidential
establishments, and monthly or bimonthly in duration with respect to
residential establishments. Bills rendered to nonresidential establishments
and to residential establishments are, in each case, in arrears of the service
period covered by the billing. Sewer rental billings may be based upon
water consumed and metered during the most recent period for which there
are water company records available.
§ 383-17. Due date; delinquency penalties; lien.
D. Determinations without meters or devices not provided by water
supplies.
(1) When a nonresidential establishment can demonstrate that it is not
practical to install meters or measuring devices to determine the
sewer charges under either Subsection B or C of this section, the
City may determine, in such manner and by such methods as it may
prescribe, the amount of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes
discharged into the sewer system, and the quantity so determined
to be discharged multiplied by a factor of 1.15 shall be used to
determine the sewage charge, which shall be final.
(2) Under no circumstances shall the sewer service charge determined
by the City exceed the service charge computed by using 100% of
the total water meter readings.
(3) All meters or other measuring devices not provided by the water
supplier, but which may be used under the provisions of this article,
shall be furnished and installed by the property owner and shall be
under the control of the City and may be tested, inspected or
repaired by City employees whenever necessary. The owner of the
property upon which such measuring device is installed shall be
responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping, and all repairs
thereto shall be made at the property owner's expense, whether
such repairs are made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or
other causes. Bills for such repairs, if made by the City, shall be due
and payable at the same time and collected in the same manner as
are the bills for sewer services; such bills from and after their due
date shall constitute a lien upon the property upon which such
measuring device is installed. The City shall have the right to read
all meters or measuring devices, and they shall be available to City
employees for meter reading at any reasonable time.
A. All bills for sewer service charges shall be due and payable upon
presentation. If any bill for sewer charges is not paid within 30 days
after the same shall become due and payable, it shall be delinquent and
a penalty of 5% shall be added, and such billing, excluding the penalty,
§ 383-15 SEWERS § 383-17
383:605
§ 383-18. Disposition of moneys.
All money received by the City from the collection of sewer charges and
all penalties therein, as provided for herein, shall be segregated and kept
separate and apart from all other funds of the City and shall be used only
for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the City in the operation,
maintenance (including insurance), repair, alteration, inspection and other
ordinary expenses in relation to the sewer system and for making use of
usual renewals and replacements and ordinary improvements thereto in
order to maintain adequate service, including income, profits, property,
franchise or excise taxes, if any, payable under any lease or supplement
or supplements thereto with the Authority and for any other payments
required to be paid under such lease or leases or any supplement.
§ 383-18.1. Applicablity; amendments.
shall thereafter bear interest at the rate of 5/6% per month, or portion
thereof until paid.
B. Upon failure of any person to pay in full any bill for sewer charges
within 30 days after the same shall become delinquent, the City shall
have the right to terminate sewer service to the property for such
period or periods as against such property, service may be restored
upon payment of all expenses which have been incurred in the
terminating of such service or restoring the same.
C. The sewer charges imposed by this article shall be and are declared to
be a lien on the property served from the date the charges become due
and payable. In addition to all other rights of the City herein granted, if
such charges are not paid, the City may file such liens and collect the
same in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of
municipal liens and claims and may proceed to collect such sewer
charges by action in assumption in the name of the City against the
owner of the property charged or the user of the service.
A. This article and any rules and regulations adopted hereunder are
hereby declared to be urgent for the preservation of the peace, health
and comfort of the citizens of the City and of the borough and shall take
effect September 1, 1997, and be in force and shall be applicable to all
properties as soon as they respectively become connected with and
have the right to use the sewer system, whether in the City or the
borough.
B. The City reserves the right, subject to its obligations under any lease or
leases or any supplement thereto with the Authority, to amend this
article or to change the rate or rates or charges set forth herein in such
time or times as in its discretion may be advisable.
§ 383-17 SCRANTON CODE § 383-18.1
383:606
ARTICLE IV
Discharge of Industrial Waste
[Adopted 3-20-1996 by Ord. No. 51-1996]
§ 383-19. Purpose and policy.
This article sets forth uniform requirements for contributors to the sewer
system within the City of Scranton and enables the City to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977
and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403).
§ 383-20. Objectives.
§ 383-21. Definitions.
A. The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewer system which
will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewer system which
will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into the
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the system.
(3) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(4) Provide for equitable distribution of the operating cost of the sewer
system.
B. This article defines certain terms and provides for the regulation of
contributors to the sewer system through the issuance of permits to
certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring, testing, inspection
and enforcement activities, requires industrial user reporting, assumes
that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, provides for
the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from
the program established herein and imposes penalties for industrial
user noncompliance.
C. This article shall apply to the City of Scranton and to persons outside
the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City or its agents,
users of the City's sewer system. Except as otherwise provided herein,
the City of Scranton or its duly authorized representatives or agents
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article.
A. Words, terms and phrases. The following words, terms and phrases
when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
§ 383-19 SEWERS § 383-21
383:607
ACT OR THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF AN INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of an industrial user may be a responsible
corporate officer, if the industrial user is a corporation. For the purpose
of this Article, a corporate officer means:
A President, Secretary, Treasurer or Vice President of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking functions for
the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one (1) or more of manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250)
persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding
twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.) [in second quarter 1980
dollars], if the authority to sign documents has been assigned
or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(2)
By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively.
(3)
The principal executive officer or director having responsibility for
the overall operation of the discharging facility if the industrial
user is a federal, state or local government entity, or their agents,
or a charitable organization or other such unincorporated entity.
(4)
By a duly authorized representative of the individual described in
Subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this definition:
The authorization is made, in writing, by the individual in
Subsection (1), (2) or (3).
(a)
The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
from which the discharge originates, such as the position of
plant manager, operator of a well or a wellfield superintendent
or a position of equivalent responsibility or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company.
(b)
The written authorization is submitted is submitted to the
control authority.
(c)
(5)
If an authorization under Subsection D of this definition is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall
responsibility for environmental matters of the company, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements of Subsection (5) of this
(6)
§ 383-21 SCRANTON CODE § 383-21
383:608
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in milligram per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five
(5) days at twenty degrees Centigrade (20° C.).
BUILDING SEWER — That part of the main building or house drain
or sewer line inside the walls of the building and extending through
the wall to a point five (5) feet from the roadway right-of-way and
connecting to the service line.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of an industrial user's treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard.
CITY — The City of Scranton, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania, or its
duly authorized representatives or agents.
COLOR — Color of an industrial waste is the color of the light
transmitted by the waste solution after removing the suspended
material, including the pseudo-colloidal particles.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample that is collected over time, formed
either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The
sample may be composited either as a time composite sample:
composed of discrete sample aliquots collected in one (1) container at
constant time intervals providing representative samples irrespective
of stream flow; or as a flow proportional composite sample: collected
either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to
stream flow or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the
flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between the
aliquots.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The City of Scranton, Lackawanna County,
Pennsylvania or its duly authorized agents.
COOLING WATER —
definition must be submitted to the control authority prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
UNCONTAMINATED — Water used for cooling purposes only,
which has no direct contact with any raw material, intermediate or
final product and which does not contain a level of contaminants
detectably higher than that of the intake water.
(1)
CONTAMINATED — Water used for cooling purposes only, which
may become contaminated either through the use of water
treatment chemicals used for corrosion inhibitors or biocides or by
direct contact with process materials and/or wastewater.
(2)
§ 383-21 SEWERS § 383-21
383:609
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term
may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
GARBAGE — Solid waste resulting from the domestic and commercial
preparation cooking and dispensing of food and from handling, storage
and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
GROUNDWATER — That water which is contained in or passing
through the ground.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section
307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) into the sewer system
(including holding tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of nondomestic waste. Any
nondomestic source discharging pollutants to a publicly owned
treatment works (POTW).
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Solid, liquid or gaseous substances,
waterborne waste or form of energy discharged or escaping in the
course of any industrial, manufacturing, commercial, trade, business
or research process or in the course of development, recovering or
processing of natural resources, but not sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts
the POTW treatment processes or operations or its sludge process, use
or disposal; and therefore, causes a violation of any of the POTW's
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or
prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified
applicable federal statues, regulations or permits issued thereunder (or
more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1345), Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act or more stringent state criteria (including
those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA) applicable to the method of
disposal or use employed by the control authority.
LOCAL LIMITS — Restrictions on concentration, mass or other
characteristics of a wastewater discharge developed by the control
§ 383-21 SCRANTON CODE § 383-21
383:610
authority and imposed on the industrial users in order to prevent
interference, pass-through or harm to the POTW, human health and
safety or animal or plant life.
MANHOLE — A structure leading from the surface of the ground to a
sewer, permitting access to the sewer.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. This
term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40
CFR 403.5.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation for
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed Categorical
Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act, which standards will be
applicable to such source if they are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section. Determination of the applicability of new
source standards shall be made as provided in the Act and 40 CFR
403.3.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, management or control
of a tank truck(s) or treatment system(s) used in the removal,
transportation, disposal or treatment of sewage and/or industrial
wastes.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of an improved property.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge of pollutant which cannot be treated
adequately by the POTW, and therefore exits into the waters of the state
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by
the context.
PH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions, expressed in gram equivalent per liter of solution and indicating
§ 383-21 SEWERS § 383-21
383:611
the degrees of acidity or alkalinity of a substance. It shall be determined
by one (1) of the accepted methods described in 40 CFR 136.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POLLUTANT — Any substance, including but not limited to dredged
spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt
and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national
pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR STANDARDS — Pretreatment
standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards and local limits.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is
owned in this instance by the Sewer Authority of the City of Scranton,
Pennsylvania. This definition includes any sewers that convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes,
sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
treatment. For the purposes of this Article, "POTW" shall also include
any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons who
are, by contract or agreement with the control authority, users of the
POTW.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or
in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the
sewer system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes or process changes and other means,
except if prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
QUALIFIED ANALYST — Any person who has demonstrated
competency in wastewater analysis by having analyzed satisfactorily a
minimum of three (3) reference wastewater samples as supplied upon
request by the control authority or by submission of their generally
recognized documentation of competency.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
waste from any improved property, excluding, however, the effluent
from septic tanks or cesspools, rain-, storm- and groundwater, as well
as roof or surface water, drainage or percolating or seeping waters, or
accumulation thereof, whether underground or in cellars or basements.
§ 383-21 SCRANTON CODE § 383-21
383:612
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and/or authorized
industrial wastes and to which storm, surface and ground waters are
not intentionally admitted.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage, or authorized
industrial waste alone or combined with stormwater.
SEWER AUTHORITY — The Sewer Authority of the City of Scranton,
Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania municipal authority.
SEWER SYSTEM — Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as
defined herein. For the purposes of this Article, "sewer system" shall
also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the sewer system
from persons who are, by contract or agreement with the control
authority, users of the sewer system.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — POTW treatment plant as defined
herein.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industrial user is in
"significant noncompliance" if its violation meets one (1) or more of
the specific criteria listed in Section 6.2 of this Article. If the control
authority determines that an industrial user is in Significant
Noncompliance (SNC), that user will be included on the annual
publication list.
SIGNIFICANT VIOLATOR — Any user that is in significant
noncompliance during any calendar year.
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature or at
a flow rate or concentration which would cause a violation of the
prohibited discharge standards.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
All users subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards under 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
(1)
All users not subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards that:
Discharges twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or
more of process wastewater ("process wastewater" excludes
sanitary, cooling water and boiler blowdown wastewaters).
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five
percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic (BOD, TSS, etc.) capacity of the treatment plant.
(b)
Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the control or
approval authority, to adversely affect the POTW by
interference, pass-through of pollutants, sludge contamination
or endangerment of POTW workers.
(c)
(2)
§ 383-21 SEWERS § 383-21
383:613
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting thereof.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance or combination of substances
that:
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance of permit effluent limitations because of
factors beyond reasonable control of the permittee, excluding such
factors as operational error, improperly designed or inadequate
treatment facilities or improper operation and maintenance or lack
thereof.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the sewer system.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or
permitted to enter the sewer system.
WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT — As set forth in Section 4 of
this Article.
WATER-COOLED EQUIPMENT — Any equipment using water as a
cooling medium for purposes other than air conditioning or
refrigeration.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or ground, natural or artificial, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any
portion thereof.
Is listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of
the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA
307(a) or other Acts; or
(1)
Is present in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a
public nuisance or to create any hazard in the sewer system or in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(2)
B. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
§ 383-21 SCRANTON CODE § 383-21
383:614
§ 383-22. Rules and regulations.
C. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
Abbreviations Definition
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand (5 Day)
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
F Fahrenheit
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SIC Standard industrial classification
SIU Significant industrial user
SNC Significant noncompliance
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.
USC United States Code
TRC Technical review criteria
TSS Total suspended solids
A. Use of sewer system and admission of industrial waste.
(1) All sewage and authorized industrial waste may be discharged to
the sewer system except those which are deemed harmful to the
system or are specifically prohibited by this Article.
(2) No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface, drainage,
noncontact cooling water, drainage from tile fields or unpolluted
process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(3) No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the sewage treatment plant or passthrough
unaltered by the sewage treatment plant. These general
prohibitions apply to all such users of the sewer system whether or
not the industrial user is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment limits or requirements.
§ 383-21 SEWERS § 383-22
383:615
(4) Except as otherwise provided in this Article, no user shall
discharge or cause to be discharged to the sewer system any
sewage, industrial waste or other matter or substance:
(a) Having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in
the sewage treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no
case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into
the sewer system which exceeds one hundred twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (120° F.) or causes the wastewater entering the
sewage treatment plant to be at or above one hundred four
degrees Fahrenheit (104° F.) or is less than thirty-two degrees
Fahrenheit (32° F.).
(b) Containing any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity, are, or may be sufficient, either alone or by
interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or
be injurious in any other way to the sewer system or to the
operation of the sewage treatment plant. At no time shall two
(2) successive readings on any explosion hazard meter, at the
point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the
system) be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading
over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter or having a closed cup flash point of less than one
hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140° F.). Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to gasoline, fuel oil,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene and any other substances which
are a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
(c) Containing unground garbage with particles greater than onehalf-
inch in any dimension.
(d) Containing or reacting to form solid or viscous substances or
which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the sewage treatment plant
such as, but not limited to: ashes, cinders, spent limestone,
dust, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags, grass
clippings, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch
manure, bentonite, lye, building materials, rubber, asphalt
residues, hairs, bones, leather, porcelain, china, ceramic
wastes, glass grinding or polishing wastes, hydrolyzed fats or
other solid or viscous substances capable of causing
obstruction or other interference with the operation of the
sewer system.
(e) Having a pH, stabilized, lower than six point zero (6.0) or
higher than nine point zero (9.0) or having any other corrosive
or scale forming property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment, bacterial action or personnel of the
sewer system.
§ 383-22 SCRANTON CODE § 383-22
383:616
(f) Containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly
or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters
of the sewage treatment plant or to exceed the limitation set
forth in a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. A toxic
pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant
identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
(g) Containing any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids
which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and
repair.
(h) Which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color
to the POTW's effluent thereby violating the Sewer Authority's
NPDES permit.
(i) Containing radioactive substances and/or isotopes of such halflife
or concentration as may exceed limits in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
(j) Containing discharges that result in toxic gases, fumes or
vapors in a quantity capable of causing injury or hazard to
workers or violations of any safety regulations, rules or
practices regarding workers' health or working conditions.
(k) Prohibited by any permit issued by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the Environmental Protection Agency.
(l) Containing any substance which will cause the sewage
treatment plant to violate its NPDES and/or state permit or the
receiving water quality standards.
(m) Containing any substance which may cause the sewage
treatment plant's effluent or any other product of the sewage
treatment plant such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged
to the sewer system cause the sewage treatment plant to be in
noncompliance with recognized sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the
Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use
or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal
Act,71 the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
71.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 383-22 SEWERS § 383-22
383:617
(n) Containing wastes which are not amenable to biological
treatment or reduction in existing treatment facilities,
including but not limited to nonbiodegradable complex carbon
compounds.
(o) Containing any organic compounds of endrin, lindane,
methoxychlor, toxaphene, dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,
trichlorophenoxypropionic acid or other herbicides, pesticides
or rodenticides.
(p) Causing a hazard to human life or public nuisance.
(q) Containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which will cause interference to the POTW.
(r) Containing petroleum oils, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or
mineral oil products in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through.
(5) If any wastes of the characteristics listed in Subsection A(4) of this
section are discharged by any user, the City may take such
enforcement actions as deemed appropriate, as enumerated in
§ 383-26 of this Article, to cause such discharge to cease or to
require pretreatment of the discharge so that it no longer has the
characteristics of a prohibited discharge.
(6) Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided in
restaurants, food preparation facilities, commercial kitchens,
vehicle and equipment repair shops, machine shops, swimming
pools or water treatment facilities, whose discharge would exceed,
in the opinion of the control authority, the limitations established in
the local limits. All interceptors or traps shall be of a type and
capacity acceptable to the control authority and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(7) The use of mechanical garbage grinders producing a finely divided
mass, properly flushed with an ample amount of water shall be
permitted upon the condition that no such mechanical garbage
grinder to serve premises used for commercial purposes shall be
installed until permission for such installation shall have been
obtained from the control authority.
(8) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
his expense and shall be accessible to the control authority for
inspection and testing.
B. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards found in 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N,
parts 403-472, are hereby incorporated. All industrial users which are
§ 383-22 SCRANTON CODE § 383-22
383:618
categorical industrial users under provisions of one (1) or more
categorical standards are significant industrial users and are required
to obtain a wastewater contribution permit as described in § 383-23 of
this Article.
C. Modification of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Where
the sewage treatment plant achieves consistent removal of pollutants
limited by National Pretreatment Standards, the control authority may
apply to the approval authority for modification for specific limits in the
National Pretreatment Standards. "Consistent Removal" shall mean
reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the
pollutant by the sewage treatment plant to a less toxic or harmless state
in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five percent
(95%) of the samples taken when measured according to the
procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 403, General Pretreatment Regulations for
Existing and New Sources of Pollution, promulgated pursuant to the
Act. The control authority may then modify pollutant discharge limits in
the National Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in
40 CFR 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval
authority is obtained.
D. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this Article.
E. Control authority's right to revisions. The control authority reserves the
right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements, including
local limits, on discharges to the sewer system if deemed necessary to
comply with the objectives presented in § 383-19 of this Article.
F. Compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. Compliance
with this Article and permits or orders issued hereunder, does not
relieve the industrial user from its obligations regarding compliance
with any and all applicable local, state and federal pretreatment
standards and requirements including any such standards or
requirements that may become effective during the term of a permit or
order or this Article.
G. Excessive discharge. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of
process water or other waters, in any way attempt to dilute a discharge
as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the limitations contained in the National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or in any other pollutant specific limitations
developed by the control authority or state.
H. Spill prevention and contingency plan.
(1) All significant industrial users and those industrial users identified
by the control authority shall provide protection from any
discharge that could cause a problem to the POTW, whether
intentional or accidental. Facilities, equipment and materials to
§ 383-22 SEWERS § 383-22
383:619
prevent these accidental or nonroutine discharges shall be
provided and maintained at the owner or industrial user's own
cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
City Emergency Management Coordinator, the County Emergency
Management Coordinator and the control authority for review and
comment before the implementation of this plan. The plan shall
contain at least the following elements:
(a) A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
batch discharges.
(b) A list and description of stored chemicals.
(c) Procedures for promptly notifying the control authority of slug
load discharges, including any discharge that would violate a
specific prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures
for follow-up written notification within five (5) days.
(d) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills,
including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
(e) If necessary, follow-up practices to limit the damage suffered
by the POTW or the environment.
(2) All existing significant industrial users shall complete such a plan
within six (6) months of the effective date of this Article. No
industrial user who commences contribution to the sewer system
after the effective date of this Article shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until spill prevention and
contingency plans have been approved by the control authority.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the
industrial user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of
this Article.
(3) In the case of an accidental or intentional discharge, or slug
loading, it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately
notify the control authority of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume and corrective actions.
I. Written notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental or
intentional discharge, or slug loading, the industrial user shall submit
to the control authority a detailed written report describing the cause of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
§ 383-22 SCRANTON CODE § 383-22
383:620
the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which
may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewer system, fishkills
or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be imposed by this Article or other applicable law.
J. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer
such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
K. Notification requirement. All industrial users shall notify the EPA
Regional Waste Management Director, the state hazardous waste
authorities and Control Authority, in writing, of any discharges into the
POTW greater than fifteen (15) kilograms [thirty-three (33) pounds] of a
substance, which, if otherwise disposed of would be a hazardous waste
under 40 CFR 261. Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of
nonacute hazardous waste in a calendar month or of any quantity of
acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification for each hazardous waste discharged.
The Control Authority must be notified of any subsequent changes and/
or additions to the hazardous waste discharges. For industrial users
commencing discharge after July 24, 1990, this notification must be
received within one hundred eighty (180) days of commencement of
discharge. Each notifying industrial user shall also submit a statement
certifying that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of wastes generated to the extent that it is economically
practical.
L. Drainage of water filtration systems. Filter backwash shall be
discharged to the sewer system as follows:
(1) Sand filter backwash may be discharged to the sewer system.
(2) Diatomaceous earth filter backwash, if discharged to the sewer
system shall be connected to the sewer system through settling
tanks with no less than three (3) months storage capacity of spent
diatomaceous earth, which tanks shall be readily accessible for
removing solid waste for disposal.
M. Removal, transportation and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes.
(1) Any waste to be discharged from tank trucks or rail car shall be
disposed at the location designated at the sewage treatment plant
at the time or times and at a rate or rates of discharge fixed by the
control authority.
(2) The wastes discharged by the tank trucks or rail car into the sewer
system shall not contain industrial waste, chemicals or other
matter, with or without pretreatment that does not conform to the
§ 383-22 SEWERS § 383-22
383:621
requirements of this Article. Conformity with this Article is to be
determined by control authority.
N. Pretreatment requirements.
(1) General. Industrial users shall design, construct, operate and
maintain at their own expenses wastewater pretreatment facilities
whenever necessary to reduce or modify the industrial user's
wastewater to achieve compliance with this Article, National
Pretreatment Standards, any condition or limitation contained in
the industrial user's wastewater contribution permit or any sludge
limitation imposed by federal, state or local authorities. The review
or approval of pretreatment facility plans, specifications and
operating procedures by the control authority or its consulting
engineer shall not excuse or mitigate any violations by the
industrial user of this Article or any federal, state or local
requirements.
(2) Proper operation and maintenance. The industrial user shall at all
times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the industrial user to achieve compliance with
this Article. Proper operation and maintenance includes but is not
limited to: effective performance, adequate funding, adequate
operator staffing and training and adequate laboratory and process
control, including appropriate quality assurance procedures. This
provision requires the operation of backup or auxiliary procedures
only when necessary to achieve compliance with this Article.
(3) Duty to halt or reduce activity. Upon reduction of efficiency of
operation or loss or failure of all or part of the treatment system the
industrial user shall, to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with this Article, control its production or discharges
(or both) until operation of the treatment system is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. It shall not be a
defense for the industrial user in an enforcement action that it
would have been necessary to halt or reduce the activity in order to
maintain compliance with this Article.
(4) Bypass of treatment facilities.
(a) Bypass of treatment systems is prohibited unless it is
unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe
property damage or no feasible alternatives exist.
(b) The industrial user may allow bypass to occur which does not
cause the effluent limitations to be exceeded, but only if it is
also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
(c) Notification of bypass.
§ 383-22 SCRANTON CODE § 383-22
383:622
§ 383-23. Administration.
[1] Anticipated bypass. If the industrial user knows in advance
of the need for bypass, it shall submit prior written notice,
at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, to the
control authority.
[2] Unanticipated bypass. The industrial user shall
immediately notify the control authority and submit a
written notice to the Authority within five (5) days. This
report shall specify:
[a] A description of the bypass, and its cause, including its
duration.
[b] Whether the bypass has been corrected.
[3] The steps being taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate
and prevent a reoccurrence of the bypass.
(5) Damage liability. The person producing and/or introducing the
waste shall be liable for all damages, increased costs of treatment,
maintenance or other costs directly attributable to such waste.
(6) Disposal of sludges. Sludges, floats, oils, etc., generated by
industrial users must be contained and transported in a safe
manner as prescribed by the rules of regulatory agencies, including
but not limited to the United States Department of Transportation
and handled by reputable persons who shall dispose of all such
wastes in accordance with all federal, state and local regulations.
The owner of such sludges, floats, oils, etc., shall keep records and
receipts needed to demonstrate proper disposal for review by the
control authority upon request.
A. Wastewater discharges. It shall be unlawful for the owner of an
improved property or any other person to discharge to the sewer
system, without first obtaining a permit from the control authority, any
industrial waste except as authorized by the control authority in
accordance with the provisions of this Article. Upon receipt of the
permit application from the control authority, the industrial user will
have forty-five (45) days to return the permit application completed and
signed by an authorized representative or be subject to civil penalties
as specified in § 383-27A of this Article.
B. Wastewater contribution permit.
(1) General. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or
to contribute to the sewer system shall obtain a wastewater
contribution permit before connecting to or contributing to the
sewer system. All existing industrial users connected to or
contributing to the sewer system who are not presently permitted
but anticipate changes in process or discharge that will:
§ 383-22 SEWERS § 383-23
383:623
(a) Cause that industry to be designated as a categorical industry
as defined by United States EPA National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard Discharge Limits.
(b) Result in changes in discharge volume or character such that
the user meets the definition of significant industrial user; shall
apply for and obtain a wastewater contribution permit prior to
discharging the modified wastewater to the sewer system.
(2) Permit application.
(a) Industrial users required to obtain wastewater contribution
permit shall complete and file with the control authority, an
application in the form prescribed by the control authority and
accompanied by a fee in the amount specified by the current
fee schedule. New industrial users shall apply at least ninety
(90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the sewer
system. In support of the application, the industrial user shall
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
[1] Name, address and location (if different from the mailing
address).
[2] Standard industrial classification (SIC) number according
to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau
of Budget, 1972, as amended.
[3] Wastewater constituents and characteristics required by
the control authority, as determined by a qualified analyst;
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as
amended. In instances where an industrial user has not yet
begun operation, therefore wastewater constituents and
characteristics are unknown, submission of comparable
data from similar industries will be accepted for permit
application purposes.
[4] Time and duration of contribution.
[5] Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any.
[6] Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans,
spill prevention and containment and details to show all
sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size,
location and elevation.
[7] Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on
the premises including all materials which could be
§ 383-23 SCRANTON CODE § 383-23
383:624
discharged, whether intentionally or unintentionally by
spilling, overflowing, leaking or other manner of escape.
[8] Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any
control authority or state regulations, National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or National
Prohibitive Standard and a statement certified to by a
qualified professional regarding whether or not the
standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required for the
industrial user to meet applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or local limits.
[9] If additional pretreatment and/or operation and
maintenance will be required to meet the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or local limits; the
shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide
such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard or, in the case of local limits, such
a date as determined by the control authority. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
[a] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in
the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for
the industrial user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction,
etc.).
[b] No increment referred to in Subsection B(2)(a)[9][a]
shall exceed nine (9) months.
[c] Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date
in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the
control authority including, as a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress to be
met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the
reason for delay and the steps being taken by the
industrial user to return the construction to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than nine
§ 383-23 SEWERS § 383-23
383:625
(9) months elapse between such progress reports to
the control authority.
[10] Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production.
[11] Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
[12] Number and type of employees and hours of operation of
plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of
pretreatment system.
[13] Any other information as may be deemed by the control
authority to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
(b) The control authority will evaluate the data furnished by the
industrial user and may require additional information. After
evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the control
authority may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject
to terms and conditions provided herein. Applicants wishing to
claim confidentiality of information required in the application
shall indicate on the application which information is of a
confidential nature. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics shall not be considered as confidential
information. Confidential information shall be treated as set
forth in § 383-23D of this Article, and in accordance with 40
CFR 2.
(3) Permit modification.
(a) A wastewater contribution permit may be modified for good
cause, including but not limited to the following:
[1] To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
[2] Material or substantial alterations or additions to the
significant industrial user's operation processes or
discharge volume or character which were not considered
in drafting the effective permit.
[3] A change in any condition in either the industrial user or
the sewer system that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination.
[4] Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses
a threat to the Sewer Authority's collection and treatment
system, personnel or the receiving stream.
[5] Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit.
§ 383-23 SCRANTON CODE § 383-23
383:626
[6] Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant
facts in the permit application or in any required
reporting.
[7] Revision of or a grant of variance from such categorical
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
[8] To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
[9] To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or
operation to a new owner/operator.
[10] Upon request of the permittee, provided that such a
request does not create a violation of any applicable
requirements, standards, laws or rules and regulations.
(b) The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit
modification does not stay any permit condition.
(4) Application signatories and certification. All wastewater
contribution permit applications and subsequent industrial user
reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user and contain the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision
in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I
am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations."
(5) Permit conditions. Wastewater contribution permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this Article and all other
applicable regulations, industrial user charges and fees established
by the control authority. Permits may contain the following:
(a) The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees
for the wastewater to be discharged to the sewer system.
(b) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
(c) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(d) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities.
§ 383-23 SEWERS § 383-23
383:627
(e) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling (twice per year at
minimum), number, types and standards for tests and
reporting schedule.
(f) Compliance schedule.
(g) Requirements for submission of technical reports, discharge
reports or baseline monitoring reports.
(h) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the control
authority and affording control authority access thereto.
(i) Requirements for notification of the control authority for any
new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial
change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the sewer system.
(j) Requirements for notification of slug load discharges.
(k) A statement of duration, as set forth in § 383-23B(6) of this
Article.
(l) A statement of nontransferability, as set forth in § 383-23B(7)
of this Article.
(m) A statement of the applicable civil and criminal penalties as set
forth in § 383-27 of this Article.
(n) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control
authority to ensure compliance with this Article.
(6) Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period
less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The
industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of
ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the significant industrial
user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification by the control authority during the term
of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in Section
2 are modified or other just cause exists. The significant industrial
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at
least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance.
(7) Permit transfer. Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a
specific significant industrial user for a specific operation. A
wastewater contribution permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new industrial user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of
§ 383-23 SCRANTON CODE § 383-23
383:628
the control authority. Any succeeding owner or industrial user shall
also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
(8) Permit appeals.
(a) The permittee may petition to appeal the terms of a permit
within thirty (30) days of issuance. This petition must be in
writing; failure to submit a petition for review shall be deemed
to be a waiver of the right of appeal. In its petition, the
permittee must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the
reasons for this objection and the alternative condition, if any,
it seeks to be placed in the permit.
(b) The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a
reconsideration by the control authority. The control authority,
or its appointed agent other than the permit writer, shall
review the petition and any pertinent information provided by
the permit writer and determine if a reconsideration of any
permit condition or requirement is proper. If so decided, the
control authority shall remand the permit to the permit writer
for reconsideration of the enumerated conditions or
requirements. Upon being so directed the permit writer shall
reexamine the relevant portions of the permit and reissue the
permit with any revisions he determines to be proper and
allowable. After remand to the permit writer and prior to
permit reissuance, those permit conditions or requirements
under reconsideration shall not be enforced and prior
enforcement actions regarding those conditions or
requirements shall be held in abeyance until reissuance of the
permit.
(c) The control authority's decision not to reconsider a final permit
or the reissuance of a reconsidered permit shall be considered
final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. The
permittee seeking judicial review of the control authority's
final action must do so by filing a complaint with the Court of
Common Pleas for Lackawanna County within the prescribed
statute of limitations.
(9) Waste characteristic change. Any owner of an improved property
who is discharging industrial waste into the sewer system and who
contemplates a change in materials, processes or method of the
industrial operation producing the waste, or in the pretreatment
facilities, which change will result in a change in the nature of the
industrial waste then being discharged into the sewer system shall
apply for a new wastewater contribution permit at least thirty (30)
days prior to such change. The revised wastewater contribution
permit will be subject to a fee. Approval or disapproval of a
modified permit shall be regulated by the procedures established
hereunder for the issuance of an original permit.
§ 383-23 SEWERS § 383-23
383:629
(10) Separation of wastes. In the case of complete separation of sanitary
sewage from industrial wastes within an establishment, with only
the sanitary wastes discharged to the sanitary sewer, no
wastewater contribution permit shall be required. The control
authority retains the right to verify discharge characteristics and
inspect the establishment.
(11) Files. The control authority and all industrial users shall maintain a
permanent file in which copies of all monitoring activities and
results, reports, permits, revisions thereto and supporting data are
filed for a minimum of three (3) years. In cases of unresolved
litigation all such files shall be retained as long as necessary, or as
required by the approval authority.
(12) Continuation of expired permits. An expired wastewater
contribution permit will continue to be effective and enforceable
until the permit is reissued if:
(a) The permittee has submitted a completed permit application at
least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the
significant industrial user's existing permit.
(b) The failure to reissue the permit, prior to the expiration of the
previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the
part of the permittee.
(13) Duty to comply. The permittee must comply with all conditions of a
wastewater contribution permit. Failure to comply with the
requirements of a permit may be grounds for administrative action,
or enforcement proceedings including civil or criminal penalties,
injunctive relief, and summary abatements.
C. Reporting requirements for permittee.
(1) Baseline monitoring reports.
(a) Upon the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of the
significant industrial user subject to such standards shall be
revised as soon as possible to comply with such standard
within the time frame prescribed by such standard.
(b) Where the user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a
wastewater contribution permit as required by § 383-23B, the
user shall, within one hundred eighty (180) days after the
promulgation of the applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard:
[1] Apply for a wastewater contribution permit.
§ 383-23 SCRANTON CODE § 383-23
383:630
[2] Provide the baseline monitoring information required by
40 CFR 403.12(b). This information may be incorporated
into the application for a wastewater contribution permit.
[3] Submit with the baseline monitoring report a compliance
schedule which contains, at minimum, the following:
[a] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in
the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for
the industrial user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g. hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction,
etc.).
[b] No increment referred to in Subsection C(1)(b)[3][a]
shall exceed nine (9) months.
[c] Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date
in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the
control authority including, as a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress to be
met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the
reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the
industrial user to return the construction to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than nine
(9) months elapse between such progress reports to
the control authority.
(c) A significant industrial user with an existing wastewater
contribution permit shall submit to the control authority, within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the
information required by 40 CFR 403.12(b).
(d) A new source, or a user that becomes a significant industrial
user subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard,
shall submit a report containing the information required by 40
CFR 402.12(6) at least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of discharge from the regulated process or
facility.
(e) A baseline monitoring report, provided under Subsection
C(1)(b)[2], C(1)(c) or C(1)(d) of this section, shall be signed by
an authorized representative of the industrial user and
certified to by a qualified professional as to the correctness of
the information contained therein.
§ 383-23 SEWERS § 383-23
383:631
(2) Pretreatment standard compliance reporting. Within ninety (90)
days following the date for final compliance with applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or, in the case of a
new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the sewer system, any industrial user subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and/or requirements
shall submit to the control authority a report indicating the nature
and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the
regulated process which are limited by National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and/or requirements and the average and
maximum daily flow for these process units in the industrial user's
facility which are limited by such National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or requirements. The report shall state
whether the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and,
if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the industrial user into
compliance with the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of an industrial user and certified to by a
qualified professional.
(3) Industrial waste contribution report.
(a) All significant industrial users shall submit to the control
authority reports indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment Regulations.
[1] Industrial users subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, after the compliance date of the
standard, or in the case of a new source after the
commencement of discharge into the sewer system, shall
submit these reports ten (10) days prior to the first day of
June and December, unless different dates or more
frequent reports are required by the National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard or the control authority.
[2] Significant industrial users not subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit these
reports as specified by the SIU's wastewater contribution
permit.
[3] Each report shall provide the required information for the
period since the previous report (e.g., May through
October).
[4] This report shall specifically contain, but not necessarily
be limited to, concentration levels of those pollutants
which are limited by the industrial user's National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard or the local limits. If
§ 383-23 SCRANTON CODE § 383-23
383:632
requested by the industrial user, the control authority will
perform the required analyses and will bill the industrial
user accordingly.
[5] In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily
flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the
average daily flow reported in § 383-23B(2)(e) of this
Article. At the discretion of the control authority and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow
rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the control authority
may agree to alter the months during which the above
reports are to be submitted.
[6] If the industrial user monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the control authority, using the
procedures prescribed in Subsection C(1)(c) of this Article,
the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
(b) The control authority may impose mass limitations on
significant industrial users regulated by concentration based
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or local limits or
in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by Subsection
C(1)(a) of this subsection shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
the local limits in the effluent of the significant industrial user.
These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis
of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and
concentration, or production and mass where requested by the
control authority, of pollutants contained therein which are
limited by the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard or local limits.
(c) All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the Environmental Protection
Agency pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in
40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does
not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant
in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA
publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening
of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and
amendments thereto.
(4) Violation and sampling reports. If a significant industrial user, as a
result of valid sampling and analysis, becomes aware of a violation
of any National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, any discharge
standard imposed by this Article or contained in a wastewater
contribution permit, the SIU shall notify the control authority of
this fact within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of it.
§ 383-23 SEWERS § 383-23
383:633
Additionally, the SIU shall provide for additional sampling and
analysis and submit a report of the results of this sampling and
analysis to the control authority within thirty (30) days of becoming
aware of the violation.
D. Sampling, flow measurement, testing and inspection.
(1) Every significant industrial user whose property is serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install at his expense
a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters
and other appurtenances in the building or lateral sewer to
facilitate observation sampling, and measurement of the waste.
The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the
industrial user's premises, but the control authority may, when
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the industrial user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed
by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or
near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling
and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and
measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling
and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
control authority's requirements and all applicable local
construction standards and specifications.
(2) Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged to the sewer system shall provide the control authority
and its representatives and agents bearing proper credentials and
I.D. the opportunity of access at any time to any part of any
property served by the sewer system as shall be required for
purposes of inspection, measurement, sampling, testing, records
examination and records copying, for ascertainment of whether the
purpose of this Article is being met and all requirements are being
complied with, and for performance of other functions relating to
service rendered by the control authority. The control authority, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
United States EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial
user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into
their premises, the industrial user shall make necessary
arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation
of suitable identification, personnel from the control authority, the
Department of Environmental Protection and the United States
EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 383-23 SCRANTON CODE § 383-23
383:634
(3) All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Article shall
be determined using methodologies found in 40 CFR 136 and shall
be under the direct supervision of a qualified analyst at the control
manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at such control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. The control manhole shall contain
only the wastewater of the industry being monitored and no flows
from other sources. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a composite or grab sample of all outfalls of a premise is
appropriate.
(4) The costs of all sampling, testing, inspection and other monitoring
activities shall be borne by the respective industrial user. The
control authority will sample and analyze the discharge of each
significant industrial user holding a wastewater contribution
permit at least once per year. The fees for such sampling and
analysis will be billed to and shall be paid by the significant
industrial user.
(5) The control authority shall annually prepare and make available to
the public upon request a report listing those significant industrial
users which were found to be in violation of one (1) or more
provisions of this Article, or any order or permit issued by the
control authority at least once during the previous calendar year.
The report shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken
against a significant industrial user(s) during the same twelve (12)
months.
(6) Both the significant industrial users and the control authority shall
maintain all records relating sampling and testing and all other
information obtained relating to compliance with National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, this Article or the SIU's
wastewater contribution permit for a period of three (3) years, and
all such records shall be made available to officials of the EPA or
approval authority upon request.
(7) Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or
other government agency without restriction, unless the industrial
user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the control authority that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial
user. The control authority will maintain a list of all persons, groups
§ 383-23 SEWERS § 383-23
383:635
§ 383-24. Fees.
§ 383-25. Compliance required.
or governmental agencies requesting information, the information
supplied and date supplied. When requested the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be
made available upon written request to governmental agencies
for uses related to this Article, the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, State Disposal System Permit
and/or the Pretreatment Programs; provided, however, that such
portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or
any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of
costs from industrial users of the control authority's sewer system for
the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the control authority's schedule of
charges and fees.
B. Charges and fees.
(1) The control authority may from time to time collect charges and
fees to include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the control authority's Pretreatment Program.
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(c) Fees for yearly sampling and analyses of industrial user's
discharge.
(d) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(e) Fees for permit and modified permit applications.
(f) Fees for filing appeals.
(g) Other fees as the control authority may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Article and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the control authority.
These fees shall be payable by the industrial user within forty-five
(45) days of notification, or the industrial user will be subject to
such enforcement action deemed appropriate by the control
authority, including but not limited to revocation of permit.
§ 383-23 SCRANTON CODE § 383-25
383:636
A. Definition of noncompliance. Any violation of pretreatment
requirements (including, but not limited to limits, sampling, analysis,
reporting and meeting compliance schedules and regulatory deadlines)
is an instance of noncompliance for which the industrial user is liable
for enforcement, including penalties. Instances of SNC are industrial
user noncompliance which meet one (1) or more of the following
criteria:
(1) Violations of wastewater discharge limits.
(a) Chronic violation. Sixty-six percent (66%) or more of the
measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the
same average limit in a six (6) month period (any magnitude of
exceedance).
(b) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations.
[1] Thirty-three percent (33%) or more of the measurements
exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average
limit by more than the TRC in a six (6) month period.
[2] There are two groups of TRC's: Group I for compatible
pollutants (conventional and nonconventional), BOD, TSS,
Oil/Grease, Ammonia-Nitrogen, TRC = + 40%; Group II for
all other pollutants, TRC = + 20%.
(c) Any other violation(s) of a discharge limit (average or daily
maximum) that the control authority believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through or endangered the health of treatment plant
personnel or the public.
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the
environment and has resulted in the control authority
exercising its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge.
(e) Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in the
permit or enforcement order, for starting construction,
completing construction and attaining final compliance by
ninety (90) days or more after the scheduled date.
(f) Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, selfmonitoring
data or National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard standards (baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day
compliance reports and periodic reports) within thirty (30)
days from the due date.
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(h) Any other violation or group of violations that the control
authority considers to be significant.
§ 383-25 SEWERS § 383-25
383:637
§ 383-26. Enforcement.
(2) An industrial user in significant noncompliance, is a significant
violator. For all significant violators during any calendar year, the
control authority shall:
(a) Report this information to the approval authority as part of the
Pretreatment Performance Summary of industrial user
noncompliance.
(b) Annually publish, in the local newspaper of the largest
circulation, a list of all significant violators, the nature of the
violation(s) leading to a finding of significant noncompliance
and a summary of actions taken to resolve the significant
noncompliance.
(c) Address the SNC through appropriate enforcement action or
document the reasons for withholding enforcement.
A. When making determinations regarding the level of the enforcement,
the control authority will consider the severity of the violation, degree
of variance from the pretreatment standards or local limits, the
duration of the violation and the fairness, equity, consistency and
integrity of the pretreatment program.
B. Enforcement response criteria.
(1) Emergency authority to suspend or terminate service.
(a) The control authority may suspend the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit of any
industrial user, when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the control authority, in order to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare
of persons, to the environment or causes interference to the
sewer system or causes the control authority to violate any
condition of the POTW NPDES Permit.
(b) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit
shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event
of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with suspension
order, the control authority shall take such steps as deemed
necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer
system or endangerment to any individuals.
(2) The control authority shall reinstate the wastewater contribution
permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written
statement submitted by the industrial user describing the causes of
§ 383-25 SCRANTON CODE § 383-26
383:638
the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence shall be submitted to the control authority within
five (5) days of the date of the occurrence.
(3) Enforcement response guide. For violations not requiring the
control authority to invoke its emergency authority, certain
guidelines shall be developed by the control authority and used to
determine the appropriate enforcement action to be taken. In
instances of continuing violations, enforcement actions, increasing
in severity, shall be used until compliance is attained. These
guidelines shall be made available for inspection upon request and
may contain the following enforcement actions:
(a) Notice of violation. Whenever the control authority finds that
any industrial user has violated or is violating this Article, a
wastewater contribution permit or order issued hereunder or
any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained herein,
the control authority may serve upon said industrial user a
written notice stating the nature of the violation(s). Within ten
(10) days of the date of the receipt, a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof shall be submitted to the
control authority by the industrial user. Submission of this plan
in no way relieves the industrial user of liability for any
violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.
(b) Consent orders. The control authority is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance,
or similar documents establishing an agreement with the
industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders
will include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to
correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified
by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and
effect as compliance orders issued pursuant to § 383-26B(3)(d)
below.
(c) Show cause hearing. The control authority may order any
industrial user which causes or contributes to violation of this
Article or a wastewater contribution permit or orders issued
hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the industrial
user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by
the control authority regarding the violation, the reasons why
the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and
directing the industrial user to show cause before the control
authority why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten (10) days before the hearing. Such notice may be
served on any principal executive officer, general partner,
corporate officer or duly authorized agent thereof. Whether or
§ 383-26 SEWERS § 383-26
383:639
not a duly notified industrial user appears as noticed,
immediate enforcement action may be pursued.
[1] The control authority may itself conduct the hearing and
take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or
any officer, employee or agent of the City to:
[a] Issue in the name of the control authority notices of
hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to
any matter involved in such hearings.
[b] Take the evidence.
[c] Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing,
including transcripts and other evidence, together
with recommendations to the control authority for
action thereon.
[2] At any hearing held pursuant to this Article, testimony
taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically.
The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any
member of the public or any party to the hearing upon
payment of the usual charges thereof.
[3] After the control authority has reviewed the evidence, it
may issue an order to the industrial user responsible for
the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances have been installed on existing treatment
facilities or that existing devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(d) Compliance order. When the control authority finds that an
industrial user has violated or continues to violate this Article
or a wastewater contribution permit or orders issued
thereunder, an order may be issued to the industrial user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specific time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated.
Orders may also contain other requirements as might be
reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance, including but not limited to the installation of
pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and
management practices.
(e) Injunctive relief. Whenever a person has violated or continues
to violate the provisions of this Article or a wastewater
contribution permit or orders issued hereunder, the control
§ 383-26 SCRANTON CODE § 383-26
383:640
authority, through the solicitor, may petition the court for
issuance of preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as
may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities
on the part of that person.
(f) Civil proceedings. If any user violates the provisions of this
Article, any wastewater contribution permit, any order issued
to that user by the control authority or any other applicable
state or national law, regulation or rule, the control authority
Solicitor may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas of Lackawanna
County.
(g) Criminal proceedings. Any person who willfully or negligently
violates any provision of this Article, a wastewater contribution
permit or orders thereunder or who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation or certification in any application,
record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this Article or wastewater contribution
permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this Article, the control authority Solicitor may request the
District Attorney of Lackawanna County to commence
appropriate legal action.
(h) Revocation of permit.
[1] Any industrial user who violates the following conditions of
this Article, a wastewater contribution permit, orders
thereunder or applicable state and federal regulations, is
subject to having its permit revoked:
[a] Failure of an industrial user to factually report the
wastewater constituents and characteristics of his
discharge.
[b] Failure of the industrial user to report significant
changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
[c] Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring.
[d] Violation of conditions of the permit.
[e] Nonpayment of charges and/or fees stated in § 383-24
and § 383-27 of this Article.
[2] If a permit is revoked, the control authority may take steps
it deems advisable, including severance of the sewer
connection, to promote compliance with this Article.
§ 383-26 SEWERS § 383-27
383:641
§ 383-27. Violations and penalties; costs.
§ 383-28. Relationship of authorities.
The relationship between the City of Scranton and the Sewer Authority
of the City of Scranton is governed by the provisions of the 1968 Trust
Indenture and Lease and the Operating Agreement of 1990 and other
applicable ordinances.
A. Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the
City Council or fails to comply with any provision of this Article or any
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined
not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.) for each offense. Each
day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided
herein, the control authority may recover reasonable attorneys' fees,
court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by
appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this
Article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
B. Criminal penalties. Any individual who knowingly, willfully or
intentionally makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Article or
wastewater contribution permit or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this Article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine
of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or more than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.) and/or by imprisonment for not
more than one year.
C. Recovery of costs incurred. In addition to civil and criminal penalties,
the industrial user violating any of the provisions of this Article or the
industrial user's wastewater contribution permit that causes damage to
or otherwise inhibits the control authority's Sewer System and/or
Sewage Treatment Plant, shall be liable to the control authority for any
expenses, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The
control authority shall bill the industrial user for costs incurred by the
control authority for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused
by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall
constitute a separate violation of this Article and subject the industrial
user to Revocation of Permit as specified in Section 7.1, 2(i) of this
Article.
D. Enhanced penalty authority. In addition to the remedies stated in
§ 383-26 of this Article, and penalties as specified in this Section, Act
90, House Bill No. 795, enacted March 17, 1992, is incorporated herein
by reference, in order to enhance the ability to enforce industrial
pretreatment standards against industrial users of POTW's.
§ 383-27 SCRANTON CODE § 383-28
383:642
Chapter 386
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 383-28 SEX OFFENDERS § 383-28
386:643

ARTICLE I
Residency Restrictions
[Adopted 11-2-2006 by Ord. No. 53-2006]
§ 386-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A licensed day-care center, licensed child-care
facility or any other child-care services facility exempt from licensing
pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CITY — The City of Scranton, including its residents and all land within its
territorial boundaries.
COMMUNITY CENTER — Any building and/or related facilities used for
educational, social, cultural or recreational activities.
OPEN SPACE — The area of land or water available and accessible for
use by the public and residents of the City which is restricted from future
development for the purpose of protecting natural features or for providing
recreational opportunities for the residents of the City. Open space
generally includes such land or area of land that is regulated, maintained
or owned by the City, and may include steep slopes, floodplains and other
significant features to be preserved.
PUBLIC PARK or RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any land, or tract of land,
or facility used for passive or active recreation, including any playground,
park, skate parks, athletic fields and any other facility owned or operated by
the City or any other governmental agency, including Lackawanna County
or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, also including any and all fields
regularly used by children for sporting contests including but not limited to
Little League baseball, football, soccer or basketball.
SCHOOL — Any educational building or facility that provides educational
services to a minor child, as defined by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including any public or private facility.
SEX OFFENDER — Any person, over the age of 18 years, who has been
convicted of any sexual offense or crimes as defined in 42 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 9795.1, including but not limited to: kidnapping where the victim is a
minor, institutional sexual assault, indecent assault, incest, prostitution and
related offenses, sexual abuse of a child, unlawful contact with a minor,
sexual exploitation of a minor, rape, involuntary deviate sexual intercourse,
sexual assault, and aggravated indecent assault. Sex offender shall also
include any individuals convicted of any attempt to commit the offenses as
enumerated herein.
§ 386-2. Sexual offender residency restrictions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any sex offender or other person over the age of
18 years who has been convicted of a violation which requires
§ 386-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 386-2
386:645
§ 386-3. Exceptions to residency restrictions.
This article shall not apply to any person or sex offender who has
established a residence prior to the date of adoption of this article, and shall
not apply if the school, child-care facility, open space, community center,
public park or recreational facility within 2,500 feet of the sex offender's
residence or lodging was established subsequent to the establishment of
the sex offender's residence of lodging. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to any person or sex offender who has established a residence
or lodging and then relocates to a different residence or lodging within the
City after the adoption of this article.
§ 386-4. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days and a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each violation, in
addition to the costs of prosecution and attorney's fees.
§ 386-5. Enforcement.
All agencies and authorities within the City, including but not limited to the
Scranton Police Department, have full authority to enforce this article and
impose such fines and other penalties as necessary and appropriate.
registration pursuant to 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 9791 et seq., or who has been
convicted of a violation which requires registration in another
jurisdiction, to reside, lodge, abide or live within 2,500 feet of any
school, child-care facility, open space, community center, public park or
recreational facility in the City.
B. For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the
distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the residence or lodging of the sex offender to the
nearest outer property line of the school, child-care facility, open space,
community center, public park or recreational facility.
C. Such person who resides or lives within 2,500 feet of any school, childcare
facility, open space, community center, public park or recreational
facility in the City shall have 60 days from receipt of written notice of
the prohibition set forth herein to move. Failure to move to a location
which is in compliance with this section within that time period shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 386-2 SCRANTON CODE § 386-5
386:646
Chapter 394
SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 175. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 412.
§ 394-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DESIGNATED AREA — The area bounded within Hickory Street, Vine
Street, Miflin Avenue, Jefferson Avenue, its surrounding pavement and
public street, roadways, berms and adjacent sidewalks.
ROLLERBLADING — That practice of propelling oneself through the use of
a pair of boot-like devices equipped with a row of wheels.
SKATEBOARDING — That practice of one or more persons riding, pedaling
or otherwise propelling themselves on a single board mounted upon two or
more wheels without benefit of handlebars or other manual control device.
§ 394-2. Prohibited.
No person shall skateboard or rollerblade within the areas abovedesignated
as prohibited. No person shall skateboard or rollerblade 24
hours a day, seven days a week.
§ 394-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Justice of the city, receive a written warning for a first offense and pay costs.
Upon conviction of a second offense, such persons shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $25 and costs. Upon conviction of a third and any
subsequent offense, such person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300 and costs and/or to be imprisoned in the county jail for a period
not exceeding 90 days. Each and every day upon which any person shall
violate or continue to violate the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 386-5 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 394-3
394:647
Chapter 400
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 278.
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 301.
Littering — See Ch. 305.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 360.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 371.
Abandoned or junk vehicles — See Ch. 438.
§ 394-3 SCRANTON CODE § 394-3
394:648
ARTICLE I
Collection
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 15, Art. I and Art. II, Div. 1, of the 1979
Code]
§ 400-1. Unlawful accumulation; penalty. [Amended by Ord. No.
97-1988]
The following accumulations are hereby prohibited:
§ 400-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively indicated:
ASHES AND UNBURNABLE RUBBISH — Includes dry ashes from coal and
other fuels, floor sweepings, bottles, broken glass, broken crockery, oyster
or clam shells, tin cans and such mineral substance as may accumulate in
connection with the ordinary conduct of households. It does not include the
accumulations resulting from the repair of dwellings or other buildings or
the result of building operations, tradewastes from stores or manufacturing
establishments.
BURNABLE REFUSE — Includes paper, pasteboard, rags, pasteboard
cartons when broken, wooden crates or boxes, when broken, and such other
burnable refuse as may accumulate in connection with the ordinary conduct
of householders.
GARBAGE — Includes the refuse of animal or vegetable foodstuffs, kitchen
or table waste, vegetables, meat, fish, bones and fat, but does not include
oyster or clam shells. Decayed vegetables, fruits or condemned food in the
possession of dealers is not considered as "garbage" to be collected by the
City.
§ 400-3. Administration by rules and regulations.
The Director of the Department of Public Works is hereby given authority
to formulate and promulgate, from time to time, such rules, regulations and
directions, consistent with the provisions of this article, as he may deem
necessary for the proper execution of both the collection and disposal of
garbage, ashes and rubbish material.
A. Continued keeping of rubbish, garbage, junk or refuse in or on
residential, commercial or industrial property.
B. The keeping of rubbish or garbage in trucks, trailers or motor vehicles
in or on any street, sidewalk or any lands within the City for a period
exceeding one hour. Any person violating this Subsection B shall, on
conviction, be liable to a fine or penalty of not more than $250 per
vehicle.
§ 400-1 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-4
394:649
§ 400-4. Receptacles required.
Each and every owner, tenant, housekeeper and other person occupying any
dwelling, house or other building or portion thereof in the City, in which
garbage, ashes and rubbish material accumulate and are to be removed
therefrom by the City, shall properly provide for such removal by using tight
receptacles having a capacity of not fewer than three nor more than 26
gallons. The receptacles shall be provided with a handle or handles and
a tight-fitting cover. No person shall use more than one receptacle with a
capacity of less than 10 gallons.
§ 400-5. Wrapping.
All garbage must be drained and wrapped in paper to prevent the same
from smelling in hot weather and freezing in cold weather. Paper and other
combustible refuse that is not deposited in receptacles must be securely
bundled in such a manner as to permit easy handling and to prevent the
contents of the same from being scattered.
§ 400-6. Placement of receptacles.
Garbage and refuse receptacles shall be so placed, by the owner, tenant,
housekeeper or other person occupying such dwelling house or other
building, in the yard where the same may be easily accessible to the
collectors.
§ 400-7. Receptacles to be kept covered.
All garbage and refuse receptacles shall be kept covered at all times so as
to provide sanitary conditions and to prevent rain or snow from entering the
same.
§ 400-8. Filling receptacles.
No garbage and refuse receptacle shall be filled within one inch of the
top thereof. The filled receptacle shall be of such weight as can be easily
handled by one man.
§ 400-9. Defective receptacles.
Garbage, ashes or rubbish shall not be placed in receptacles which are in a
filthy, leaky or defective condition.
§ 400-4 SCRANTON CODE § 400-9
394:650
ARTICLE II
Disposal and Fees
[Adopted as Ord. No. 17-1994 (Ch. 15, Art. II, Div. 2, of the 1979
Code]
§ 400-10. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue from burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials for the purposes of heating and cooking. It shall not
include the cinders produced in steam generated plants.
CITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania, the Mayor and the City Council
of Scranton.
CITY COLLECTOR — That individual, partnership, firm, corporation or
business entity designated by the City to collect and dispose of City refuse.
COMMERCIAL — A class of premises not used as dwelling units.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — A dwelling unit in a house or row
of houses. A dwelling unit being defined as a building thereof with exclusive
culinary and/or sanitary facilities designed for occupancy and use by one
person or one family household.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of foods. It shall not include more
than a minimal amount of free liquids. It shall not include food-processing
waste from canneries, packing plants or similar industries, nor large
quantities of condemned food products.
REFUSE — Garbage and ashes as herein defined.
WASTE DISPOSAL AND COLLECTION — The process of collecting refuse
and garbage within the City of Scranton, including, but not by way of
limitation, landfill tipping costs, employees' salaries, employees' benefits
and other costs incidental thereto.
§ 400-11. Administration.
A. All City residential refuse accumulated in the City shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the City.
B. Commercial nonresidential enterprises or a residential enterprise of six
or more EDU's in one building or residential clusters, must provide
refuse removal by a private licensed hauler.
C. The collection and disposal of refuse in the City shall be under the
supervision of the Director of the Department of Public Works. He shall
have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of
collection, type and location of waste containers and such other matters
pertaining to the collection and disposal as may be deemed advisable,
§ 400-10 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-11
394:651
§ 400-12. Fees. [Amended 2-8-1995 by Ord. No. 8-1995; 1-24-1996
by Ord. No. 25-1996; 1-15-1997 by Ord. No. 9-1997; 2-8-1999 by
Ord. No. 9-1999; 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 9-2000; 1-29-2001 by Ord.
No. 7-2001; 2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 9-2002; 1-27-2003 by Ord. No.
110-2003; 1-29-2004 by Ord. No. 7-2004; 1-20-2005 by Ord. No.
97-2005; 1-26-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006; 1-18-2007 by Ord. No.
77-2007; 1-29-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008; 1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
53-2009; 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No.
6-2011; 1-12-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012; 11-15-2012 by Ord. No.
68-2012; 1-30-2014 by Ord. No. 5-2014; 1-29-2015 by Ord. No.
78-2015; 1-14-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016; 5-26-2016 by Ord. No.
27-2016; 1-5-2017 by Ord. No. 79-201772; 3-5-2018 by Ord. No.
4-201873]
The fees for the payment of waste disposal collection costs shall be as
follows:
and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law,
provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions
hereof.
D. Ownership of refuse materials set out for collection shall be vested in
the City.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than such persons as are duly
authorized by the City, to collect and haul refuse within or from the City
so as to avoid payment of the refuse collection charge as provided for
herein.
A. The property owner is responsible for the payment of waste disposal
and collection fee for each equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) he/she owns.
The fee set herein provided may be paid by the owner, tenant, lessee, or
occupant of a particular dwelling unit but shall be the ultimate
responsibility of the property owner.
B. The annual fee for the payment of the waste disposal collection costs
shall be $300.
C. All fees fixed by this subsection shall be payable semiannually.
(1) Fees paid on a semiannual basis shall be due each year on May 1
and September 1 in the amount of $150 per payment.
(2) The fees shall be considered delinquent if not paid within 30 days
from due date. A delinquent charge of 12% will be added to each
unpaid balance.
(3) All fees shall be deposited in a special City interest-bearing account
to be established by the Business Administrator. This account will
72.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it would be retroactive to 1-1-2017.
73.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it would be retroactive to 1-1-2018.
§ 400-11 SCRANTON CODE § 400-12
394:652
§ 400-13. Exonerations; rules, regulations and administrative
procedures for collection.
§ 400-14. Violations and penalties.
be used to reimburse the General City Operating Fund for costs
incurred directly for the disposal of refuse.
(4) All fees and associated penalties that remain unpaid as of January
1, 2017, shall constitute a lien against the property and will accrue
interest at the rate of 10% per annum.
(5) If the annual waste disposal fee, that is $300, is paid in full by May
31 of the year in which the fee is due, the payor may take a 10%
discount from the annual fee. [Amended 5-7-2018 by Ord. No.
17-2018; 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 59-2019]
D. The Director of the Department of Public Works may discontinue all
refuse collection service to any delinquent account. If service is
stopped, service will be resumed only on payment of all accumulated
fees during the delinquent period as well as all interest and penalties
assessed against the account.
E. Any persons whose refuse is not being collected by the City under terms
of this chapter shall furnish the Director of the Department of Public
Works with a statement of the method and means of disposal of their
garbage/ashes and furnish a statement of the reasons for which said
person is not having his/her garbage/ashes disposed of by the City
under the terms of this chapter.
A. Any dwelling unit which is totally unoccupied and which generates no
refuse for an entire quarter shall be exonerated from the charges as
herein provided. Such exoneration shall be granted only after:
(1) The owner(s) has filed an affidavit with the City certifying to such
vacancy.
(2) The City approves the affidavit.
B. For purposes of this section, a "quarter" shall be defined as three
consecutive months.
C. An exoneration given for one quarter reduces the yearly fee paid by
25%. The owner of an unoccupied EDU must request and receive
exonerations during each three consecutive months in order to pay no
waste disposal collection fee in any given year.
D. The City Council shall, from time to time, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations setting forth the terms, conditions, and administrative
procedures for levying and collecting of the waste disposal collection
fee.
§ 400-12 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-14
394:653
A. Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating or
assisting in violation of any provisions of this article or of any regulation
made by Council, or the Director of the Department of Public Works
under the provisions hereof, shall, upon conviction thereof before a
District Justice, pay a fine of not less than $300 and not more than $500
and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs of prosecution,
shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not more than 30
days.
B. Giving false information to City officials in order to avoid or reduce
payment of the within fees shall constitute a separate offense which,
upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than $300 and not more than $500 and, in default of
the payment of such fine and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned
in the county jail for a period of not more than 30 days.
§ 400-14 SCRANTON CODE § 400-14
394:654
ARTICLE III
Sanitation Haulers
[Adopted 12-29-2003 by Ord. No. 260-200374]
§ 400-15. Definitions; word usage.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future. Words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
COMMERCIAL — Any group of more than five dwelling units contained
in one structure and establishments engaged in nonmanufacturing or
nonprocessing business, including, but not limited to, stores, markets, office
buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
DEMOLITION MATERIALS — Solid waste resulting from the construction
or demolition of buildings and other structures, including but not limited to,
wood, plaster, metals, asphaltic substances, bricks, block and unsegregated
concrete. The term also includes dredging waste. The term does not include
the following if they are separate from other waste and are used as clean
fill:
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Permits, Licensing and
Inspections.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities;
and sludge not meeting the definition of residual; or hazardous waste
under the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution and agency, including, but not limited to, the Department
of General Services or an other legal entity which is recognized by law as
Uncontaminated soil, rock, stone, gravel, unused brick and block and
concrete.
A.
Waste from land cleaning, grubbing and excavation, including trees,
brush, stumps and vegetative material.
B.
74.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. III, Sanitation Haulers, adopted
by Ord. No. 19-1987 (Ch. 17, Art. III, of the 1979 Code).
§ 400-15 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-15
394:655
the subject of rights and duties. In the provisions of this article pertaining
to a fine or a penalty, the term includes the officers and directors of a
corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PORTABLE BOXES — Containers which are placed by a hauler for the
purpose of accumulating waste so as to be bulk transferred to a packer
truck and where the box is returned to the original position before
transporting the waste to a disposal site.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be
disposed or processed as municipal waste.
RESIDENTIAL — Any dwelling in a group of five dwelling units or less
contained in one structure.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse other discarded material or other
waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials
resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and any sludge
from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply treatment facility,
wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided that
it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste" shall not include coal refuse
as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act. Residual waste shall
not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants,
disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a
valid permit issued pursuant the Clean Streams Law.
ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS — Large containers which are placed by a hauler
for the purpose of accumulating waste which is then picked up and rolled on
a specially framed truck rack in its entirety and transported to and emptied
at a disposal site.
§ 400-16. Licensing of haulers.
A. Any hauler of municipal waste and/or residual waste who collects such
waste, whether residential, industrial and/or commercial, within the
City limits shall have a license to conduct such business. Upon receipt
of said fee, the license shall be obtained from and issued by the
Department of Permits, Licensing and Inspections. Any hauler of
residential or commercial recyclable commingled materials who
collects such materials within the City limits shall have a license to
conduct such business.
B. The license fee shall be issued and renewed annually. The fee for the
license shall be $150 per truck for the annual license fee from January 1
of each year or any fractional part of said year.
C. The license application shall include a list of all vehicles the hauler
intends to use to collect and transport waste within the City limits. Each
listed vehicle must receive and exhibit in plain sight on the vehicle a
license sticker issued by the City.
§ 400-15 SCRANTON CODE § 400-16
394:656
§ 400-17. Roll-off containers and portable boxes.
D. Any hauler having a license to collect municipal waste in the City shall
be subject to having the license revoked for violation of any of the rules,
regulations or ordinances related to the collection, transportation and
disposal of municipal solid waste.
E. Any hauler of municipal waste or any other kind of waste, including
residual and hazardous waste, who transports such waste within the
City limits in an environmentally unsafe manner shall be subject to the
penalties of this article.
F. Any industry or commercial business located in the City of Scranton
using its own or leased vehicle(s) to haul or transport municipal waste
or any other kind of waste from its facility to a landfill or any other
disposal location shall be exempt from this article. All open vehicles,
containers transported in open vehicles and/or all roll-off containers
used in the transportation of municipal or residual waste or recyclable
materials will be tightly tarped or covered at all times during said
transportation.
A. All roll-off containers and portable boxes that are placed on any street
or highway within the corporate limits of the City of Scranton for the
purpose of collecting waste to be transported to a disposal site shall
require a permit issued by the Department of Permits, Licensing and
Inspections.
B. The permit application shall state the following:
(1) The name and address of the person(s) or entity applying for the
permit, stating with specificity the location desired, describing the
precise area where the proposed roll-off container or portable
boxes will be located, the purpose of placing the roll-off container
or portable boxes at that location and the anticipated time that said
roll-off container or portable boxes will be parked.
(2) The application shall include a provision that the applicant(s) by
his/her signature(s) accepts full responsibility to completely
indemnify and hold harmless the City of Scranton from all damages
or injuries of any kind that may occur while the said roll-off
container(s) or portable boxes are parked or driving on a City street
or highway; and that the applicant will comply with this article and
all other rules and regulations concerning the parking of roll-off
containers or portable boxes.
C. The permit fee shall be $5 per day per roll-off container or portable box.
D. All roll-off containers or portable boxes parked on a City street or
highway must have a flashing light and proper reflectors to provide
warning to approaching traffic, which light and reflective devices shall
be in proper working condition.
§ 400-16 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-17
394:657
§ 400-17.1. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil fine of
not more than $600 for each violation, together with costs. Each day that a
violation remains outstanding constitutes a separate violation.
E. A roll-off container or portable box may be parked in a right-of-way area
on a public street or highway for only one day. Pursuant to a permit
issued under this article unless the permit holder engages an off-duty
police officer to insure the safe movement of traffic around the said rolloff
container or portable box.
§ 400-17 SCRANTON CODE § 400-17.1
394:658
ARTICLE IV
Storage Areas, Transfer Stations and Landfills
[Adopted as Ord. No. 137-1989 (Ch. 15, Art. IV, of the 1979 Code]
§ 400-18. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 177-1989; 88-1991]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY SITUATION — An emergency situation shall exist in the City
only after such is designated officially by the Mayor of the City. The Mayor
shall declare such an emergency situation in the event that the residents
of the City are unable to dispose of their junk, trash or garbage at an
approved landfill, junkyard, dump, incinerator or other approved junk, trash
or garbage disposal area or facility.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable waste resulting from preparation,
cooking or consumption of foods. It shall also mean glass, metal, paper,
plastic, plant growth or other solid waste.
JUNK — Includes scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap
lead or scrap zinc and all other scrap metals and their alloys and bones,
rags, paper, used cloth, used rubber, used rope, used tinfoil, used bottles,
old or used machinery, used tools, used appliances, used plumbing, heating
and other fixtures, used utensils, used lumber, used boxes, or crates, used
pipe or pipe fittings, used tires and other manufactured goods that are so
worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing
condition, but are subject to being dismantled.
JUNK STORAGE VEHICLE — A garbage or junk storage vehicle shall be
defined as a vehicle capable of movement on the subject real estate or any
street or road adjacent to such real estate and which has as its primary
purpose the storage, housing or containment of garbage or junk, and shall
include but not be limited to dump trucks, garbage trucks and open tractortrailers.
LEACHATE — A liquid waste resulting from the interaction of water or
other liquids containing dissolved or other suspended solid matter which is
deleterious, injurious or hazardous to the general public, the environment,
rivers, streams, creeks, ditches, lakes, storm sewers, watercourses or any
other collection of water.
STOPPING AREA FOR GARBAGE OR JUNK STORAGE VEHICLES — A
stopping area for garbage or junk storage vehicles shall be defined as an
area of real estate on which garbage or junk storage vehicles shall be
allowed to park, stop or remain fully or partially loaded with garbage or
junk for a period in excess of 24 hours. Nothing herein shall be construed
to prevent the City from seeking to abate a nuisance by any legal remedy, if
a nuisance develops within 24 hours.
TEMPORARY GARBAGE OR JUNK SITE — A temporary garbage or junk
site shall be defined as an area of real estate where garbage or junk shall
be deposited and the owner of the real estate intends to remove the junk
§ 400-18 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-18
394:659
from such real estate to a permanent landfill, junkyard, dump, incinerator
or other approved junk, trash or garbage disposal area or facility.
TRANSFER STATION — Any property where solid waste (as defined by the
applicable Commonwealth of Pennsylvania rules and regulations) is stored
temporarily or transferred by vehicle storage container or any other means,
except that storage containers for the solid waste generated on a specific
site (i.e. trash cans and dumpsters) and solid waste on the immediate
property of its ultimate disposal (i.e. a properly permitted sanitary landfill)
shall not be considered a transfer station.
§ 400-19. License/permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to keep, maintain or allow any
area of real estate within the City to be used as a temporary garbage or junk
site, transfer station or sanitary landfill or a stopping area for garbage or
junk storage which garbage or junk is generated from a place other than the
subject premises, whether the same is contained within vehicles, trailers or
containers or not, unless a license is issued in accordance with this Article
or an emergency situation exists in the City for which an emergency permit
shall have been previously obtained as hereinafter provided.
§ 400-20. Application. [Amended by Ord. No. 177-1989]
A permit for a transfer station or sanitary landfill or an emergency permit
to keep, maintain or allow to exist any temporary garbage or junk site
or stopping area for garbage or junk storage shall be granted only by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the City according to the standards
and guidelines hereafter set forth. Any such emergency permit shall be
valid only during the existence of the emergency situation. Every person
or entity desiring to keep, maintain or allow to exist any such transfer
station, sanitary landfill, temporary garbage or junk site or stopping area
shall file with the Zoning Enforcement Officer an application for a permit or
an emergency permit, as appropriate, which application shall contain:
A. A description of the emergency situation, if applicable.
B. A description of the real estate for which the permit is desired,
including the size of the area and proposed placement of the site or
stopping area(s).
C. A description of the items of garbage or junk to be allowed on the
proposed temporary junk site or in the stopping area.
D. An estimate of the time for which the permit would be required.
E. The name of the owners of the subject premises.
F. The name of the owner of all premises adjoining the premises.
G. A description of the steps to be taken to ensure insect and odor control
and proper disposal of leachate.
§ 400-18 SCRANTON CODE § 400-20
394:660
H. A description of fencing to control blowing litter and prevent
unauthorized access, particularly by children.
I. A statement that such area proposed to be used as a temporary
emergency storage site, transfer station, sanitary landfill or garbage
stopping area is permitted under the applicable provisions of the City
Zoning Ordinance.
J. A description of steps to be taken to ensure proper drainage.
K. A description of the background of the applicants in managing a
garbage or junk storage site, sanitary landfill, garbage stopping area or
transfer station or emergency storage area, including the name,
address and telephone numbers of at least three references.
L. The provision to the City of an insurance policy, wherein the City is
listed as a co-insured sufficient to indemnify and hold the City harmless
from the liability of whatever nature in the operation of the temporary,
emergency garbage or junk storage site; each applicant shall sign a
hold harmless clause on the application acknowledging his or her
responsibility which clause shall be approved by the Solicitor's Office of
the City of Scranton.
M. Each applicant shall produce a surety bond in favor of the City, in an
amount to be determined by the City taking into consideration the size
of the site, proposed use of the site, the materials to be stored there, the
length of time such materials are stored, the likely costs of cleanup and
disposal of garbage, refuse or other waste, if deposited in violation of
this Article or in violation of federal or state law or regulations.
N. The provision of evidence of compliance with all other City licenses,
permits or conditions required by other ordinances of the City.
O. Submission of evidence clearly showing compliance with all applicable
federal and state statutes or regulations governing the storage,
transportation, loading and unloading or disposal of garbage, refuse or
other waste.
P. A description of steps to be taken to prevent the storage, transportation
or disposal of hazardous or infectious waste.
Q. A description of the hours that the facility will be open and the days of
the week that the facility will operate, except in accordance with the
following hours and days:
Days Hours
Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Saturdays 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
Sundays and holidays Closed
§ 400-20 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-21
394:661
§ 400-21. Permit review and appeal procedure; fee. [Amended by
Ord. No. 177-1989]
A. Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(1) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review the information
contained in the application and shall inspect the proposed site as
necessary, together with the City Engineer. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer may request additional information to ensure
that the proposed transfer station, sanitary landfill, garbage
storage area or temporary emergency storage area will be safely
and properly administered. Upon final approval of the permit, the
applicant shall pay a permit fee of $1,200 per year. A permit may be
issued for a period of less then one year, and the fee for a partial
year permit shall be $100 per month. A permit may be renewed
upon the applicant providing clear evidence to the City of his
compliance with the provisions of this Article and applicable
federal and state statutes and regulations.
(2) The Zoning Enforcement Officer is empowered to revoke the
permit if it appears that the facility is not being operated in
accordance with the provisions of this Article or state and federal
statutes and regulations.
B. Appeal procedure.
(1) Any person aggrieved by a revocation or denial of a permit for any
operation required to be licensed or regulated by this Article shall
have the right to appeal a determination by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, in writing, to the Director of the Department
of Community Development, within 20 days of the notice issued
thereof, as of the date of such notice.
(2) The Director shall schedule a hearing to be open to the public
(excepting conferences of counsel at sidebar) within 20 days, at
which time evidence may be presented by any aggrieved person,
witnesses, City officials and documents may be received. The
Director shall be empowered to swear in witnesses at any such
hearing and to rule on the reception of relevant evidence. Each
such hearing shall be conducted under the provisions of the Local
Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq., and the practice and
procedure shall follow subject thereby to said statute § § 551 to
555. A hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days of the notice of
appeal unless the matter is continued or postponed with consent of
all parties.
(3) Following a hearing, including continuances or postponements as
determined by the Director, the Director of Community
Development shall issue an adjudication, in writing, in accordance
with 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 555, specifying his decision with findings of fact
and reasons for the adjudication, further advising of a right to
appeal the adjudication within 30 days of the date of the
§ 400-21 SCRANTON CODE § 400-21
394:662
§ 400-22. Purpose and standards.
adjudication which shall be served upon all parties or their counsel
personally or by mail. Such service by mail shall be by registered
mail if a party is unrepresented by counsel. The Director shall issue
his adjudication within 20 days from the date of the hearing or the
date that the hearing was concluded if a hearing was held on more
than one day.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the adjudication of the Director of
Community Development may appeal such adjudication within 30
days of the date such adjudication was made, to the Court of
Common Pleas of Lackawanna County, in accordance with the
provisions of the Local Agency Law.75
A. Purpose. All sanitary landfills, transfer stations, garbage or junk
storage areas or emergency storage areas shall meet the following
performance standards in order to preserve the public health, secure
the public safety and general welfare of the residents of the City and
avoid the creation of nuisances.
B. Performance standards. Performance standards shall be:
(1) To ensure accountability for the safe and lawful operation of any
licensed site, the identity of the operators or owners and their
address must be provided to the Department of Community
Development.
(2) To protect the City from liability for accidents or failure to safely or
properly operate the licensed site, evidence of sufficient insurance
and a surety bond must be provided and a hold harmless
agreement executed by any permittee.
(3) To avoid the creation of an attractive nuisance, and prevent the
blowing of litter off of the site of any permitted operation,
appropriate fencing must enclose any licensed site.
(4) To avoid the spread of disease, insects, rodents and other vectors
shall be strictly controlled, and no ponds or pools of water will be
permitted. The presence of such vectors or accumulations of water
shall be grounds for revocation of a permit or for citation for
violation of this Article.
(5) To avoid the creation of nuisances, no odor of garbage shall be
permitted to be emitted from the premises of a licensed site, nor
shall noise be excessive.
(6) To ensure compliance with public policy, each permittee shall
strictly comply with all federal laws and regulations and with laws
and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as well as
75.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A § 105.
§ 400-21 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-22
394:663
§ 400-23. Improper operation; cost recovery by City. [Amended by
Ord. No. 177-1989]
In the event that the permittee does not safely and properly operate such
transfer station, sanitary landfill, the temporary emergency storage area,
garbage or junk storage vehicle stopping area the City may seek the
execution of the surety bond for necessary cleanup and disposition of
garbage, junk or other materials illegally stored at the site in violation of
this Article. The City may attach a lien onto the property or take other
legal steps against the operator of the temporary emergency storage area
to recover the full cost of enforcement proceedings, cleanup and disposal
of any material, garbage or junk stored improperly or in violation of this
Article.
with all ordinances, regulations and permits of the City of
Scranton.
(7) To avoid the problem of excessive water runoff and disputes or
litigation arising therefrom, an appropriate system of drainage
shall be provided at each permitted site.
(8) To prevent pollution of the surrounding area, leachate shall be
properly and safely collected, and disposed of in accordance with
all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, as well as any
local regulations or ordinances.
(9) To avoid a threat to the public health, no hazardous waste or
infectious waste shall be permitted on any permitted site unless
such wastes are specifically allowed under permits issued by both
the United States Government and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; there is strict compliance with all applicable federal,
state and City laws, ordinances and regulations; and such wastes
are constantly held in appropriate closed containers so that there is
no spill, leakage or other discharge into the ground, water or air
surrounding the site.
(10) To ensure compliance with these performance standards and with
all City ordinances, regulations and permits, the permittees of any
permitted site under this Article shall guarantee access to the
property for reasonable inspections by City officials, as they may
deem necessary.
C. The leakage of gasoline, oil, water or other liquids or solid materials
from containers of any kind or from motor vehicles on any permitted
site shall not be permitted, and the operator of each site, as well as the
owner of the container or vehicle shall be required to stop such leakage,
and perform such cleanup as may be necessary to avoid pollution or a
threat to public health. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from
exercising any legal remedy, or arranging for any necessary cleaning
and recovering the amount of moneys expended.
§ 400-22 SCRANTON CODE § 400-24
394:664
§ 400-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300 per violation and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Each day said violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
§ 400-24 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-24
394:665

ARTICLE V
Recycling
[Adopted as Ord. No. 122-1990 (Ch. 15, Art. II, Div. 3, of the 1979
Code); amended in its entirety 7-28-2016 by Ord. No. 45-2016]
§ 400-25. Legislative purpose.
The reduction of the amount of solid waste and conservation of recyclable
materials is an important public concern by reason of the growing problem
of solid waste disposal and its impact on the environment. The collection of
all types of paper, glass, cans, plastics, yard waste, and other recyclables
as defined herein for recycling from residences and/or businesses and
institutions and other commercial ventures, and community activities in the
City of Scranton will serve the general public interest by:
§ 400-26. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and
phrases used throughout this article shall have the following meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act of 1988.
ALUMINUM — All products made of aluminum including aluminum cans,
foil, wrappers, containers for prepared dinners or other foods, screen
frames and lawn chairs, as well as similar types of aluminum products.
CITY — This refers to the City of Scranton.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — This includes a business or institution
located in the City.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITY — Any special event held in the City with over
200 people in attendance. This includes festivals, picnics, sporting events,
parades and similar activities.
COUNTY — This refers to Lackawanna County.
DEBRIS — Stones, dirt, demolition material, broken concrete, cinder blocks
and other similar material.
A. Reducing the volume of municipal solid waste which must be disposed,
thereby reducing storage, collection, transportation and disposal costs
of said waste and
B. Preserving valuable natural resources and landfill space; and save
energy, and will result in a financial benefit to the residents and
taxpayers of the City of Scranton by reason of the avoided costs realized
by volume reduction via recycling. Collection regulations and fees must
be established to implement the program, facilitate the
accomplishment of its objectives and to encourage the fullest possible
citizen participation in the program.
§ 400-25 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-26
394:667
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable waste incident
to and resulting from the use, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the
product being transparent or translucent and being made for packaging or
bottling of various matter and all other material commonly known as glass
excluding, however, blue and flat glass commonly known as window glass
which are not currently recyclable.
LEAF AND YARD WASTE — Leaves, brush, branches, and any yard
trimmings including grass clippings. Leaf and yard waste does not include
shipping pallets or other wood waste, such as trimmings from wood
manufacturing.
METAL — All products made of metal, with the exception of recyclable
aluminum and steel/bi metal cans which are recyclable at the curb,
including washers, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, hot water heaters, tire
rims, springs, bicycles, or scrap metal.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — All garbage and refuse normally placed by
persons for regular collection by the City of Scranton.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed news
and articles and containing advertisements and other matters of public
interest. Magazines, catalogs, phone books, and glossy inserts, along with
other periodicals may currently be recycled with newspaper.
PERSON — Includes a lessee as well as an owner of a residence, and
includes a person, firm or corporation which owns residence.
PLASTICS — Any item made from a synthetic resin material derived from
oil, natural gas and comprised of organic polymers which can be molded
into a variety of products such as bottles, jars, other types of rigid items,
as well as plastic films and other products. Types of plastics may include,
but are not limited to, polyester, polyethylene, PVC, and polystyrene. Plastic
bottles, jars, and tubs are currently recyclable in the City of Scranton.
RECYCLABLE PAPER PRODUCTS — All uncontaminated paper such as used
newspaper, magazines, phone books, cardboard boxes, mixed paper, school
paper, unwanted mail and brown paper bags and other paper which market
conditions deem recyclable.
RECYCLABLES — Material having an economic value in the secondary
materials market. The following materials have such economic value
currently: aluminum cans foil containers, steel and bi metal cans, glass
bottles and jars, office paper, newspaper, magazines and catalogs, brown
paper bags, phone books, other types of paper products including mixed
paper; plastic and glass bottles and jars and tubs, leaf and yard waste, and
other items as market conditions dictate.
RESIDENCE — Any single-family or other residential dwelling or municipal
establishment from which the City of Scranton collects municipal solid
waste or recyclables.
§ 400-26 SCRANTON CODE § 400-26
394:668
TRASH — Ashes, non-recyclable plastic material, ceramics, window glass,
and flat glass, non-putrescible solid waste, nonrecyclable building and
construction material, contaminated paper and other similar materials.
§ 400-27. Establishment of program/grant of power.
The City of Scranton hereby establishes and operates a Source Separation
- Resource Recovery Program for the mandatory separation and collection
of recyclables and yard waste as defined herein from all residences in the
City for which municipal solid waste collection is provided by the City of
Scranton. Collection of the materials to be recycled shall be made biweekly
by the City of Scranton or their designated agent for recycling purposes.
§ 400-28. Establishment of regulations.
The Mayor and Council of the City of Scranton are hereby authorized
and empowered to establish and promulgate regulations on the manner,
days, and times of collections of recyclable materials, and the preparation,
handling, location and time of placement of such materials for collection.
These may change from time to time depending on labor and vehicle
availability.
§ 400-29. Separation and removal of waste and recycling.
The occupant or owner of any building within the City of Scranton who shall
place for disposal, removal or collection the following named items shall do
so in strict conformity with the following regulations:
A. Commingled containers, bottles, and jars, paper products and yard
waste. These items shall be kept separate from other refuse and shall
be collected by the City or subcontract by its designated agent.
Individual household units shall separate and prepare for collection
these materials in the following manner: mixed paper including
newspaper, office paper, magazines, catalogs, and phone books shall be
kept free of food and other contaminants and placed in paper recycling
bins provided by the City; comingled containers shall be emptied,
cleaned and separated into the commingled container provided by the
City, and separated from paper products and yard waste. Recyclable
items are to be collected at times and days designated by the City on a
biweekly basis throughout the year.
B. Paper products and commingled containers, leaf and yard waste. As
defined in this article shall not be placed in the same garbage can as or
otherwise mixed with other forms of solid waste for collection, removal
or disposal.
C. Brush, leaf and yard waste. Branches shall be tied in bundles not to
exceed four feet in length and of a size and weight to be handled by one
person on collection crews. Yard waste, brush and leaves may also be
placed in large brown leaf and yard waste collection bags which may be
purchased at many commercial locations throughout the area. The City
§ 400-26 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-29
394:669
§ 400-30. Ownership of recyclable materials.
All recyclables as defined by this article and placed for collection by the City
under the provisions of this article and any other City regulations shall, from
time of placement at the curb, become the property of the City. This article
forbids scavenging of recyclables once they are placed at the curb and are
the property of the City. Any scavenging of recyclables can be subject to the
penalties and fines included in this article.
§ 400-31. Collection prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this article, for any person, firm or corporation,
other than the City of Scranton or one authorized by the City of Scranton,
to collect recyclables or yard debris, placed by a resident for collection
by the City. Each unauthorized collection in violation hereof from one or
more residence on one calendar day shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense punishable as provided by the fee structure in this article.
§ 400-32. Other means of disposal.
Any resident may donate or sell newspaper, glass, cans, bottles and other
recyclables to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating for profit
or not, provided that the receiving person, firm or corporation shall collect
such donated recyclable materials from the collection point of a residence.
Once at the curb, recyclables are the property of the City of Scranton.
§ 400-33. Commercial establishments/reporting requirements.
collects yard debris for recycling from April through November along
with Christmas trees during the holiday season as advertised in the
newspaper or on the City website. Brush, leaves and yard waste should
be placed curbside for collection at designated collection times. Brush,
leaves, and yard waste may also be disposed of by individual home
owners and businesses at the Lackawanna County Recycling Center
compost site.
D. Large nonmetal items. Items such as furniture, rugs, mattresses, and
other large items shall be placed at curbside on the day designated for
collection of such items, and placed out with regular trash collection.
The City will not collect electronics at curbside since these items are
banned from Pennsylvania landfills. Electronics may be taken to
Lackawanna Recycling Center by the individual homeowner or to
another authorized recycler. The City will not collect tires from
individual residences. These items may be recycled during the
Lackawanna County tire recycling collections, or taken to various other
authorized recyclers or garages.
E. Receptacle requirements. Recyclables must be placed in a designated
recycling container/receptacle. Recycling containers are available at
the Department of Public Works facility during regular business hours
at no cost to City residents.
§ 400-29 SCRANTON CODE § 400-33
394:670
A. Each commercial establishment, business, institution or municipal
entity or building located within the City of Scranton shall employ or
contract with its own private hauler for the collection and disposal of
garbage, trash, recyclables, tires, white goods, appliances and yard
waste and any other items generated at the establishment for each
calendar year.
B. All private trash haulers operating within the City are required by this
article to offer recycling to each commercial, municipal, business or
institutional customer in accordance with the items required under Act
10176 that is corrugated cardboard, office paper, aluminum cans and
leaf waste. Nothing in this article shall prohibit private haulers from
offering additional recyclables to customers and they are encouraged to
do so.
C. Each commercial establishment, business or municipal entity or
institution must recycle at least once each month.
D. Each commercial establishment, business, municipal entity and
institution in the City shall at a minimum, recycle items required by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under Act 101, or specified by any
subsequent Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or Federal government,
mandate or law covering commercial recycling. The items to be
recycled currently include corrugated cardboard, office paper, and
aluminum cans, as well as any leaf waste if these items are generated
by the establishment. Any commercial establishment, business or
institution which is collected by the City, may recycle any items
collected from its residential customers in addition to those required
under Act 101 as delineated above.
E. As a business, each landlord must provide for trash disposal and
recycling for the tenants in their buildings. Recyclables collected must
conform to this article and the requirements of Act 101 namely
corrugated cardboard, office paper, aluminum cans and leaf waste if
any is generated. Landlords are encouraged to recycle additional items
if feasible.
F. Landlords must offer recycling in multi-family residential units. They
must recycle all items that the City requires for residential recycling
programs.
G. Each commercial establishment, business, municipal, institution or
landlord of a multi family or multi-business or office complex located in
the City must return to the City an annual recycling report during the
first quarter of each calendar year listing the amounts recycled during
the previous calendar year. These reports must include weight slips or
report totals signed by the hauler or recycling center. These totals will
be used by the City in reporting to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 400-33 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-33
394:671
§ 400-34. Other requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to combine any recyclables with trash
for the purpose of collection and disposal. The City requires that all
recyclables collected should be marketed at a recycling facility rather than
disposed of as solid waste.
§ 400-35. Litter.
No persons shall place or deposit litter, trash or waste in public receptacles
or other person's private residential or commercial, business or institutional
refuse receptacles except in such a manner as to prevent it from being
scattered or carried by the elements to any street, sidewalk or other public
places or private premises.
§ 400-36. Unlawful trash disposal.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to dispose of their appliances, ashes,
garbage, recyclables, refuse, rubbish, tires, white goods, and yard waste in
an area owned or controlled by another person, commercial unit, business,
institution, or the City.
§ 400-37. Outside waste generation.
It shall be unlawful for any persons bringing appliances, ashes, garbage,
recyclables, refuse, rubbish, tires, white goods, and yard waste generated
outside of the City of Scranton into the City.
§ 400-38. Fines.
Any persons found to be in violation of an sections of this article shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $300. Each day that violation continues after
notice of violation has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
for the required annual report and for Act 101, Section 90477
performance grant purposes.
H. A commercial establishment, business or institution may haul or drop
off their own recycling at a recycling center provided they receive a
weight slip which should be provided to the City yearly during the first
quarter of each year.
I. All community activities and special events held in the City must recycle
the same items as are required of commercial establishments if these
items are generated during the event. Special events may include
festivals, parades, sporting events, carnivals, picnics, and other similar
events.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.904.
§ 400-33 SCRANTON CODE § 400-38
394:672
Chapter 405
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Construction codes — See Ch. 201.
Fees — See Ch. 226.
Sewers — See Ch. 383.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 412.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
423.
Zoning — See Ch. 445.
§ 400-38 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 400-38
394:673

Part 1
(Reserved)
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)78
§ 405-1. through § 405-5. (Reserved)
78.Editor's Note: Former Article I, General Regulations, adopted by Ord. No. 54-1993 (Ch. 33,
Art. IV, of the 1979 Code), was repealed 12-13-2012 by Ord. No. 76-2012. See now Part 3,
Discharge to Waterways.
§ 405-1 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-1
394:675

Part 2
[AdoptDedisc3h-9a-r2g0e0 T6oB SyeOwredr .S Nyost. e1m9-2006]
ARTICLE II
Prohibited Discharge
§ 405-6. Purpose; policy.
§ 405-7. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Part 2 shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. Words, terms and phrases are as
follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C., 1251 et seq.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular
shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
A. This Part 2sets forth uniform requirements for contributions to the
sewer system within the City of Scranton and enables the City to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean
Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR
Part 403). The objectives of this Part 2 are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of stormwater into the sewer system
which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewer system
which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into the
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system;
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the operating cost of the
sewer system; and
(5) To prohibit the connection of downspout gutters to the sewer
system.
B. This Part 2 shall apply to the City of Scranton and to persons outside the
City who are, by contract or agreement with the City or its agents, users
of the City's sewer system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
City of Scranton or its duly authorized representatives or agents shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Part 2.
§ 405-6 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-7
394:677
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting thereof.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the sewer system.
§ 405-8. Use of sewer system.
§ 405-9. Recovery of costs.
It is the purpose of this Part 2 to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the Sewer Authority's sewer system for the implementation of the
program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set
forth in the Sewer Authority's schedule of charges and fees.
§ 405-10. Charges; fees.
§ 405-11. Enforcement.
A. All sewage and authorized industrial waste may be discharged to the
sewer system except those which are deemed harmful to the system or
are specifically prohibited by this article.
B. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
noncontact cooling water, drainage from tile fields or unpolluted
process waters to any sanitary sewer.
C. No user shall be permitted to have a downspout gutter empty into or be
connected to any pipe leading to the sewer system.
A. The Sewer Authority may from time to time collect charges and fees, to
include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
Sewer Authority's Downspout Enforcement Program.
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures.
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(4) Other fees as the Sewer Authority may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein.
B. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part 2and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the Sewer Authority. These
fees shall be payable by the user within 45 days of notification, or the
user will be subject to such enforcement action deemed necessary.
§ 405-7 SCRANTON CODE § 405-11
394:678
A. When making determinations regarding the level of the enforcement,
the Sewer Authority will consider the severity of the violation, the
duration of the violation, and the fairness, equity, consistency, and
integrity of the program.
(1) Enforcement designation. The City of Scranton hereby designates
the Scranton Sewer Authority as the enforcement agent in
connection with any and all enforcement aspects of this Part 2.
(2) Enforcement response criteria.
(a) Emergency authority to suspend or terminate service.
[1] The Sewer Authority may suspend the wastewater
treatment service when such suspension is necessary, in
the opinion of the Sewer Authority, in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or causes
interference to the sewer system.
[2] Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service shall immediately stop or eliminate the
discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with suspension order, the Sewer Authority
shall take such steps as deemed necessary including
immediately severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the sewer system or endangerment
to any individuals.
[3] The Sewer Authority shall reinstate the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge.
(3) Enforcement response guide. For violations not requiring the
Sewer Authority to invoke its emergency authority, certain
guidelines shall be developed by the Sewer Authority and used to
determine the appropriate enforcement action to be taken. In
instances of continuing violations, enforcement actions, increasing
in severity, shall be used until compliance is attained. These
guidelines shall be made available for inspection upon request and
may contain the following enforcement actions:
(a) Notice of violation. Whenever the Sewer Authority finds that
any user has violated or is violating this article, an order issued
hereunder or any prohibition, limitation of requirements
contained herein, the Sewer Authority may serve upon said
user a written notice stating the nature of the violations.
Within 10 days of the date of the receipt, a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof shall be
submitted to the Sewer Authority by the user. Submission of
§ 405-11 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-11
394:679
this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violation
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
(b) Consent orders. The Sewer Authority is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance,
or similar documents establishing an agreement with the user
responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order.
Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as
compliance orders issued pursuant to § 405-11A(3)(d) below.
(c) Show-cause hearing. The Sewer Authority may order any user
which causes or contributes to violation of this Part 2 or to
show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time
and place of a hearing to be held by the Sewer Authority
regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user
to show cause before the Sewer Authority why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the
hearing. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as
noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued.
[1] The Sewer Authority may itself conduct the hearing and
take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or
any officer, employee, or agent of the City to:
[a] Issue in the name of the Sewer Authority notices of
hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to
any matter involved in such hearings;
[b] Take the evidence;
[c] Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing,
including transcripts and other evidence, together
with recommendations to the Sewer Authority for
action thereon.
[2] After the Sewer Authority has reviewed the evidence, it
may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that, following a specified time period,
the sewer service be discontinued unless the79
(d) Compliance order. When the Sewer Authority finds that a user
has violated or continues to violate this Parat 2, an order may
be issued to the user responsible for the discharge directing
79.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 405-11 SCRANTON CODE § 405-11
394:680
§ 405-12. Penalties; costs.
that, following a specific time period, sewer service shall be
discontinued. Orders may also contain other requirements as
might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance.
(e) Injunctive relief.
[1] Whenever a person has violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this Part 2, the Sewer Authority, through the
solicitor, may petition the court for issuance of preliminary
or permanent injunction, or both (as may be appropriate),
which restrains or compels the activities on the part of that
person.
[2] If any user violates the provisions of this Part 2, any order
issued to that user by the Sewer Authority, or any other
applicable state or national law, regulation or rule, the
Sewer Authority Solicitor may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of
Common Pleas of Lackawanna County.
(f) Criminal proceedings. For any person who willfully or
negligently violates any provision of this Part 2, or who
knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
Part 2, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this Part 2, the Sewer Authority Solicitor may request the
District Attorney of Lackawanna County to commence
appropriate legal action.
A. Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the
City Council or fails to comply with any provision of this Part 2, or any
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined
not more than $1,000 for each offense. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Sewer Authority may
recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees
and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
person found to have violated this Part 2or the orders, rules,
regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
B. Criminal penalties. Any individual who knowingly, willfully, or
intentionally makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 2, or who
falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this Part 2, shall, upon conviction, be
§ 405-11 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-12
394:681
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or by imprisonment for
not more than one year.
C. Recovery of costs incurred. In addition to civil and criminal penalties,
the user violating any of the provisions of this Part 2 that causes
damage to or otherwise inhibits the Sewer Authority's sewer system
and/or sewage treatment plan shall be liable to the Sewer Authority for
any expenses, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge.
The Sewer Authority shall bill the user for costs incurred by the Sewer
Authority for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the
violation or discharge.
§ 405-12 SCRANTON CODE § 405-12
394:682
Part 3
[AdoptedD1i2s-c1h3a-r2g0e1 2ToB Wy aOtredr.w Naoys. 76-2012]
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 405-13. Title.
This Part 3 shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Scranton
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 405-14. Statement of findings.
The Council of the City of Scranton finds that:
§ 405-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 3 is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the City of Scranton and its watershed by minimizing the harms and
maximizing the benefits described in § 405-14 of this Part 3, through
provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood-control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases non-point-source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection of people of the City of Scranton and the
commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource. Less runoff provides for
increased groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of
streams, which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
A. Accommodate site development and redevelopment in a manner that
protects public safety and that is consistent with (or reestablishes) the
natural hydrologic characteristics of the Lackawanna River watershed
and sustains groundwater recharge, stream base flows, stable stream
channel (geomorphology) conditions, the carrying capacity of streams
§ 405-13 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-15
394:683
§ 405-16. Statutory authority.
and their floodplains, groundwater and surface water quality, and
aquatic living resources and their habitats.
B. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
C. Authorize a comprehensive program of stormwater management
designed to preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of
commonwealth streams; to preserve to the maximum extent practicable
natural stormwater runoff regimes and natural course, current and
cross section of waters of the commonwealth; and to protect and
conserve groundwaters and groundwater recharge areas.
D. Reduce flooding impacts and prevent a significant increase in surface
runoff rates and volumes, predevelopment to post-development, which
could worsen flooding downstream in the watershed, enlarge
floodplains, erode stream banks and create other flood-related healthwelfare-
property losses; in general, to preserve and restore the natural
flood-carrying capacity of streams and their floodplains.
E. Protect adjacent lands from adverse impacts of direct stormwater
discharges.
F. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
G. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
H. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
I. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and stream beds.
J. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs)
that are implemented within the City of Scranton.
K. Address certain requirements of the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
L. Encourage the provision or upgrade of stormwater BMPs for existing
development.
M. Reduce the impacts of runoff and stormwater infiltration on the
Scranton Sewer Authority system.
§ 405-15 SCRANTON CODE § 405-16
394:684
§ 405-17. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance, are subject to regulation
by this Part 3.
§ 405-18. Repealer.
File of the Council No. 54, 1993, is hereby repealed in its entirety, and
any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the City of Scranton
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Part 3 is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 405-19. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Part 3 shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of this Part 3
so long as it remains legally enforceable minus the invalid portion. The City
reserves the right to amend this Part 3 or any portion thereof from time to
time as it shall deem advisable in the best interests of the promotion of the
purposes and intent of this Part 3 and the effective administration thereof.
§ 405-20. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this Part 3 do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
A. Primary authority. The City of Scranton is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act," and the Act of Legislature, April 13, 1972, Act No.
62, known as the "Home Rule Charter and Option Plans Law,"80 and any
other applicable law arising under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Secondary authority. The City of Scranton also is empowered to
regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act
of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.81
80.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2901 et seq.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 405-16 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-20
394:685

ARTICLE IV
Definitions
§ 405-21. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this Part 3, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 405-22. Definitions.
As used in this Part 3, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, and harvesting
crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application to the City of Scranton for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the City of Scranton.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Part 3.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this Part 3, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, rain gardens, sand filters,
detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs
are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
§ 405-21 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-22
394:687
BUFFER, STREAM BUFFER, RIPARIAN BUFFER, or AQUATIC BUFFER
— An area of permanent native vegetation, including trees, shrubs, and
herbaceous vegetation, that exists or is established to protect a stream
system, lake, reservoir, or costal estuarine area.
CFS — Cubic feet per second.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse that conveys, continuously
or periodically, flowing water.
CITY OF SCRANTON or CITY — The City of Scranton, Lackawanna County,
Pennsylvania, or its designee.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in Section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P. S. § 851(c)], which has the
authority under a delegation agreement executed with the Department to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the erosion and sediment control
program in this commonwealth.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event, measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION — The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the
waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment (above or below ground) designed
to collect and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff
and releasing it at a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to
drain completely shortly after any given rainfall event and are dry until the
next rainfall event.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCHARGE — The release of water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage
basin or other point of interest (verb); the rate and volume of flow of water
such as in a stream, generally expressed in cubic feet per second (volume
per unit of time) (noun).
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH/SWALE — An artificial waterway for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance.
DRAINAGE AREA — That land area contributing runoff to a single point and
that is enclosed by a ridgeline.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — All facilities and natural features used for the
movement of stormwater through and from a drainage area, including, but
not limited to, any and all of the following: conduits, pipes and appurtenant
features, channels, ditches, flumes, culverts, streets, swales, gutters as well
as all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands.
§ 405-22 SCRANTON CODE § 405-22
394:688
EARTH DISTURBANCE — A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and
grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building
construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock
or earth materials.
EPA — The Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION — The wearing away of land surface by water or wind which
occurs naturally from weather or runoff but is often intensified by human
activity.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area. Included are lands adjoining a river or stream
that have been or may be expected to be inundated by a one-hundred-year
flood. Also included are areas that comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in
Appendix A of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PADEP) Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended
or replaced from time to time by PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from
the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting
a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area
of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS3,4).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces,
§ 405-22 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-22
394:689
patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and any new streets
or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas and driveway areas are not counted
as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration. "Net increase of
impervious surface" refers to the difference between the existing
impervious coverage and the total impervious surface proposed.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolates
downward to recharge groundwater.
INTENSITY — The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of time.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of the
following meanings:
LOADING — The total amount (generally measured in pounds or kilograms
per acre per year) of material (sediment, nutrients, oxygen-demanding
material, or other chemicals or compounds) brought into a lake, stream or
water body by inflowing streams, runoff, direct discharge through pipes,
groundwater, the air (aerial or atmospheric deposition) and other sources
over a specific period of time (often annually).
MAINTENANCE — The action taken to restore or preserve the as-built
functional design of any facility or system.
MEADOW CONDITION — A natural ground cover with less than one viable
tree of a DBH (diameter at breast height, 4.5 feet) of six inches or greater
per 1,500 square feet within three years of application; a cover condition
for which SCS curve numbers have been assigned or to which equivalent
Rational Method runoff coefficients have been assigned.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.82
C.
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 405-22 SCRANTON CODE § 405-22
394:690
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
Created in 1972 under the Clean Water Act to authorize discharges to local
receiving waters only pursuant to governmental permits, in an effort to
reduce point-source and non-point-source pollutants.
NOAA — The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Passive,
site design approaches or regulatory approaches that positively impact
water quality and reduce or minimize the generation of stormwater runoff
without requiring the construction of specific or discrete stormwater
management control structures.
NRCS — The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — Any natural or man-made watercourse or conduit in
which water flows with a free surface.
OPEN VEGETATED CHANNEL — Also known as "swales," "grass channels,"
and "biofilters." These systems are used for the conveyance, retention,
infiltration and filtration of stormwater runoff.
PA BMP MANUAL — The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, PA DEP Document Number: 363-0300-002, as amended
and updated.
PACD — The Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PennDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the City of Scranton are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this Part 3.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbances or any activities that
involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect
stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, Chapter
102, or the Clean Streams Law.83
RETENTION/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that is captured
and not released directly into the surface waters of this commonwealth
during or after a storm event.
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 405-22 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-22
394:691
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years. The probability of a twenty-five-year storm
occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.84
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Is
abbreviated as "SWM BMPs" throughout this Part 3.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Lackawanna River Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff adopted by
the County of Lackawanna as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864 (Act 167), as amended, and known as the "Storm Water Management
Act."85
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this Part 3.
"Stormwater management site plan" will be designated as "SWM site plan"
throughout this Part 3.
STREAM — For purposes of administration of this Part 3 (other regulatory
agencies such as the United States Army Corps of Engineers have a
different definition), a "stream" is defined as a perennial or intermittent
watercourse identified through site inspection and U.S. Geological Survey
(USGS) maps. Perennial streams are those which are depicted on a USGS
map with a solid blue line. Intermittent streams are those which are
depicted on a USGS map with a dotted blue line.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.86
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
84.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
85.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 405-22 SCRANTON CODE § 405-22
394:692
WATERSHED — A region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
surface water of the commonwealth.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels of conveyance of
surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
§ 405-22 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-22
394:693

ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 405-23. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 405-24:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the City of Scranton
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this Part 3.
B. SWM site plans approved by the City of Scranton, in accordance with
§ 405-33, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The City of Scranton may, after consultation with the DEP, approve
measures for meeting the state water quality requirements other than
those in this Part 3, provided that they meet the minimum requirements
of, and do not conflict with, state law, including but not limited to the
Clean Streams Law.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this Part
3 and to meet all requirements under Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and
the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are
listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual
(E&S Manual), Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, No. 363-2134-008 (2000), as amended and
updated.
E. Impervious areas.
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this Part 3.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
Part 3; except the volume controls in § 405-25 and the peak rate
controls of § 405-26 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious area.
F. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written notification
§ 405-23 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-23
394:695
to the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows shall be
subject to the requirements of this Part 3.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet state water quality requirements as defined in Article IV;
(3) Meet the water quality goals of this Part 3 by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, woodlands,
areas of steep slopes and existing native vegetation.
(b) Preserve and maintain trees and woodlands; maintain or
extend riparian buffers and protect existing forested buffer;
and provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(c) Establish and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow pathways.
(d) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction; cover disturbed
areas and replace topsoil to a depth sufficient to achieve
adequate vegetated cover; use tracked equipment for grading
when feasible.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(4) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices described in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (PA BMP
Manual).1
H. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this Part 3.
J. Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and
rate control capacities over a period of time not more than 72 hours
from the end of the design storm or otherwise be treated.
K. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this Part 3 and to meet all requirements under
Pennsylvania Code Title 25, the Clean Streams Law, the Storm Water
Management Act, and § 405-15 of this Part 3.
§ 405-23 SCRANTON CODE § 405-23
394:696
§ 405-24. Exemptions.
L. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the PA BMP
Manual.1
M. Materials, Workmanship and Methods. All materials, workmanship, and
methods of work shall comply with the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication 408 specifications, as accepted and
commonly used by the City of Scranton, and shall be considered to be
incorporated into this Part 3 as if copied in full. In the event a conflict
arises between the requirements of this Part 3 and the PADOT
Publication 408 specifications, the City of Scranton shall resolve the
difference, and said opinion shall be binding.
N. Supplemental standards and criteria contained in Article XI are hereby
incorporated into this Part 3 to govern the hydrologic and hydraulic
design provisions contained herein.
O. The signature and seal of a registered professional engineer, if
required, must be provided at the time of plan submission.
A. The following activities are specifically exempt from the plan
preparation and submission provisions of this Part 3 but remain subject
to the requirements in § 405-23E through L of this Part 3 (and erosion
and sedimentation pollution control requirements):
(1) Regulated activities that create impervious areas smaller in area
than 5,000 square feet and regulated activities that disturb less
than 5,000 square feet are exempt from the peak rate control and
the SWM site plan preparation requirements of this Part 3. Refer to
the stormwater management plan (SMP) requirements in Appendix
B.87
(2) Agricultural plowing and tilling are exempt from the rate control
and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this Part 3,
provided that the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control.
(3) Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the
rate control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this
Part 3, provided the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control.
(4) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(5) Agriculture when operated in accordance with an approved
conservation plan.
87.Editor's Note: Appendix B is attached to this chapter.
§ 405-23 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-24
394:697
§ 405-25. Volume controls.
The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual shall
be utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable.
Where the design professional determines volume controls are not practical
or will place an undue hardship on the development, he/she may request a
waiver from complying with this section. The waiver request shall contain
sufficient information for the City of Scranton to consider the request. If
the City of Scranton determines the volume controls are not practicable
or will place an undue hardship on the development, it shall grant the
waiver. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm
Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below.
For regulated activity areas equal to or less than one acre that do not
require hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this Part 3
establishes no preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant
may select either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the
intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated
with each methodology, and other factors.
B. Exemptions from any provisions of this Part 3 shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 405-23E through L.
C. The City of Scranton may include permit conditions to specify that
regulated activities maintain a minimum distance between proposed
impervious areas/stormwater management facility outlets and
downslope property line(s).
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the PA BMP Manual) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling
based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration rainfall.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow or its equivalent.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in the model for existing
conditions for redevelopment.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the PA BMP Manual) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm
Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to activities that
disturb greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall be sized to capture at least the first two
inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
§ 405-24 SCRANTON CODE § 405-25
394:698
§ 405-26. Rate controls.
§ 405-27. Technical design standards.
All regulated activities shall be conducted in conformance with the
following standards:
(2) At least the first 1.0 inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not
be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth. Removal
options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 405-26, Rate
controls.
A. Areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan. Post-development discharge rates shall
not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for the two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms. If it
is shown, that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the postdevelopment
analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms,
then the requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the
applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the
peak rate of discharge requirement.
B. Areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan. For the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year storms, the post-development peak
discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate maps.
For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the postdevelopment
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates.
A. After installation of impervious cover, peak discharges for the two-, five-
, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year frequency storms from
the site shall not exceed the respective peak discharge performance
standards in this Part 3. Stormwater runoff shall be managed so that no
downstream increases in flood damages or impairment of streets and
other public facilities occurs. The City of Scranton may require that
downstream impacts be evaluated at critical locations, such as dams,
tributaries, existing developments, undersized culverts, and floodprone
areas. The City of Scranton shall make the final determination
with respect to the degree of management required for any site. The
applicant shall evaluate the effects of the proposed plan on such critical
§ 405-25 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-27
394:699
locations by providing computed water surface elevations (WSEL) for
the ten- and one-hundred-year storms. Methods of computation shall
have prior approval of the City of Scranton. At such downstream critical
locations, stormwater management may be exercised by:
(1) Providing off-site improvements to downstream conveyances in
order to contain flow increases.
(2) Providing downstream drainage easements with sufficient widths
to contain the flood limits.
B. Groundwater recharge. The City of Scranton may impose stormwater
quality measures in accordance with this Part 3 to protect against
ground or surface water pollution where the type of business or the
nature of the stormwater runoff and soils underlying stormwater
management facilities would constitute a substantial risk of
contamination.
C. In establishing the site conditions for calculating stormwater runoff
prior to development, the following assumptions shall apply:
(1) Woodland or meadow in good condition shall be used for all
undeveloped areas.
(2) Average antecedent moisture conditions as defined by the Natural
Resource Conservation Service (NRCS).
(3) Determining predevelopment peak discharges from karst geologic
areas, apply either:
(a) Peak adjustment factors in accordance with the USGS Water
Resources Investigations Report 00-4189, Techniques for
Estimating Magnitude and Frequency of Peak Flows for
Pennsylvania Streams; or
(b) Drainage area reductions equal to the area of undrained
depressions or pond factor adjustments in accordance with the
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No.
55 (TR-55, USDA, NRCS).
D. Hydrologic methods. All plans and designs for stormwater management
facilities shall be reviewed by the City of Scranton. Plans for facilities
other than storm sewers should determine stormwater peak discharge
and stormwater runoff by the use of the PennDOT Drainage Manual,
Publication Number 13, DM-2, Chapter 10, as amended. The City of
Scranton may permit the use of the Modified Rational Method or other
methods for calculation of the storage capacity of a stormwater
management facility from drainage areas of 20 acres or less.
(1) Coefficients. Acceptable runoff coefficient values for use in the
Rational Method equation are identified in Appendix C, of this Part
3.88 When applying the Rational Method coefficients in Table A-3,
open space coefficients shall be used for undeveloped, densely
§ 405-27 SCRANTON CODE § 405-27
394:700
vegetated (nonforest) areas instead of meadow coefficients. Refer
to PennDOT Drainage Manual, Publication Number 13, DM-2,
Chapter 10, as amended, for permissible curve numbers. The
Rational Formula may be used in lieu of the Soil-Cover-Complex
Method to compute design flows for the sizing of storm sewers,
inlets, and swales.
(2) Rainfall amounts for the return periods specified shall be
determined using the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2 (as amended), United States Department
of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland, 20910. Rainfall duration
for hydrograph generation shall be selected for the specified
recurrence intervals on the basis of twice the computed time of
concentration for the given watershed and subwatersheds. In no
case shall the duration be less than 24 hours.
(3) Time of concentration shall be determined in accordance with the
methods presented in PennDOT Drainage Manual, Publication
Number 13, DM-2 Chapter 10, as amended.
(4) In order to reduce stormwater runoff volumes from developed
areas and encourage groundwater recharge, underground basin
drains, infiltration trenches, and cisterns are permitted to which
roof leaders may be connected. These drains consist of stone-filled
basins which temporarily store and release water below ground
surface. Plans for such facilities shall be submitted to the City of
Scranton for approval, and the basins shall be used only in those
areas where soils, geologic, and water table conditions permit.
E. Stormwater management facilities and related installations shall be
provided:
(1) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses. Such flow may
be redirected as required, subject to the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) To ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the curbline of
streets.
(3) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained and
to prevent substantial flow of water across intersections or flooded
intersections during storms, in accordance with the procedures in
the PennDOT Drainage Manual, Publication Number 13, DM-2,
Chapter 10, as amended.
(4) To ensure adequate and unimpeded flow of stormwater under
driveways in, near, or across natural watercourses or drainage
88.Editor's Note: Appendix C is attached to this chapter.
§ 405-27 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-27
394:701
swales. Suitable pipes or other waterways shall be provided as
necessary.
(5) To properly drain stormwater runoff from all land development
projects. All lot and open areas shall be designed to drain to the
nearest practical street or drainage system, existing or proposed,
as defined by the City of Scranton, with no impact on adjoining
properties, unless an area specifically designed for stormwater
detention is provided.
F. Storm sewers and related installations.
(1) Storm sewers, where required by zoning and land use densities,
shall be placed under or immediately adjacent to the roadway side
of the curb, or as directed by the City of Scranton, when parallel to
the street within the right-of-way.
(2) When located in undedicated land, they shall be placed within a
drainage easement not less than 20 feet wide as approved by the
City of Scranton.
(3) The use of properly designed, graded, and turfed drainage swales
is encouraged in lieu of storm sewers in commercial and industrial
areas and, where approved by the City of Scranton, in residential
areas. Such swales shall be designed not only to carry the required
discharge without excessive erosion but also to increase the time of
concentration, reduce the peak discharge and velocity, and permit
the water to percolate into the soil, where appropriate. Criteria
related to the use and design of drainage swales are as follows.
(4) Criteria.
(a) Where vegetated drainage swales are used in lieu of or in
addition to storm sewers, they shall be designed to carry the
twenty-five-year discharge without erosion and also to increase
the time of concentration, reduce the peak discharge and
velocity, and permit the water to percolate into the soil.
(b) The maximum encroachment of water on the roadway
pavement along roadside swales in cut areas shall not exceed
half of a through traffic lane during a ten-year frequency storm
of five-minute duration. Frequent and/or sustained flooding of
the subbase shall be avoided.
(c) Swales shall be designed in accordance with PennDOT
Drainage Manual, Publication Number 13, DM-2, Chapter 10,
as amended. Inlets shall be provided to limit the shoulder
encroachment and water velocity.
(d) The side slope for any vegetated drainage channel requiring
mowing of the vegetation shall have a maximum grade of three
horizontal to one vertical on those areas to be mowed.
§ 405-27 SCRANTON CODE § 405-27
394:702
(e) Erosion prevention. All drainage swales shall be designed to
prevent the erosion of the bed and bank areas. Suitable
temporary and/or permanent stabilization during vegetative
cover establishment shall be provided to prevent erosion.
(f) Storm sewers or drainage swales shall discharge to a detention
or retention basin to attenuate the peak rate and volume,
respectively of stormwater runoff, except as provided in the
plan.
(g) Design standard. Because of the critical nature of vegetated
drainage channels, the design of all vegetated channels shall,
as a minimum, conform to the design procedures outlined in
the PennDOT Drainage Manual, Publication Number 13, DM-2,
Chapter 10, as amended.
(5) Guidelines.
(a) Deed restrictions may be required on property(ies) containing
drainage swales and/or perennial streams. When required,
these deed restrictions shall specify that no property owner
obstruct or alter any drainage swale or perennial stream
identified in the stormwater management plan.
(b) The design capacity of storm sewers shall be in accordance
with PennDOT Drainage Manual, Publication Number 13,
DM-2, Chapter 10, as amended. Storm drainage systems shall
be designed without surcharging inlets to provide conveyance
of stormwater runoff into a detention basin or similar facility
utilized to manage the rate of stormwater runoff. To avoid
surcharging inlets, and to ensure that inlets will receive
stormwater runoff, the hydraulic grade line at the inlet should
be at least one foot (12 inches) below the elevation of the inlet
grate. Where site grading will direct stormwater runoff from
the one-hundred-year design storm to a detention basin or
similar facility utilized to manage the rate of stormwater
runoff, then the storm sewer may be designed for the ten-year
design storm. Where site grading will not direct stormwater
runoff from the one-hundred-year design storm to a detention
basin or similar facility utilized to manage the rate of
stormwater runoff, then the storm sewer shall be designed for
the one-hundred-year design storm. Conveyance of storms to
the detention basin, up to and including the one-hundred-year
frequency, shall be provided so as not to endanger life or
seriously damage property.
(c) Storm inlet types and inlet assemblies shall conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Standards for
Roadway Construction as approved by the City of Scranton.
[1] Inlets shall, at a minimum, be located at the lowest point of
street intersections to intercept the stormwater before it
§ 405-27 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-27
394:703
reaches pedestrian crossings; or at sag points of vertical
curves in the street alignment which provide a natural
point of ponding of surface stormwater.
[2] Where the City of Scranton deems it necessary because of
special land requirements, special inlets may be approved.
[3] The interval between inlets collecting stormwater runoff
shall be determined in accordance with the PennDOT
Drainage Manual, Publication Number 13, DM-2, Chapter
10, as amended.
[4] In curbed sections, the maximum encroachment of water
on the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a
through traffic lane or one inch less than the depth of curb
during the ten-year design storm of five-minute duration.
Inlets shall be provided to limit the encroachment of water
on the pavement. When inlets are used in a storm system
within the right-of-way limits of a street in lieu of
manholes, the spacing of such inlets shall not exceed the
maximum distance of 450 feet.
[5] The design of storm inlets shall be in accordance with
PennDOT Drainage Manual, Publication Number 13,
DM-2, Chapter 10, as amended.
[6] All inlets shall be marked with a four-inch stainless steel
storm drain marker that indicates "NO DUMPING-DRAINS
TO RIVER" or similar message approved by the City of
Scranton.
(d) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on a
continuous storm sewer system at all vertical dislocations, at
all locations where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is
required, at all vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding
5°, and at all points of convergence of two or more influent
storm sewer mains. The construction locations of accessible
drainage structures shall be as indicated on the subdivision
drainage plan or area drainage plan approved by the City of
Scranton.
(e) When evidence available to the City of Scranton indicates that
existing storm sewers have sufficient capacity as determined
by hydrograph summation and are accessible, proposed
stormwater facilities may connect to the existing storm sewers
so long as the peak rate of discharge does not exceed the
amount permitted by this article.
(f) When the outlet of stormwater to the Scranton Sewer
Authority combined sewer system is the only feasible
stormwater control method, in addition to meeting the
requirements of this Part 3, compliance with the Sewer
§ 405-27 SCRANTON CODE § 405-27
394:704
Authority of the City of Scranton's "Policy on the Connection
of Stormwater Discharges into the Combined Sewer System"
shall be required and evidenced by providing the City of
Scranton with a copy of the permit to discharge into Scranton
Sewer Authority system.
G. Bridges and culverts shall have ample waterway opening to carry
expected flows, based on the PennDOT Drainage Manual, Publication
Number 13, DM-2, Chapter 10, as amended, or as required by the City
of Scranton.
H. Detention or retention basins for the management of stormwater peak
discharges shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Basins shall be installed prior to or concurrent with any
earthmoving or land disturbances which they will serve. The
phasing of their construction shall be noted in the narrative and on
the plan.
(2) The design of all facilities over limestone formations shall include
measures to prevent groundwater contamination and, where
required, sinkhole formation. Soils used for the construction of
basins shall have moderate to low erodibility factors (i.e., "K"
factors of 0.32 or less).
(3) Energy dissipaters and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
(4) Outlet structures and aprons.
(a) Outlet structures within detention/retention basins shall
incorporate childproof, nonclogging trash racks or grates over
all horizontally oriented openings. All vertically oriented
openings over 12 inches or larger in any dimension where
entry by a child could cause injury or death shall be covered
with childproof, nonclogging trash racks, except where such
openings carry perennial stream flows. Design openings less
than six inches in any dimension shall be covered with a pipe
screen (e.g., Neenah R-7512 or equivalent). Measures to
completely drain detention/retention basins in the event of
clogging of the primary design opening(s) shall be
incorporated into the design of basin outlet structures. Basin
outlet pipes shall have a minimum inside diameter of 15 inches
or a cross-sectional area of 176 square inches, except that
pipes under a twenty-five-foot or greater fill shall not be less
than 24 inches or a cross-sectional area of 453 square inches,
and shall consist of reinforced concrete.
(b) Outlet aprons shall be designed and shall extend at a minimum
to the toe of the basin slope. Where spillways will be used to
manage peak discharges in excess of the ten-year storm, such
spillways shall be constructed to withstand the pressures of
§ 405-27 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-27
394:705
impounded waters and convey flows at computed outlet
velocities without erosion.
(5) When the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
requires facilities to be permitted, the designer shall submit all
information to the PA DEP Regional Office and obtain all necessary
approvals and permits pursuant to Pennsylvania Code, Title 25,
Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Encroachment Act.
(6) Downstream analysis.
(a) Where deemed necessary by the City of Scranton, the
applicant shall submit an analysis of the impacts of detained
stormwater flows on downstream areas within the watershed,
established with the concurrence of the City of Scranton. The
analysis shall include hydrologic and hydraulic calculations
necessary to determine the impact of peak discharge
modifications of the proposed development on critical locations
such as dams, tributaries, existing developments, undersized
culverts, and flood-prone areas.
(b) Review and comment of the downstream analysis by the City of
Scranton shall be obtained as deemed necessary.
(7) Detention basins may be waived by the City of Scranton at sites in
close proximity to larger receiving streams, depending on the
hydrology of the watershed. This is to facilitate drainage prior to
main stream flooding. It shall be incumbent upon the applicant to
demonstrate that no downstream increase in stream flooding or
channel erosion will result in accordance with this article and that
no increases in peak discharge within the receiving stream will
occur as outlined in this article.
(8) Multiple-use basins. The design and construction of multiple-use
stormwater detention facilities are strongly encouraged. In
addition to stormwater management, where appropriate, facilities
allow for recreational uses, including: ballfields, play areas, picnic
grounds, etc. Provision for parking facilities within basins and
permanent wet ponds with stormwater management capabilities
may also be appropriate. Prior approval and consultation with the
City of Scranton are required before design. Multiple-use basins
should be constructed so that potentially dangerous conditions are
not created.
(9) Multiple-development basins. Stormwater management facilities
designed to serve more than one property or development in the
same watershed are encouraged. Staged construction of existing or
proposed multiple-use detention facilities by several developers in
conjunction with watershed development is encouraged. Each
applicant shall be responsible for the incremental increase in
stormwater runoff generated by the respective development and
incremental construction improvements necessary for the overall
§ 405-27 SCRANTON CODE § 405-27
394:706
detention facility. Prior approval and consultation with the City of
Scranton is required before design of such facilities.
(10) Alternative detention facilities. Alternative stormwater detention
facilities, including rooftop, subsurface basins or tanks and in-pipe
detention storage, or other approved alternative designs are
permitted as determined by the City of Scranton.
I. All calculations shall be submitted to the City of Scranton on
computation sheets acceptable to the reviewer for approval. If the City
of Scranton determines through review and independent computation
that the size(s) of storm pipes or detention basins is insufficient, the
City of Scranton may require the applicant to increase the size(s) of said
storm pipes or detention basins. If the storm drainage system design is
completed on a computer installation, sufficient supporting data shall
be provided to allow comprehensive review by municipal officials.
J. When the elevation of any existing or proposed entrance to a structure,
including windows, is lower than the elevation of the public cartway
serving that site, a drainage plan shall be submitted, reviewed and
approved as part of the zoning permit process for the proposed
structure.
K. The City of Scranton may require that stormwater management
facilities located outside of existing or proposed rights-of-way shall be
located within and accessible by easements as follows:
(1) Drainage easements. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement paralleling the line of such watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream. The width of the drainage easement will be
adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the
one-hundred-year floodplain. Drainage easements shall provide for
maintenance and for the purpose of widening, deepening,
improving or protecting such drainage facilities.
(2) Access easements. Where proposed stormwater management
facilities are not adjacent to proposed or existing public rights-ofway
or are not accessible due to physical constraints, as
determined by the City of Scranton, a twenty-foot-wide passable
access easement specifying rights of entry shall be provided.
Access easements shall provide for vehicle ingress and egress on
grades of less than 10% for carrying out inspection or maintenance
activities.
(3) Maintenance easements. A maintenance easement shall be
provided which encompasses the stormwater facility and
appurtenances and provides for access for maintenance purposes.
The maintenance easement must be located at least 20 feet outside
of the one-hundred-year surface elevation and the stormwater
facility and appurtenances.
§ 405-27 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-27
394:707
(4) Easements shall stipulate that no trees, shrubs, structures,
excavation, or fill be placed, and no regrading is to be performed
within the area of the easement without written approval from the
City of Scranton. Upon approval, such landscaping may be placed
in maintenance easements, provided that it does not impede
access.
(5) Whenever practicable, easements shall be parallel to width and
linked to property lines of the subdivision.
(6) All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the site plan. The format and
content of the easement agreement shall be reviewed and
approved by the City of Scranton.
L. Sinkhole protection.
(1) Stormwater from roadways, parking lots, storm sewers, roof
drains, or other concentrated stormwater runoff paths shall not be
discharged directly into sinkholes.
(2) To protect sensitive karst areas, the City of Scranton may require
basins to contain an impervious liner. The liner may be of the
impervious membrane type, placed in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations, or an approved alternative as
approved by the City of Scranton.
M. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(1) All plans for erosion and sediment pollution control (E&SPC) shall
meet the requirements of the Clean Streams Law, Act of June 22,
1937, P.L. 1987, as amended, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et. seq., and 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102.1 et seq., Erosion Control.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit the E&SPC
plan, application and other necessary material to the Conservation
District or DEP office, as appropriate. A copy of the transmittal
letter shall be provided to the City of Scranton. Comments shall be
received and E&SPC plan approval obtained from the Conservation
District prior to stormwater plan approval.
N. All regulated activities that do not fall under the exemption criteria
referenced herein shall submit a drainage plan to the City of Scranton
for review. These criteria shall apply to the total proposed development
even if development is to take place in stages. Impervious cover shall
include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and
any new streets and sidewalks. Any areas designed to initially be gravel
or crushed stone shall be considered to be impervious for the purposes
of comparison to the waiver criteria, unless they are installed and
maintained as provided for in the PA BMP Manual.
§ 405-27 SCRANTON CODE § 405-27
394:708
(1) Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent
with this Part 3.
(2) Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to
any applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of
existing discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or
maintained as diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise
provided by this Part 3. If diffused flow is proposed to be
concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the applicant
must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities
exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge or otherwise
prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other harm will
result from the concentrated discharge.
(3) Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation,
the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation
within the easement, shall be required, except as approved by the
appropriate governing authority.
(4) When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage,
open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the
line and grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural
drainageways shall be subject to approval by the PA DEP through
the joint permit application process or, where deemed appropriate
by the PA DEP, through the general permit process.
(5) Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Part 3 that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or
wetlands shall be subject to approval by the PA DEP through the
joint permit application process or, where deemed appropriate by
the PA DEP, the general permit process. When there is a question
whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the
applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise approval to work in the area must
be obtained from the PA DEP.
(6) Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Part 3 that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PA
DOT).
(7) Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of stormwater
runoff through seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are
encouraged, where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or
§ 405-27 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-27
394:709
eliminate the need for detention facilities. When infiltration is
utilized, appropriate testing is required.
(8) In order to promote overland flow and infiltration, roof drains
should not discharge directly to streets or storm sewers. Roof
drains may discharge directly to streets or storm sewers when
deemed necessary by the City of Scranton. Under no circumstances
shall roof drains discharge directly to sanitary sewer systems.
§ 405-27 SCRANTON CODE § 405-27
394:710
ARTICLE VI
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 405-28. Plan contents.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. Appropriate sections from the Municipal Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,89 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plans.
B. The City of Scranton shall not approve any SWM site plan that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this Part 3. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this article, when an SWM site plan is
found to be deficient, the City of Scranton may either disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor
deficiencies, the City of Scranton may accept submission of
modifications.
C. Provisions for a permanent access or maintenance easement for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance plan discussed
in Subsection I(9) below.
D. The following signature block for the City of Scranton:
"(Municipal Official or designee), on this date (date of signature) has
reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM site plan meets all design
standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No. (Number
assigned to the Ordinance)."
E. The following signature block for the registered professional preparing
the plan:
"I,__________, hereby certify on this date (date of signature) that the
stormwater management plan meets all design standards and criteria
of the Ordinance No. (Number assigned to the Ordinance)."
F. The following statement by the owner:
"I/we hereby acknowledge that I/we and/or my/our assignees/grantees
shall be responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management
system shown hereon, in accordance with approved stormwater
management ownership and maintenance plan for this project, and
that such stormwater system shall remain as a permanent fixture that
cannot be altered, replaced, or removed without prior written approval
from the City of Scranton."
G. A note indicating that as-built plans may be required to be submitted by
a qualified professional for all stormwater facilities prior to occupancy
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 423, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 405-28 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-28
394:711
or the release of the surety bond. The City of Scranton reserves the
right to authorize the Municipal Engineer to review said as-built plans.
H. All permits required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT), and
United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and other regulatory
agencies.
I. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the PA BMP
Manual.1 A detailed site evaluation may be required for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst topography and
other environmentally sensitive areas such as brownfields.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this Part 3, or otherwise necessary to demonstrate that
the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet the
requirements of this Part 3, including the recommendations and
general requirements in § 405-23.
(4) Expected project time schedule.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and approved by the Conservation District.
(6) The effect (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality, and peak
flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features and on any
existing stormwater-conveyance system that may be affected by
the project.
(7) Plans and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs including open
channel structures, pipes, open channels, and swales shall be at the
discretion of the City of Scranton.
(8) The SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing
watercourses and existing and proposed on-lot wastewater
facilities, water supply wells, and infiltration areas.
(9) The SWM site plan shall include an operation and maintenance
(O&M) plan for all existing and proposed physical stormwater
management facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership
and responsibilities for operation and maintenance.
(10) Horizontal and vertical profiles of any existing and proposed
watercourses, drainageways, channels or streams, including
hydraulic capacity.
(11) Hydrologic and hydraulic computations for all existing and
proposed stormwater management facilities and measures.
§ 405-28 SCRANTON CODE § 405-28
394:712
(12) Stormwater management both during and after development.
(13) Unless specifically exempted in writing, the following must also be
shown on the SWM site plan, prepared in a form which meets the
requirements for recording in the office of the Register and
Recorder of Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania:
(a) Annotated maps, drawings, engineering plans, and
construction details. Said plan shall be prepared by a
registered professional land surveyor, qualified geologist,
landscape architect, architect, or engineer licensed in the
State of Pennsylvania, with said preparer's seal and
registration number affixed to the plan. Plans for tracts of less
than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals no
more than 50 feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, plans shall be
drawn at a scale of one inch equals no more than 200 feet.
Plans shall be submitted on the following sheet sizes: 22 inches
by 34 inches, 24 inches by 36 inches, 30 inches by 42 inches,
36 inches by 42 inches or 36 inches by 48 inches. All lettering
shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans are reduced to
half size. All sheets comprising a submission shall be on one
size.
(b) The name of the proposed development and the name and
address of the owner of the property and the individual or firm
preparing the plan.
(c) Date of submission and revision, graphic scale, and North
arrow.
(d) Total tract boundary, with distances marked to the nearest foot
and bearings to the nearest degree, and the total acreage of
the tract.
(e) Key map (drawn to scale) showing all existing natural and manmade
features beyond the property boundary affected by the
project and the extent of the watershed or subbasin which
drains through the project site for 1,000 feet or as specified by
the City of Scranton.
(f) Existing and proposed topographic contours shall be provided
at intervals not greater than five feet for existing and proposed
conditions. Topographic contours at intervals less than five feet
may be required for flat sites and to depict certain existing and
future stormwater management features. The reference datum
used to develop topographic contours shall be stated on the
plans.
(g) Existing and proposed use, including the total area of
impervious surfaces after construction.
§ 405-28 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-28
394:713
§ 405-29. Plan submission.
§ 405-30. Plan review.
(h) Location and selected plant material used for vegetative filter
paths to sinkholes, stream buffers, buffer yards, wetlands,
streams, and other waters of the commonwealth, and the
location of all notices to be posted, as specified in this Part 3.
(i) If stormwater management facilities are off-site, a note on the
plan referring to location and agreements indicating
responsibility for conveyance to and maintenance of the
facilities; all such off-site facilities shall meet the design
standards and criteria specified in this Part 3, and details of the
facilities shall be included with the plan.
A. Two hard copies and one electronic (PDF or other format approved by
the City of Scranton) of the SWM site plan shall be submitted to the City
of Scranton or Ordinance Administrator for distribution to the
Municipal Engineer, County Conservation District, County Planning
Commission, and other agencies as applicable.
(1) Distribution to the County Conservation District, County Planning
Commission, and other agencies is the responsibility of the
applicant.
B. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the City of
Scranton, Ordinance Administrator or DEP.
A. The SWM site plan shall be reviewed by a qualified professional for the
City of Scranton for consistency with the provisions of this Part 3. After
review, the qualified professional shall provide a written
recommendation for the City of Scranton to approve or disapprove the
SWM site plan. If it is recommended to disapprove the SWM site plan,
the qualified professional shall state the reasons for the disapproval in
writing. The qualified professional also may recommend approval of the
SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable
conditions for approval in writing. The SWM site plan review and
recommendations shall be completed within the time allowed by the
Municipalities Planning Code for reviewing subdivision plans.
B. The City of Scranton shall notify the applicant in writing within 45
calendar days whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If
the SWM plan involves a subdivision or land development plan, the
notification period is 90 days. If a longer notification period is provided
by other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so
notified by the City of Scranton. If the City of Scranton disapproves the
SWM plan, the City of Scranton shall cite the reasons for disapproval in
writing.
§ 405-28 SCRANTON CODE § 405-30
394:714
§ 405-31. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan as determined by the City of Scranton, shall require a
resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this article.
§ 405-32. Resubmission of disapproved stormwater management
site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the City of Scranton's concerns, to the City of Scranton in
accordance with this article. The applicable review fee must accompany a
resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 405-33. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The City of Scranton's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval, unless otherwise
authorized by the City of Scranton. The City of Scranton may specify a term
of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM site
plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the City of Scranton
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is not
completed according to § 405-34 within the term of validity, then the City of
Scranton may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any
C. The City of Scranton's approval of an SWM site plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed five years. This five-year time period shall
commence on the date that the City of Scranton signs the approved
SWM site plan. If stormwater management facilities included in the
approved SWM site plan have not been constructed, or if an as-built
survey (if required) of these facilities has not been approved within this
five-year time period, then the City of Scranton may consider the SWM
site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM site
plans that are considered disapproved by the City of Scranton shall be
resubmitted in accordance with § 405-32 of this Part 3. The five-year
time period may be renewed for a single five-year term upon request of
the applicant if there have been no adopted or pending revisions to the
SWM Ordinance.
D. An SWM site plan may be adjusted, revised and resubmitted in
accordance with above.
E. Failure of the City of Scranton or Ordinance Administrator to render a
decision and communicate it to the applicant within 90 days (except
when a plan is being reviewed concurrently with another development
approval), in which case the time limit for the concurrent development
permit shall apply, shall be deemed an approval of the plan.
§ 405-30 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-33
394:715
and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the City
of Scranton shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 405-32 of this Part 3.
§ 405-34. As-built plans, completion certificate and final inspection.
A. The developer shall be responsible for completing an as-built plan(s) of
all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built
plans and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction
plans shall be submitted to the City of Scranton.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the
construction plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the
completion certificate.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the City of Scranton, the
City of Scranton may conduct a final inspection.
§ 405-33 SCRANTON CODE § 405-34
394:716
ARTICLE VII
Operation and Maintenance
§ 405-35. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 405-36. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The City of Scranton shall make the final determination on the
continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the
SWM site plan. The City of Scranton may require a dedication of such
facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan.
Such a requirement is not an indication that the City of Scranton will
accept the facilities. The City of Scranton reserves the right to accept
the ownership and operating responsibility for any or the entire
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
C. The operation and maintenance plan shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
A. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the SWM
BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and maintenance
agreement, the City of Scranton may perform the services required and
charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a
lien against the property.
B. Each stormwater management plan shall contain provisions which
clearly set forth the ownership and maintenance responsibility of all
permanent stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities, including:
(1) Description of maintenance requirements.
(2) Establishment of suitable easements for access to all facilities by
public officials, in accordance with this article.
(3) Municipalities are exempt from the requirement to sign and record
an operation and maintenance agreement.
(4) Identification of the responsible party or entity for ownership and
maintenance of both temporary and permanent stormwater
management and erosion and sediment pollution control facilities.
In meeting this requirement, the following options are hereby
provided for upon approval by the City of Scranton:
(a) Facilities may be incorporated within individual lots so that the
respective lot owners will own and be responsible for
maintenance in accordance with recorded deed restrictions. A
§ 405-35 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-36
394:717
description of the facility or system and the terms of the
required maintenance shall be incorporated as part of the deed
to the property.
(b) Ownership and maintenance may be the responsibility of a
property owners' association. The stated responsibilities of the
property owners' association in terms of owning and
maintaining the stormwater management facilities shall be
submitted with final plans for determination of their adequacy
and, upon their approval, shall be recorded with the approved
subdivision plan among the deed records of Lackawanna
County, Pennsylvania. In addition, the approved subdivision
plan and any deed written from said plan for a lot or lots shown
herein shall contain a condition that it shall be mandatory for
the owner or owners of said lot to be members of said property
owners' association.
(c) For stormwater management facilities that are proposed as
part of the site development plan, the applicant will be
required to execute a developer agreement and a maintenance
agreement with the City of Scranton for the construction and
continued maintenance of the facilities prior to the signature
approval on the final plan. Access for inspection by the City of
Scranton of all such facilities deemed critical to the public
welfare at any reasonable time shall be provided.
(d) In the event the City of Scranton accepts dedication of the
facilities constructed in accordance with this Part 3, as a
condition of City of Scranton acceptance of said facilities, the
applicant shall provide 15% of the cost of improvements, in the
form of a maintenance bond, as estimated by the applicant's
qualified professional, and approved by the City of Scranton, to
cover contingency maintenance costs for 18 months from the
date of stormwater management facilities acceptance of
dedication. The 15% bond shall be based on the construction
costs of the detention basin and outlet structure within the
area dedicated to the City of Scranton. Also, the City of
Scranton may require the developer to make a lump-sum
payment to defer future maintenance costs. Said payment
amount shall be negotiated and deposited in a special City
account for maintenance costs of the dedicated facility only.
§ 405-36 SCRANTON CODE § 405-36
394:718
ARTICLE VIII
Fees and Expenses
§ 405-37. Review fee.
A. The City of Scranton may include all costs incurred in the review fee
charged to an applicant.
B. The review fee may include but not be limited to costs for the following:
(1) Administrative/clerical processing.
(2) Review of the SWM site plan.
(3) Attendance at meetings.
(4) Inspections.
C. The review fee shall be set by resolution of the Council of the City of
Scranton and may be amended by resolution of the Council of the City
of Scranton.
§ 405-37 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-37
394:719

ARTICLE IX
Prohibitions
§ 405-38. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the waters of this commonwealth
is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the City of Scranton or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 405-38C significantly contribute to pollution
§ 405-38 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-38
394:721
§ 405-39. Roof drains.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs to the maximum extent practicable and in no case shall discharge into
any sanitary or combined sanitary/storm sewer system.
§ 405-40. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures without the prior written approval of the City
of Scranton.
of the waters of this commonwealth, the City of Scranton or DEP will
notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 405-38 SCRANTON CODE § 405-40
394:722
ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 405-41. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the City of Scranton may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the City of Scranton to inspect
the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any
aspect regulated by this Part 3.
§ 405-42. Inspection.
SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the City of Scranton for dedicated and owned facilities),
according to the following list of minimum frequencies:
§ 405-43. Enforcement.
§ 405-44. Suspension and revocation.
A. Quarterly for the first three years;
B. Biannually thereafter;
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a significant (>2 inches of
rainfall in a twenty-four-hour period) storm event.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 405-24.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 405-40 of this Part 3 or to alter or
remove any control structure required by the SWM site plan.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the City of Scranton. (This does not relieve the
landowner of his/her obligation to inspect and maintain his/her
facilities.)
D. If the City of Scranton determines at any time that any permanent
stormwater management facility has been eliminated, altered, or
improperly maintained, the City of Scranton shall advise the
responsible party of required corrective measures and shall provide
said responsible party with a specific time to implement the required
corrective measures. If such action is not taken by the property owner,
the City of Scranton may cause the work to be done and back-charge all
costs to the property owners in accordance with this Part 3.
A. Any approval or permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the City
of Scranton for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance agreement.
§ 405-41 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-44
394:723
§ 405-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with this Part 3 within the period stated in
the notice of the designated municipal representative shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a
penalty of not more than $300. Each and every day of continued violation
and of each specific violation shall constitute a separate violation.
(2) A violation of any provision of this Part 3 or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the City of Scranton when:
(1) The City of Scranton has inspected and approved the corrections to
the violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The City of Scranton is satisfied that the violation has been
corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the City of Scranton cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this Part 3.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the City of Scranton shall provide a
reasonable time frame for the owner to correct the violation. In these
cases, the City of Scranton will provide the owner, or the owner's
designee, with a written notice of the violation and the time period
allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not
correct the violation within the allowed time period, the City of
Scranton may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and
permits pertaining to any provision of this Part 3.
A. In the event that the owner, developer, occupant, applicant, property
manager or other person responsible fails to comply with the terms of
this Part 3 within the time specified by the municipal representative,
the City of Scranton may take any actions necessary to remove the
public nuisance. The costs of removal of the violation shall be in
addition to any penalties for violations for failure to comply.
B. In addition to the fines for violations, costs, and penalties provided for
by this article, the City of Scranton may institute proceedings in courts
of equity to require owners and/or occupants of real estate to comply
with the provision of this Part 3.
C. The cost of removal, fine, and penalties hereinabove mentioned may be
entered by the City of Scranton as a lien against such property, or
§ 405-44 SCRANTON CODE § 405-45
394:724
§ 405-46. Appeals.
properties of individual members of a property owners' association, in
accordance with existing provisions of law.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the City of Scranton, or its
designee, relevant to the provisions of this Part 3 may appeal to the City
Planning Commission within 30 days of that action.
B. The City Planning Commission may grant an appeal to modify the
requirements of one or more provisions if the application of this Part 3
will exact undue hardship due to peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, providing such modification will not be contrary to the
public interest and that the purpose and intent of this Part 3 is
observed.
(1) All requests to the City Planning Commission shall be in writing.
The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision(s) of this Part 3, and the minimum modification
necessary.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City of Scranton relevant
to the provisions of this Part 3 may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the City of Scranton's decision.
§ 405-45 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-46
394:725

ARTICLE XI
References
§ 405-47. References.
1. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). No.
363-0300-002 (2006), as amended and updated. Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
2. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). No.
363-2134-008 (2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
3. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), National Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook, Part
630, Hydrology, 1969-2001. Originally published as the National
Engineering Handbook, Section 4, Hydrology. Available online at:
http://www.wcc.nrcs.usda.gov/hydro/hydro-techref-neh-630.html.
4. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS). 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
5. United States Department of Commerce (USDC), National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service (NWS),
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Silver Spring,
Maryland, 20910. Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
6. United States Department of Department of Transportation (US DOT),
Federal Highway Administration (FHA). 2001. Hydraulic Engineering
Circular Number 22 (HEC-22), Urban Drainage Design Manual.
7. PennDOT Drainage Manual, Publication Number 13, DM-2, Chapter 10,
as amended.
8. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Storm Water Management Act No.
167.
§ 405-47 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 405-47
394:727
Chapter 412
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising and bill posting — See Ch. 140.
Bicycles — See Ch. 175.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 193.
Littering — See Ch. 305.
Loitering — See Ch. 309.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 336
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 340.
Poles and wires — See Ch. 349.
Sewers — See Ch. 383.
Skateboarding and rollerblading — See Ch.
394.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
423.
Abandoned or junk vehicles — See Ch. 438.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 439.
Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 441.
§ 405-47 SCRANTON CODE § 405-47
394:728
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 412-1. Picket and barbed fences abutting streets prohibited.
No person shall erect or build on property abutting on any street, avenue,
court or place a fence made of iron, wood or any other material that shall
have sharp, pointed pickets or which has barbed wire.
§ 412-2. Playing baseball and football in streets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to play baseball or football in any of the
streets or highways of the city.
§ 412-3. Placing merchandise, boxes, etc., on streets and sidewalks
prohibited.
Placing or leaving any article of traffic or merchandise or any wares or any
case or box containing the same or any packing boxes or barrel on streets,
sidewalks or highways is prohibited.
§ 412-4. Coin-operated dispensing machines on sidewalks or
highways; penalty. [Added by Ord. No. 27-1984]
§ 412-5. Encroachments requiring permits.
The doing, committing or permitting of any of the following acts or things
without having first obtained a permit therefor from the Director of the
Department of Public Works, for which permit a fee of fifty cents ($0.50)
shall be charged are hereby prohibited:
A. The placement of any type of coin-operated dispensing machines other
than newspaper dispensing machines upon any public sidewalk or
highway within the central business district shall be prohibited.
B. Any person or persons violating this provision shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to a fine or penalty of not more than three hundred
dollars ($300.).
A. Opening or continuing any cellarway or vault beyond the inside limit of
the sidewalk line in or upon any street or highway.
B. Laying any sidewalk, pave or gutter stone or changing any gutter or
watercourse within the city.
C. Placing or hanging banners over or across any of the sidewalks, streets
or highways.
D. Placing or continuing posts, fence rails or other obstructions in the
streets, highways, alleys or public places.
§ 412-1 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-6
394:729
§ 412-6. Encroachment by buildings prohibited.
Erecting any building or part thereof or the continuance of any building
upon any street, highway or public place or the erection of any structure,
which obscures the prospect between any inside of the sidewalk line,
lawfully established, and the public street is prohibited.
§ 412-6 SCRANTON CODE § 412-6
394:730
ARTICLE II
Street Dedications
§ 412-7. Acceptance requirements; filing certified map.
No street, avenue, court, alley or other highway shall be accepted by
the city, nor shall any work thereon be done by the city for the opening,
grading or otherwise improving of the same, nor shall any crosswalks be
constructed thereon, nor street lights installed, until the owner or owners
of the plot or addition in which such highways are included shall have filed
with the Director of the Department of Public Works a certified map or plan
showing all of such highways dedicated to the city and the lots abutting
thereon, nor shall the same be accepted until such highways have been
graded from fence line to fence line at a grade to be fixed by the Bureau
of Engineering, and sewers laid therein, subject to the approval of the City
Engineer.
§ 412-8. Street widths and intersections.
No street or avenue shall hereafter be accepted by the city unless it shall be
of a width of not fewer than fifty (50) feet from fence line to fence line and
shall extend through from street to street. Nor shall any street or avenue
be accepted the plan for which does not include also the dedication of cross
or intersecting streets or avenues at places or intervals of at least every
six hundred (600) feet. Nor shall any court or alley be accepted by the city
unless it shall be of a width of sixteen (16) feet from fence line to fence line.
§ 412-9. Sidewalk width and grade.
No street or avenue shall hereafter be accepted by the city until there shall
have been laid on both sides thereof five (5) foot flagstone or concrete
sidewalks at a grade fixed by the Bureau of Engineering.
§ 412-10. Exceptions; waiver.
Upon the advice of both the City Planning Commission and the City
Engineer that any of the provisions of this Article is working or will work
a hardship upon those desiring to dedicate new streets or courts to the
city, Council may waive any or all of the provisions of such sections and
accept streets and courts dedicated to the city upon the recommendation of
both the City Planning Commission and the City Engineer, even though such
streets and courts do not comply with all of the provisions of this Article.
The waived provisions shall be noted in the ordinance accepting the streets
or courts.
§ 412-7 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-10
394:731

ARTICLE III
Excavations
§ 412-11. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the plural number include the singular
number; words in the singular shall include the plural; and words in the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
B. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
BUSINESS DAY — Any normal work day for the City government,
including Monday through Friday, except designated holidays.
CITY — City of Scranton.
CITY CORPORATE AUTHORITY — Any governmental corporation
initiated by Council under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945.90
CONCRETE — Soil cement, plain cement concrete or reinforced cement
concrete and material contained in the base course of some City
streets.
COST — Actual expenditures incurred by the City for labor, equipment
and materials, which include all fringe benefits and overhead.
DEPARTMENT — The Bureau of Engineering.
DISTURBANCE — Any change in the road surface that alters the
preexisting conditions.[Added 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
EMERGENCY — Any condition constituting a clear and present danger
to life or property by reason of escaping gas, exposed wires or other
breaks or defects in the user's line.
EXCAVATABLE FLOWABLE FILL — Also referred to as "controlled
density fill." A low-strength flowable mixture of cement, pozzolan (fly
ash), sand and water used as a backfill material, placed by pouring it
into the excavation or opening, requiring no subsequent vibration or
tamping to achieve consolidation.
EXCAVATION — Any activity within the right-of-way of any street, alley
or cartway which involves cutting, breaking or disturbing of the surface
thereof, with the exception of reconstruction of said street, alley or
cartway. "Reconstruction" shall be defined as the complete removal of
the existing pavement structure and the construction of new subbase,
base course and wearing course of a City street whereby reconstruction
has been determined to be appropriate as part of a street improvement
program initiated by the City. In this article, the term "opening" shall
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 412-11 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-11
394:733
§ 412-12. Street opening permit required; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any
kind in any of the streets in the City of Scranton unless a permit has been
secured for said purpose and in the manner hereinafter described, except
in instances which require the placement of utility poles.
have essentially the same meaning as excavation.[Amended
7-12-1995 by Ord. No. 111-1995]
PENNDOT — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
PENNDOT STREET — Any Pennsylvania state road located within the
municipal boundaries of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
PERMIT FEE — A fee paid by the permittee to the City to cover the
costs of issuing, processing and filing the street opening permit and all
reasonable costs associated with the inspection of an excavation and
restoration of street opening.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has
agreed to fulfill all the provisions of this article.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, public utility company, or municipal authority.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any utility company, excluding corporate
authorities of the City, franchised by the Public Utility Commission of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
RESURFACE — A process which provides a new wearing surface in
a certain paved street area between curbs with the same material
which was existing prior to excavation, unless the City Engineer deems
another material to be appropriate.
SIDEWALK AREA — That portion of the street right-of-way reserved for
sidewalks or that area defined on the City Plan.
SQUARE YARD — Surface space that measures out to the equivalent of
a square one yard (three feet) wide by one yard (three feet) long. There
are nine square feet to a square yard.[Added 6-4-2015 by Ord. No.
102-2015]
STREET — The entire right-of-way established for the use of vehicles,
including, but not limited to any public street, avenue, road, square,
alley, highway, or easement within the City limits, excluding the
designated curb and sidewalk area.
A. Any person who desires to obtain a permit to open or to make any
excavation of any kind in any of the streets in the City of Scranton shall
be a licensed contractor by the City of Scranton. [Amended 7-12-1995
by Ord. No. 111-1995]
B. Upon completion of a street paving/resurfacing project by any entity,
the City of Scranton will not allow the street to be excavated for any
§ 412-11 SCRANTON CODE § 412-12
394:734
§ 412-13. Application for permit; insurance; fee.
Street opening permits shall only be granted upon compliance with the
following express provisions:
reason for five years, except for emergency situations. (This includes
any and all activities defined as upgrades, improvements and/or
maintenance to utility systems.) Permits will not be issued to any entity
that is desirous in conducting excavations on a street within a five-year
period following a paving/resurfacing of City streets. [Added 6-4-2015
by Ord. No. 102-2015]
C. Any person working in the vicinity of any City street who in any manner
disturbs such street or who in any manner causes damage to a street
shall be required by this article to obtain a permit and correct this
damage in accordance with the directives of the Department. Street
opening permits are not required for persons excavating adjacent to the
curb for the express purpose of installing or replacing sidewalks and/or
curbs, provided a curb and sidewalk permit has been obtained prior to
such work through the Department of Licensing, Inspections and
Permitting. [Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
D. All City departments and City corporate authorities shall not be
required to obtain a permit when work is to be completed by City
personnel. [Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
E. All contractors or subcontractors performing work under contract for
the City, City corporate authority, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
the federal government shall obtain a permit for street excavation
work. [Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
F. Any person who shall desire to make an opening or excavation in any
PennDOT street within the City limits shall obtain a permit from the
City in addition to obtaining a permit from PennDOT. The PennDOT
permit may be obtained from the offices of Maintenance District 4-0,
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, O'Neill Highway,
Dunmore, Pennsylvania, 18512. In the case of any leak, explosion or
other accident in any subsurface pipe, line, construction or apparatus,
it shall be lawful for the person owning or responsible for such pipe,
line, construction or apparatus to commence an excavation to remedy
such condition before securing a permit, provided that application for a
permit shall be made immediately and not later than the next business
day thereafter and that all other provisions of this article are fully
complied with. [Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
A. Permits shall be issued only to a person or their authorized agent
furnishing public utility services or the owner or owners of the real
property adjoining the location where such opening or excavation is to
be made.
§ 412-12 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-13
394:735
B. Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any
of the streets in the City shall make application to the City Engineer, in
writing, for that purpose. Such application shall be made upon blanks to
be furnished by the City and shall set forth the name of the applicant,
the exact location of the proposed opening or excavation and the
approximate size or depth thereof, the full scope of work to be included
in the project, the date or dates during which such excavation is to be
permitted and the date such excavation is to be refilled and resurfaced
in the manner hereinafter provided. An applicant shall furnish a
drawing of the proposed opening site upon request by the City
Engineer.
C. The application shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant
that the work shall be done in full compliance with the ordinances of the
City and the laws of the commonwealth in relation thereto and that the
applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the City
from and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands,
payments, costs and charges for or by reason of the proposed opening
or excavation and all damages to persons or property resulting in any
manner therefrom or occurring in the prosecution of the work
connected therewith or from any other matter, cause or thing relating
thereto. In the event that the suit shall be brought against the City
either independently or jointly with the permittee, and in the event of a
final judgment being obtained against the City either independently or
jointly with the permittee, the permittee shall pay such judgment with
all costs and hold the City harmless therefrom.
D. In any instance where the street opening permit is required for water
supply and/or sewer service purposes, the application shall be
countersigned by the City Plumbing Inspector or any person authorized
by the City Plumbing Inspector before any permit shall be granted.
E. An applicant shall provide all necessary certificates of insurance to the
Department, which have been properly executed by the applicant's
insurance agency, and verify that the applicant is insured against claims
for personal injury as well as against claims for property damages
which may arise from or out of the performance of the excavation work,
whether such performance be by the applicant or anyone directly or
indirectly employed by him. The City shall be named as an additional
insured by any applicant, including but not limited to utilities operating
water, gas, electric or telephone facilities within the City. Such
insurance shall include protection against liability arising from
completed operations, underground utility damage and collapse of any
property. Liability insurance for bodily injury shall be in an amount not
less than $1,000,000 for each person and $1,000,000 for each accident
and for property damages an amount not less than $1,000,000. If an
insurance certificate is not provided as required, a permit shall not be
issued. Evidence of insurance for public liability and property damage
shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried on by the City or
its employees or utilities operating water, gas, electric or telephone
§ 412-13 SCRANTON CODE § 412-13
394:736
facilities within the City. Liability insurance requirements for any
blasting may be obtained from the Department. All blasting permits
shall be obtained from the Department.
F. Any applicant issued a permit shall remit the street opening permit fee
in the amount fixed by this article in Subsection H and any and all other
fees associated with the street opening by the 10th of the month
following the month in which the permit was issued.
G. No permit shall be issued to any applicant unless the applicant has paid
to the City any and all moneys, then due to the City, for prior
excavations made or for any loss, damages or expense in any manner
occasioned by or arising from the work done by the applicant under the
provisions of this article.
H. Street opening permit fee. Any person who desires to do any street
opening or excavation of a street shall pay the sum of $125 plus
inspection fees. Any street opening or excavation shall be computed to
the nearest whole square yard of excavation for purposes of computing
the inspection fee. See Table 1 for the inspection fee schedule.
[Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
I. The work authorized by the permit is subject to all provisions of the Act
of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, § 1 et seq.,91 as amended or
supplemented from time to time. It shall be the permittee's
responsibility to contact the utilities that have recorded their facilities
in compliance with said Act. A partial list of utilities providing services
in the City and their office addresses may be obtained from the County
Recorder of Deeds. [Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
J. Inspections documentation. The City of Scranton shall create and
maintain appropriate documentation as a work order inspection
tracking ticket. This document shall be issued to the City Inspector
when a permit is issued by the City of Scranton and shall be maintained
for compliance by the Department of Public Works and the City
Inspectors as assigned to perform the required activity. This document
shall be in effect until the work is completed and accepted by the agent/
inspector of the City of Scranton. [Added 6-4-2015 by Ord. No.
102-2015]
K. Copies of permits and work order inspection tracking tickets shall be
issued and maintained by the Department of Public Works. Each permit
and work order inspection tracking ticket shall be maintained for no
less than seven years. Each permit issued shall be maintained together
with its work order inspection tracking ticket following the completion
of work and inspection. [Added 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
91.Editor's Note: This Act was repealed December 12, 1986, by P.L. 1574, No. 172. See now
73 P.S. § 182.2 et seq.
§ 412-13 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-14
394:737
§ 412-14. Completion requirements; street improvements;
exception. [Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
The Department of Public Works shall give timely notice to all persons
owning property abutting on any street within the City about to be paved
or improved and to all public utility companies operating in the City, and
all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or sewer
connections, as well as any repairs thereto, which would necessitate
excavation of said street within 30 days from the giving of such notice,
unless such time is extended, in writing, for cause shown by the Department
of Public Works. New paving shall not be opened or excavated for a period
of five years after the completion thereof, except in the case of an
emergency, the existence of which emergency and the necessity for the
opening or excavation of such paving to be determined by the Department
of Public Works. Any person who desires to excavate a street for a utility
within five years after completion of the paving shall make written
application to the Department of Public Works, and a permit for such
opening shall be issued only after express approval of the Department of
Public Works and City's Business Administrator.
§ 412-15. Manner of completion. [Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No.
102-2015]
A. Any person who shall open or excavate any street in the City shall
thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation in such a
manner as to prevent any settling thereafter and shall restore the
surface to the same condition as it was before the opening or
excavation, and such restoration shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which are hereby adopted as
specifications of the City for restoration of surfaces of streets in the
City; as restored, the surface shall conform to the proper grade and be
of the same surface covering as the part of the thoroughfare
immediately adjoining the opening. Any street or court that has
received bituminous resurfacing (paving) within a five-year period shall
be milled to a depth of 1.5 inches and resurfaced with appropriate
material with (scratch leveling course) and (wearing course 1 1/2
inches) depth curb to curb and 10 feet beyond the farthest point of the
pave cut edge in any direction by any person who shall open or excavate
any street or court for any purposes; this includes emergency-related
work. All restoration work shall be completed within and no later than
30 days from the day recorded for the excavation.
B. Trenching excavations in lengths equal to the road surface and in
parallel or otherwise to the road surface shall have the same restoration
requirements as for pave cuts above for the manner of completion.
C. If any street or court with a surface area older than five years has more
than 10% of disturbance in the surface area of any one City block limits
following any excavation, the road surface shall have the same
restoration requirements as for pave cuts above for the manner of
§ 412-14 SCRANTON CODE § 412-15
394:738
§ 412-16. Requirements for work; correction of unsatisfactory work;
completion of incomplete work.
completion. If two pave cuts are made less than 100 feet apart, the
entire area between the two pave cuts and including the two pave cuts
shall be milled and resurfaced as described above for a width of 1/2
the street/court width (i.e., nearest curb to center line). If the repair
excavation crosses the center line of the street/court, then the mill and
resurfacing shall be for the full width of the street/court (curb to curb)
for the entire length of the work area.
D. If, within five years after the restoration of the surface as herein
provided, defects shall appear, the applicant shall reimburse the City
for the cost of all necessary repairs to the permanent paving or, as
directed by the City of Scranton, may be required to reconstruct the
road surface of the pave cut area to meet compliance.
E. Pavement markings. Any person who shall open or excavate any street/
court in the City shall thoroughly and completely replace all pavement
markings to their preexisting condition within five days following the
resurfacing of the street/court.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the street a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line of
the street before being refilled and the surface of the street restored to
a condition safe and convenient for travel.
B. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
the water mains, sewers or their connections with the houses or any
other subsurface lines or constructions until permission of the proper
authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or constructions
shall have been obtained.
D. Disturbed portions of the street, including but not limited to slopes and
appurtenances and structures, such as guiderails, curbs, signs,
markings, drainpipes, driveways and vegetation, shall be restored by
the permittee to a condition at least equal to that which existed before
the state of work.
E. If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous concrete surface,
the permittee shall, in addition to the requirements contained herein,
overlay the pavement in accordance with the following conditions:
[Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
(1) When a longitudinal opening longer than 100 linear feet has been
made in the pavement, the permittee shall overlay the lane or lanes
in which the opening was made, for the entire length of roadway
that was opened, curb to curb, in a manner authorized by the
Department of Public Works.
§ 412-15 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-16
394:739
(2) When three or more transverse openings have been made in the
same lane within 100 linear feet of pavement and when the
openings occupy more than 25% of the road surface between the
openings, the permittee shall overlay the lane or lanes in which the
openings were made, for the entire length of roadway between the
first and last opening, curb to curb.
(3) If disturbed lanes adjacent to undisturbed lanes are overlaid, the
edge of the disturbed lane shall be saw-cut and milled to a depth of
2.25 inches or to the depth of the existing surface course,
whichever is less, for the length of the opening, to ensure a smooth
joint, with proper elevation and cross section. A full-width overlay
will be required if the undisturbed lane is severely deteriorated as
determined by the Department of Public Works.
(4) If disturbed lanes adjacent to curbs are overlaid, the gutter areas
must be milled at least three feet wide to maintain proper curb
reveal for the length of roadway that is overlaid.
F. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Department of Public Works and permission therefor endorsed upon the
permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the
presence of the Department of Public Works, or an inspector designated
by it, and shall be done only in a method approved by him. [Amended
6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
G. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled immediately with
excavatable flowable fill or select granular material (2RC). The
materials, mix design and construction shall conform to the
specifications below. [Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
(1) Excavatable flowable fill shall be in accordance with Section 220,
Flowable Backfill, of PennDOT's Publication 408, most current
edition.
(2) Select granular material (2RC) shall be in accordance with Section
703.3, Select Granular Material (2RC), of PennDOT's Publication
408, most current edition. If 2RC backfill is used, the pavement
restoration will include eight inches of bituminous base course. The
bituminous base course shall be in accordance with Section 309 or
311 of PennDOT's Publication 408, most current edition.
H. No temporary paving or cold-patch premix used as a temporary filling
in a street opening or an excavation shall be permitted (unless dictated
by weather and availability). Permanent paving shall be installed
immediately after the excavatable flowable fill has set or the select
granular material (2RC) has been properly placed.
I. On concrete base streets, such base shall be replaced with concrete,
and the minimum size of the opening or excavation shall be 16 square
feet. During the making of any excavation in the street, every necessary
and reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the
§ 412-16 SCRANTON CODE § 412-16
394:740
§ 412-17. Payment for work done by City.
Payment for all work done by the City of Scranton under the provisions
hereof shall be made by the person made liable therefor under the
provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person
by the City of Scranton. Upon failure to pay such charges within such
time, the same shall be collectible by the City of Scranton by an action in
assumpsit or in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal
claims.
§ 412-18. Compliance required.
If any person shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions
of this article or any rules or regulations or any reasonable orders or
directions of a City representative in reference thereto, the City may refuse
to issue further permits to such person until such conditions or orders are
complied with.
parties making the same to keep the street in a safe and passable
condition both day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other
devices, and all excavating permits granted hereunder are granted
under and subject to the express condition that the person to whom the
same is issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the City from
any loss in damages, or otherwise whatsoever, which may or shall be
occasioned at any time by said excavation or by any leak, explosion,
or other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit or any other matter
placed in said excavation. Said excavation shall be done in conformity
with Ordinance No. 20-1992, whereby the City requires that all utility
and construction/maintenance work done on streets, roads, and alleys
in the City of Scranton and all utility, construction, or maintenance
work done within state highway rights-of-way be done in accordance
with Temporary Traffic Control Guidelines, PennDOT Publication 203,
and any and all amendments and supplements thereto.
J. The applicant shall notify the Pave Cut Inspector when the opening or
excavation is ready for backfilling before any backfilling is done, when
backfilling work is completed and when the street has been
permanently restored so that inspections may be made.
K. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Department of Public Works, be unsatisfactory, and
the same shall not be corrected in accordance with its instructions
within the time fixed by it, or in the event that the work for which the
permit was granted is not completed within the time fixed by the
Department of Public Works, the City may proceed to correct such
unsatisfactory work or complete any such work not completed and
charge the cost thereof, plus 20%, to such owner or person.
§ 412-16 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-19
394:741
§ 412-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of no more
than $1,000 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 412-20. Applicability. [Amended 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 102-2015]
§ 412-20.1. Table 1: Inspection Fees. [Added 6-4-2015 by Ord. No.
102-2015]
Table 1
Inspection Fees
Inspection rate of fee in dollars per square yard of streets constructed,
reconstructed or resurfaced. Inspection rates are applied to all permits
issued, including all emergency situations or approved exceptions.
Total Square Yards to Be
Excavated
Inspection Fee
1 $50
2 $75
3 $100
4 $125
5 $150
6 $160
7 $170
8 $180
9 $190
10-11 $198
12-13 $216
14-15 $234
16-17 $252
18-19 $270
20-21 $288
22-23 $306
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or
curbs.
B. The City of Scranton reserves the right to deny the issuance of future
street opening permits to any person or entity who violates the
provisions of this article.
§ 412-19 SCRANTON CODE § 412-20.1
394:742
Table 1
Inspection Fees
Inspection rate of fee in dollars per square yard of streets constructed,
reconstructed or resurfaced. Inspection rates are applied to all permits
issued, including all emergency situations or approved exceptions.
Total Square Yards to Be
Excavated
Inspection Fee
24-25 $324
26-27 $342
28-29 $360
30-34 $396
35-39 $438
40-44 $477
45-49 $516
50-54 $552
55-59 $588
60-69 $624
70-79 $855
80-89 $765
90-99 $822
100 $846
101 $858
Greater than 101 $846 + $12 per square yard over
100
NOTES:
The number of square yards of excavation shall be computed to the nearest
whole square yard. The minimum fee shall be equal to the fee for one
square yard.
§ 412-20.1 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-20.1
394:743

ARTICLE IV
Street paving
§ 412-21. Materials.
When any public streets are to be paved, the materials used in such
pavement shall be those recommended by the Director of the Department
of Public Works and the City Engineer.
§ 412-22. Plans and specifications.
All plans and specifications for the paving of any streets shall be prepared
by the Director of the Department of Public Works and the City Engineer.
§ 412-23. Furnishing asphalt to City contractors.
The Director of the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to
furnish asphalt to persons having contracts with the City to pave any of its
streets.
§ 412-24. Price of asphalt.
The asphalt to be furnished to persons under § 412-23 shall be at a price
equal to the cost of the same to the City, plus 10% to be added thereto to
cover the cost of handling and preparing the asphalt.
§ 412-25. Payment for asphalt.
Payment by contractors for asphalt under § 412-24 is to be made when and
as estimates are given to contractors by the City.
§ 412-26. Cost of paving intersections.
The cost of paving the intersections of streets, avenues and courts shall be
assumed by the City and shall be paid out of the general City treasury.
§ 412-27. Temporary pave of dirt roads; petition.
Dirt roads in the City shall be temporarily paved in a manner decided upon
by the Director of the Department of Public Works, either upon the petition
of a majority of property owners in interest and number abutting the line
of the proposed improvement or, if the City deems it best in the interest
of the City, the Department shall have the power to pave any dirt road
notwithstanding the majority of the property owners in interest and number
shall not have signed a petition. The petition must be verified by affidavit
of one or more parties to it. A majority in interest of owners of undivided
interests in any piece of property is to be deemed and treated as one person
for the purposes of the petition.
§ 412-21 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-28
394:745
§ 412-28. Advertisement for materials and equipment.
The proper officers of the city are hereby authorized and directed to
advertise for the furnishing of the necessary materials and equipment
required for the completion of any of the projects authorized by this Article.
§ 412-29. Costs of temporary paving; assessment.
The entire cost of any temporary pave shall be borne by the abutting
property owners. Property owners shall be given notice of the time and
place of making the assessment against them and such assessment shall be
certified by the Department of Public Works to the proper authorities for
collection. Such assessment shall be allowed as a credit or setoff against
any cost assessed for any subsequent permanent pave.
§ 412-30. Filing for collection of assessments.
Immediately after the completion of the work under this Article, the City
Engineer shall file, in the office for the collection of such accounts, a
certificate of completion and a final or correct schedule of assessments.
§ 412-31. Payment of assessments.
The abutting property owners may pay the assessments in installments or
the full assessment may be paid at any time during the period of performing
the work under this Article. However, the entire assessment shall be paid
on or before the date of completing the work.
§ 412-32. Special fund for temporary paves.
All moneys collected from the abutting property owners as herein provided
are hereby appropriated to a fund to be called "Special Fund for Temporary
Paves".
§ 412-33. Fund money segregated to specific roads.
All moneys collected and appropriated to the special fund for temporary
paves shall be segregated to be used for the paving of the specific road for
which it was collected.
§ 412-28 SCRANTON CODE § 412-33
394:746
ARTICLE V
Railroad Crossing Paving
§ 412-34. Paving between railroad rails with wooden blocks.
Wherever any railroad track shall cross at-grade any paved street or
highway within the city, the person maintaining such track shall pave the
space between the rails and for a distance of one (1) foot outside of the
rails, with creosoted wooden blocks laid upon a plank base and covered with
Tarvia. Such work shall be done under the supervision and direction of the
Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 412-35. Exceptions for existing railroad crossings.
Existing crossings which, in the opinion of the Director of the Department
of Public Works, are in good repair need not conform to the terms of this
Article until such time as, in the opinion of the Director, they shall require
repairs or replacement and notice to that effect has been given to the party
maintaining such track and a period of thirty (30) days after the giving of
such notice has elapsed.
§ 412-34 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-35
394:747

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)92
§ 412-36. (Reserved)
§ 412-37. (Reserved)
§ 412-38. (Reserved)
§ 412-39. (Reserved)
92.Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Sidewalks, was repealed 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 123-2003.
This ordinance also provided that the regulation of sidewalks is to be covered exclusively
by the BOCA Property Maintenance Code. See Ch. 360, Property Maintenance.
§ 412-36 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-39
394:749

ARTICLE VII
Conformity of Construction in Downtown Area
[Added by Ord. No. 53-1986]
§ 412-40. Terms defined.
"Downtown" shall be described as that area bounded by and including
Lackawanna Avenue, Mifflin Avenue, Mulberry Street and Jefferson Avenue.
§ 412-41. Responsibility of abutting property owner.
The owner of property fronting or abutting on any designated public street,
lane or alley in the city shall be required to construct sidewalks and keep
the same in good repair and condition and shall construct, replace and
repair the same in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
§ 412-42. Installation required upon issuance of building permit.
Upon the issuance of a building permit for a new building, the owner
through his contractor, is obligated to install sidewalks, if required, as a part
of the building contract. Such installation shall be in accordance with the
regulations of this Article.
§ 412-43. Permit required; specifications; fee.
A. Permit required. All sidewalks constructed or repaired in the downtown
area of the city shall require a permit from the Building Inspector's
office.
B. Lines and grades. All sidewalks shall be constructed or repaired to lines
and grades as established and on file, or to be placed on file in the City
Engineer's office and where feasible they are hereby fixed at a uniform
width of four (4) feet on the respective streets from the line of the street
towards the curb, gutter or cartway on each side. All sidewalks must
provide cuts for the handicapped from the street to the sidewalk in
accordance with resolutions hereinafter passed, except that the fourfoot
width may be increased by waiver, dependent upon existing
conditions and location, but in no case shall such width be less than four
(4) feet. Such waiver shall be in accordance with directions set forth by
the Director of Public Works or City Engineer upon written application
by the owner, to the Department of Planning and Development who will
so instruct the Director of Public Works or City Engineer.
C. Construction regulations. Except by special waiver, sidewalks in the
downtown area of the city may be constructed only of stone flagging,
brick, tile or concrete and must be constructed under the following
regulations:
(1) Stone flagging on walks six (6) feet wide or over must consist of
stone not less than four (4) feet long by three (3) feet wide and two
(2) inches thick; four-foot walks must consist of stone not fewer
§ 412-40 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-43
394:751
than three (3) feet long by two (2) feet wide by two (2) inches
thick. Such stones must be laid evenly on a base of crushed stones,
porous cinders or sand not less than four (4) inches in depth with
joints not more than one-half (1/2) inch in width.
(2) Concrete.
(a) Concrete shall be at least four (4) inches thick, except where
driveways cross sidewalks, thickness shall be six (6) inches;
the sidewalk shall be constructed of and meet the following
criteria:
[1] At least six and twenty-five hundredths (6.25) minimum to
eight and zero-tenths (8.0) bags of cement/cubic yard.
[2] A water/cement ratio of five-tenths (0.5) pound/pound.
[3] A slump range of one (1) to three (3) inches.
[4] A proportional coarse aggregate solid volume of nine and
ninety-three hundredths (9.93) to thirteen and tenhundredths
(13.10) cubic feet per cubic yard.
(b) The concrete shall be air entrained and capable of testing to
three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch
compression after twenty-eight (28) days, curing may be by
natural means or chemically sprayed. All sidewalks shall be
sprayed with an anti-spalling protective treatment after the
twenty-eight-day period is fulfilled. Concrete shall be placed on
a base of crushed stone (4) inches in depth, with one (1) layer
of 6-10/10 welded wire mesh reinforcing placed half way
between the top and bottom of the sidewalk slab. Finish shall
be steel troweled, with a light broomed or float finish.
(3) Asphalt or asphalt mixture shall not be used for new construction of
sidewalks or driveways crossing sidewalks. Asphalt or asphalt
mixtures may be used to repair an existing asphalt sidewalk,
provided that such repair is not in excess of thirty (30) percent of
the existing walk area.
(4) Cuts.
(a) When a cut is made by a contractor (plumbing, electrical, etc.),
utility or utility contractor in an existing sidewalk; block (slab
section), flaggings, concrete or asphalt shall be replaced,
where damaged, in its entirety in accordance with the
regulations set forth herein; where existing walk is of asphalt
construction, the damaged portion shall be reconstructed so
that the entire width of the existing walk is replaced with
concrete as hereinbefore regulated for a distance not fewer
than eight (8) inches beyond the initial cut opening paralleling
the street line. Where the existing sidewalk is concrete and cut
§ 412-43 SCRANTON CODE § 412-43
394:752
is made with a saw in a straight and neat manner, only the
portion removed will need to be replaced subject to approval
of the Department of Public Works.
(b) All contractors (plumbing, electrical, etc.), utilities and utility
contractors are required to apply to the Bureau of Building
Inspection and obtain a sidewalk opening permit. The permit
fee is two dollars ($2.). Such permit shall be numbered, contain
original and two (2) copies and describe the applicant by name
and address, direct permission for him to perform work at a
designated address, provide for an explanation of purpose for
the work and make provision for issuing authorities' signature.
General instructions on the permit shall be stated as follows:
[1] Backfill must be tamped in four-inch layers.
[2] Sidewalk must be replaced by contractor within ten (10)
days after backfilling.
[3] Concrete sidewalks must be replaced in accordance with
Article VI, Sidewalks, of this chapter.
[4] Asphalt restoration will not be permitted; damaged or cut
asphalt sidewalks shall be replaced in accordance with
Article VI, Sidewalks, of this chapter.
[5] Trenches must be properly barricaded and lighted.
[6] No trees shall be cut or removed without permission of the
City Shade Tree Commission.
[7] Tunneling will not be permitted without permission of the
Director of the Department of Public Works or the City
Engineer.
(5) Sidewalks shall be level with the driveway grades, and in no case
shall step downs be acceptable. When approved by the Director of
the Department of Public Works or the City Engineer, sidewalks
may be sloped to driveways if excessive grades prohibit a level
installation. Outside edges and joints shall be formed with a
quarter-inch radius edging tool. Traverse dummy joints shall be
formed at five-foot intervals approximately one-eighth-inch by one
(1) inch deep. Half-inch premolded expansion joints for full depth of
sidewalk shall be placed opposite expansion joints in adjacent
curbs, between the sidewalk and curb and between the sidewalk
and rigid structures.
(6) The Department of Public Works shall direct the owner of
properties fronting or abutting on any designated public street,
lane or alley in the city to repair or replace any sidewalk which in
his discretionary opinion does not meet city standards, such as:
§ 412-43 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-43
394:753
§ 412-44. Service of notice.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to serve notices on the owner
of any lot or piece of land in the downtown area of the city in front or on the
side of which the sidewalk is out of repair or where no required sidewalk
has been laid. Where the owner cannot be found, the Building Inspector is
to cause the notice to be served on his agent or on the tenant or occupier
of such lot or piece of land, notifying such owner to repair or construct a
sidewalk as required by this Article. In case the owner of any vacant lot or
piece of land does not reside in the city and has not agent on whom service
can be made, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to cause the
notice provided for under this Article to be served on such owner, if the
same can be found, by registered mail or otherwise at his place of residence
or by posting the notice on the most public part of the property. Whenever
any notice has been served under this Article, the person serving shall make
an affidavit of the time and manner of service and upon whom the same
is served. This affidavit shall be filed in the office of the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
§ 412-45. Failure of property owner to comply.
If any owner, subject to the provisions of this Article, shall refuse or neglect
to comply therewith after thirty (30) days' notice to do so by the Department
of Public Works, then the city shall have sidewalks constructed, repaired
or replaced in accordance with this Article and the cost and expense of
the same, together with a penalty of fifteen percent (15%) additional cost,
shall be collected from the person so refusing or neglecting in the manner
provided.
(a) Sidewalks buckled by tree roots or frost upheaval, presenting
an uneven variation in elevation between units, in excess of
one to one and one-half (1:1 and 1/2) inches or more, which
would be detrimental or injurious to a person walking thereon.
(b) Sidewalks cracked by settling, heavy truck or other vehicular
traffic which present the same characteristics as noted on
§ 412-43C(6)(a).
(c) Sidewalks overly pitted or deteriorating to a point where a
serious condition is prevalent and the safety of the public is
endangered.
(7) Driveway curb cuts shall be made only after approval of the
Director of the Department of Public Works or City Engineer. All
cuts shall be not fewer than ten (10) feet in length nor more than
thirty-five (35) feet in length and shall be elevated two (2) inches
minimum above pavement in order to provide a proper gutter for
stormwater drainage. New curb recesses in new curbing shall also
comply with the dimensions set forth herein.
§ 412-43 SCRANTON CODE § 412-46
394:754
§ 412-46. Collection of costs incurred by city.
Whenever the city has constructed, replaced or repaired sidewalks, the
City Engineer shall certify the cost thereof to the City Treasurer, who shall
collect such costs. Such costs shall be liened upon the premises from the
time of the filing of such certification. It shall then be the duty of the
City Treasurer to place in the hands of the city solicitor within six (6)
months from the time of receiving such certification of costs and expenses
against any property or properties, a list of claims against such property
or properties showing the amount paid on each and the City Solicitor shall
thereupon file liens for such claims in the Clerk of Judicial Records Office in
the proper lien docket.
§ 412-46 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-46
394:755

ARTICLE VIII
Curbs
§ 412-47. Grade of curbstones; permission to raise or cut.
The curbstones set or that may hereafter be set along the streets and
avenues of the city shall be set to the uniform grade given by the City
Engineer as established by Council. No person shall raise or cut off the
curbstones from the grade lines unless permission has been given by
resolution of Council.
§ 412-48. Altering curbstones without permission.
Whenever curblines and grades have been established and the curbstones
set are not put and maintained at the lines and grades given by the City
Engineer, it shall be the duty of the Director of the Department of Public
Works to notify the owners of property abutting thereon to set or reset
the same, as the case may be, to the line, in compliance with § 412-47,
the intention being that curbstones must not be altered for the purpose of
making sidewalks accessible from the streets for vehicles.
§ 412-47 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-48
394:757

ARTICLE IX
Barricades and Warning Lights
§ 412-49. Guarding street excavations; pavement replacement.
Whenever public service companies or any other person shall dig up any
street, avenue, alley or lane in the city, it shall be the duty of such company
or person at all times to keep the same guarded by fenceboards, boxes or by
any other sufficient means and during the nighttime to keep, at such place
one (1) or more lights and, after the work is done, to replace such street,
avenue, alley or lane in as good condition as before.
§ 412-50. Sidewalk excavations.
Whenever any company or person shall dig up the space allotted for
sidewalk on any street, avenue, alley or lane in the city, for the purpose of
excavating a cellar, cellar-way or vault, such company or person shall erect
over such space a good and sufficient walk, at least four (4) feet wide and
guard the same securely by railing or otherwise.
§ 412-51. Guarding excavations at night.
Whenever any company or person shall dig or excavate any cellar or cellarway
on any street, avenue, alley or lane traveled by the public, such
company or person shall keep the same securely guarded at nighttime by
railing or otherwise. If the Director of the Department of Public Works
shall deem it necessary, the owner or contractor digging or excavating as
aforesaid shall keep a light at such place.
§ 412-49 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-51
394:759

ARTICLE X
Emergency Snow Removal
§ 412-52. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively indicated:
CHAINS — Full chains, strap chains or other types of chains so mounted as
to give motor vehicles traction in snow.
SNOW — Any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets of
the city including snow, sleet, hail, ice or freezing rain.
SNOW EMERGENCY — A state, declared as herein described, under which
highway conditions are hazardous and dangerous to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES OR SNOW ROUTES — All streets within the
city so designated and marked as hereinafter set forth.
SNOW TIRES — Tires having treads designed for use in mud or snow and
being in such condition as to serve the purpose for which they are designed.
VEHICLES — All motor vehicles using city streets, including all public and
private transportation conveyances, trucks and other powered vehicles.
§ 412-53. Designation of snow routes; posting signs; map and
changes.
The Director of the Department of Public Works, with the approval of
the Director of the Department of Public Safety, shall designate as snow
emergency routes streets which are heavily traveled and are necessary
thoroughfares for the movement of vehicular traffic through the city. Such
designation shall take into consideration state highway routes, fire
apparatus emergency routes and other commonly traveled streets. Each
of such routes shall be posted with suitable signs or markers, not less
frequently than once in each direction in one (1) block. Such signs shall bear
the words "snow route" and may restrict parking in such block on alternate
sides of such street. A map of such snow routes shall be filed with the City
Clerk and other copies thereof shall be available for public examination in
the Departments of Public Safety and Public Works. The Director of the
Department of Public Works may change such map from time to time, copies
of such changes being entered as aforesaid.
§ 412-54. Declaration of snow emergency; procedure for notice.
When, in the opinion of the Mayor, the actual or expected precipitation of
snow will create hazardous or dangerous highway conditions for vehicular
or pedestrian traffic, he is hereby authorized to declare a snow emergency.
He shall immediately inform the public by issuing press releases to all
news media. Such snow emergency shall continue in force until the Mayor
§ 412-52 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING § 412-54
394:761
shall declare the emergency no longer exists by press releases in the same
fashion.
§ 412-55. Effective time and conditions.
Two (2) hours after a snow emergency has been declared and during its
existence:
§ 412-56. Throwing snow in street.
No person shall throw, shovel, cast or otherwise move, place, pile, deposit
or dump snow or ice removed from sidewalks, driveways or other areas into
the street or public highway. No person, when the cartway of the street or
highway is cleared or partially cleared, shall throw or place any snow or any
other accumulation in the cleared cartway or passageway area.
§ 412-57. When effective.
This Article shall be in full force and effect upon its adoption and shall be
effective from October 15 of each year to April 15 of the following year.
A. No vehicle shall be parked on a snow emergency route, unless signs
posted in accordance with § 412-53 permit certain parking.
B. Any person who operates a vehicle without chains or snow tires upon
any street designated as a snow route, which vehicle becomes staged or
incapable of moving under its own power, or any person who leaves
such a vehicle unattended shall be in violation of this Article.
C. Any vehicle parked, stalled, incapable of moving under its own power or
left unattended upon any snow route may be removed or towed away to
any other location by the Bureau of Police or by persons authorized by
such Bureau to do so.
§ 412-54 SCRANTON CODE § 412-57
394:762
Chapter 417
STRIKEBREAKERS
§ 417-1. Prohibited acts.
§ 417-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any employment agent licensed as such
under the Department of Labor and Industry, of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the United States Employment Service.
Chapter 423
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCE
Planning Commission — See Ch. 18, Art. IV.
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 201.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 405.
Zoning — See Ch. 445.
A. No person, partnership, agency, firm or corporation or officer, employee
or agent thereof not involved in a labor strike or lockout shall recruit,
procure, supply or refer any person for employment who customarily
and repeatedly offers himself for employment in place of any employee
involved in a labor dispute in which such person, partnership, agency,
firm or corporation is not directly involved, when the purpose of such
recruiting, procuring, supplying or referring is to have such person take
the place in employment of an employee in an industry where a labor
strike or lockout exists.
B. No person, partnership, agency, firm or corporation involved in a labor
dispute shall, directly or indirectly:
(1) Employ in the place of an employee involved in such dispute, any
person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself for
employment in place of employees involved in a labor dispute; or
(2) Contract or arrange with any other person to recruit, procure,
supply or refer persons for employment who customarily and
repeatedly offer themselves for employment in place of employees
involved in such labor dispute.
C. No person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself for
employment in place of employees involved in a labor dispute shall take
or offer to take the place in employment of any employee involved in a
labor dispute.
§ 412-57 STRIKEBREAKERS § 417-2
417:763

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose
§ 423-1. Purpose.
The following is an ordinance providing for the regulation and control of
the subdivision of lots and the development of land; the approval of plans,
plots or replots of land laid out in building lots; standards for the design of
streets, lots, easements, blocks and other improvements; certain minimum
improvements and construction standards on all streets and required
dedications; the administration of this chapter by the City of Scranton
Planning Commission and the City of Scranton City Council; and penalties
for the violation of this chapter.
§ 423-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Scranton
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1996."
§ 423-1 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-2
417:765

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 423-3. Intent.
The purpose of these regulations is to create conditions favorable to the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens by assisting in the
orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions; ensuring conformance of
subdivision plans with the public improvements plans of the city; ensuring
sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation; facilitating the
efficient movement of traffic and avoiding traffic hazards and congestion;
securing equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform
procedures and standards; improving land records by establishing
standards for surveys and plans; safeguarding the interests of the public,
the homeowner, the subdivider and all municipalities; preserving natural
and historic features; serving all other purposes authorized for a subdivision
and land development ordinance by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code93; and carrying out the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 423-4. Applicability.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made, and no street, sanitary sewer main, water main or other
improvements required in connection with a proposed subdivision or
land development shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated
for use of the public or the occupants of the proposed subdivision or
land development, except in accordance with this chapter.
B. A lot or parcel that was not a legal lot of record prior to adoption of this
chapter shall not be created, sold or transferred, and no land
development may occur on a lot unless and until:
(1) The subdivision of the lot and/or the approval of the land
development as applicable has been granted final plan approval
and any subdivision has been recorded.
(2) Either of the following occurs:
(a) The city has been assured by means of adequate financial
security as provided in § 423-41 of this chapter to guarantee
that the improvements will subsequently be installed; or
(b) The required improvements in connection with the subdivision
or land development are entirely completed in advance, as
provided in § 423-41.
C. Landowner. No subdivision or land development shall be submitted to
the city for review except by the landowner of such land or his/her
93.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 423-3 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-4
417:767
§ 423-5. Amendments to statute.
The provisions of this chapter that only repeat, summarize or reference
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code94 shall be
deemed to be automatically superseded and replaced by any applicable
amendments to such provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code at the date such amendments become effective as state law.
§ 423-6. Land development requirements.
See § 423-29 regarding the requirements for a land development.
§ 423-7. Exemptions.
§ 423-8. Interpretation.
§ 423-9. Modifications and exceptions.
specifically authorized agent. (See the definition of "landowner" in
Article III, which includes equitable owner.)
A. Agriculture. The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes
into parcels of more than 10 acres which does not involve any new
street or access easement or nonagricultural building shall be
exempted from the regulations of this chapter.
B. Revisions to city regulations after approval of a development.
(1) From the time an application for approval of a plan, whether
preliminary or final, has been approved or approved subject to
conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning,
subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to
adversely affect the right of the applicant to commence and to
complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such
approval.
(2) If final plan approval is preceded by preliminary plan approval, the
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
plan approval.
A. Differing provisions. Where two or more provisions of this chapter
apply to the same situation, or where a provision of this chapter
regulates the same matter as another city ordinance or a federal or
state statute or regulation, then the more restrictive requirement shall
apply, regardless of its source, unless specified to the contrary.
B. Illustrations. The illustrations in this chapter are provided only for
general illustrative purposes and are not part of the regulations of this
chapter.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 423-4 SCRANTON CODE § 423-9
417:768
§ 423-10. Fees.
A. An applicant seeking a modification or exception to this chapter shall
submit to the City Planner request, in writing, that states:
(1) The specific ordinance section(s) involved.
(2) The reasons for the request. The Planning Commission may, in
writing, grant a waiver or modifications to the specific
requirements of this chapter.
B. The applicant must prove that the request will meet one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) Avoid an undue hardship that was not self-created and that results
from the peculiar and uncommon conditions of the property.
(2) Avoid an unreasonable or unnecessary requirement that would not
serve any valid public purpose.
(3) Allow an alternative standard that is clearly proven by the
applicant to provide equal or better results.
(4) Allow a layout or improvements that would clearly be more in the
public interest than what would occur if the modification were not
granted.
(5) Remove a requirement that is not applicable, such as because of
the small size of the proposed subdivision or land development.
A. City Council has established a written schedule of fees for all
applications and other matters pertaining to this chapter. Such fee
requirements for subdivisions and land developments may be amended,
revised or superseded by written ordinance or resolution of City
Council.
B. The applicant is also required to pay any review fees required by the
County Planning Commission and the County Conservation District and
any other applicable agencies.
C. Plans shall not be considered filed until all fees are paid and the
applications are properly signed as required.
D. If the expenses of the city for reviews of a subdivision or land
development exceed the total fees that have been paid or placed in
escrow by an applicant, such excess expenses shall be paid by the
applicant prior to release of the final plans by the city for recording.
E. Administration of fee; establishment. [Added 3-13-1996 by Ord. No.
13-1996]
(1) Applications for review of any and all subdivisions and land
developments shall be accompanied by the fee established by this
section.
§ 423-9 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-10
417:769
(2) If said fee is less than the actual cost of review to the City of
Scranton, applicant shall pay any excess cost prior to the release of
any plan for recording of the issuance of any building permit.
(3) If said fee is greater than the actual cost of review to the City of
Scranton, the city will refund any excess moneys to the applicant
upon a final account of costs.
(4) The cost of review shall include an administrative fee which shall
cover the costs associated with the processing of the application by
City of Scranton personnel other than the technical reviewers
employed by the city.
(5) Reviews will primarily be conducted by the City Engineer, City
Planner, Fire Chief and their staffs. In instances deemed necessary
by the City Engineer, other City of Scranton staff may be required
to review the plans. When a conflict exists with city personnel or
when a skill not possessed by city personnel is required to properly
review a plan, a professional with the necessary review skills shall
be hired pursuant to the city's normal selection process to complete
the review.
(6) The schedule of fees required at the time of submission of any
subdivision or land development application is as follows:
Plan Type Administrative Fee Review Fee Escrow
Lot line adjustment $50.00 None
Minor subdivision $100.00 $100.00
Major subdivision $150.00 $200.00, plus $20.00/
lot
Land development $200.00 $200.00, plus $0.10/
square foot1
NOTES:
1 $3,000 shall be the maximum amount required to be escrowed
initially by any applicant. If 75% or more of the original
amount is used by the city, then the full amount as computed
from the above table shall be deposited unless a determination
is made by the city that a lesser amount will be required to
complete the review.
(7) The fee charged to the applicant in addition to the administrative
fee shall equal the hourly rate, including any and all fringe benefits,
multiplied by the exact number of hours spent reviewing the plan
by city staff and/or the amount billed to the City of Scranton by any
outside professionals.
(8) Annually, the Business Administrator shall determine the hourly
rate to be charged by the city for each staff member involved in
reviewing plans.
§ 423-10 SCRANTON CODE § 423-10
417:770
§ 423-11. Revisions, alternate plans and resubdivisions.
(9) Each staff member shall keep a written record of the time spent
reviewing particular plans and submit timely to the Ordinance
Administrator a copy thereof for billing purposes.
(10) A written invoice detailing each reviewer's hours shall be made
available to the applicant when funds are drawn from the escrow
and at the completion of the review.
(11) Disputes over the amount of any review fee herein shall be settled
pursuant to Sections 503 and 510 of Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted
and amended by Act 170 of 1988,95 known as the the " Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code."
(12) The fees herein are related only to the review of subdivision and
land development plans and are not in lieu of any other fee or cost
associated with the development of land in the City of Scranton,
including but not limited to the inspection fee pursuant to
§ 423-44B(4) of this chapter, any building permit fee or sewer
connection fee.
(13) A special city account shall be created to accept and disburse the
fees generated by this section.
A. Alternate plans. Only one plan concerning any one area of land shall be
before the city for review at any one moment in time, unless the
Planning Commission specifically permits simultaneous review of
alternative plans. When an alternative plan is permitted, a new
submission fee shall be required, unless the Planning Commission
determines that the alternative plan is not significantly different from
the earlier submission.
B. Revisions and resubdivisions.
(1) Revised plans.
(a) Until a submission is approved or rejected by the Planning
Commission, the applicant may withdraw the submission and
submit a revised plan following the submission and review
procedures which apply to that plan. For any submittal of a
revision of a previously submitted plan, the city may require
the applicant to submit additional fees if needed based upon
the city's expenditures on the review up to that time.
(b) If the Planning Commission determines that a revised plan for
a subdivision or land development that is being reviewed
constitutes a significant change from the previous submittal,
then the Planning Commission may at a regular meeting
determine that the revised plan shall be considered a new
95.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10503 and 1051, respectively.
§ 423-10 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-11
417:771
§ 423-12. City records.
The city shall maintain records of the decisions of the Planning Commission
regarding all subdivision and land development plans. Such records shall be
available to the public for review.
§ 423-13. Amendments to chapter.
submittal, and the ninety-day maximum time period for city
approval shall restart after the regular Planning Commission
meeting, after such revised submittal.
(2) A revision or resubdivision of a final plan approved by the Planning
Commission shall be considered as a new subdivision and shall
comply with all of the regulations of this chapter. For changes only
involving lot line adjustments or minor corrections, see the simpler
provisions of Article VIII.
A. The regulations set forth in this chapter may, from time to time, be
amended by City Council, following the procedures of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,96 as amended, including a City Council
public hearing.
B. Reviews. The city staff shall submit each proposed amendment (other
than an amendment prepared by or under the direction of the Planning
Commission) to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least
30 days prior to the date set for the City Council public hearing. Also,
the city staff shall submit any proposed amendment to the County
Planning Commission at least 30 days before the public hearing on such
amendments.
C. Public notice. The city staff shall publish the proposed amendment in a
newspaper of general circulation, within the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Publication of the proposed
amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a
brief summary. If the full text is not published, then a copy shall be
supplied to a newspaper of general circulation and a copy shall be filed
in the County Law Library.
D. Changes. In the event that substantial changes are made in the
proposed amendment after the hearing, then before voting upon
enactment, City Council shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment,
readvertise in one newspaper of general circulation a summary of the
changes.
96.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 423-11 SCRANTON CODE § 423-14
417:772
§ 423-14. Appeals to courts. [Amended 4-30-2018 by Ord. No.
9-2018]
Decisions of the City Planning Commission and/or the City Subdivision
Bureau (in the case of lot line adjustments, annexations and minor revisions
of approved plans where the Subdivision Bureau acts as the approving
body) may be appealed in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.97
§ 423-15. Enforcement.
§ 423-16. Violations and penalties.
§ 423-17. Subdivision Bureau.
There is hereby created a Subdivision Bureau of the City of Scranton,
staff-persons who shall serve as a committee responsible for the technical
review of subdivision and land development plans. Such Bureau shall be
under the direction of the City Engineer and shall include the Chief City
Planner. The Bureau shall also include such other city staff-persons as
deemed appropriate by the City Engineer, such as but not limited to: a
A. Inspections. The Mayor shall authorize one or more persons, which may
include the Zoning Officer and the City Engineer and his/her
representatives, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the
accompanying design standards and improvement specifications. Any
action under this chapter Is subject to on-site inspection by the city or
its authorized representatives to ensure compliance with this chapter,
other city ordinances and the approved plans.
B. Remedies. Any action inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a cease and desist order and other appropriate
measures by the Mayor and City Council or their authorized
representatives. The enforcement provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,98 shall apply.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated any
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the city or their
authorized representatives, pay fines and fees as authorized by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. These violations shall
include, but not be limited to, actions listed under § 423-4, Applicability,
without following the applicable procedures of this chapter.
B. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 423-14 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-17
417:773
Code Enforcement Officer, the Superintendent of Building Inspection, the
Assistant City Planner and the Zoning Officer.
§ 423-18. Liability.
Neither the approval nor the granting of any building permit, floodplain
permit, site plan review, subdivision approval, land development approval,
zoning permit, erosion review, stormwater runoff review, wetland
delineation or wetland review, steep slope review or any other review or
permit of this chapter, involving any land governed by the provisions of this
chapter, by an officer, solicitor, employee, consultant or agency of the city,
shall constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the
city or its employees, consultants, officials or agencies of the practicality or
safety of any structure, use or subdivision and shall create no liability upon,
nor a cause of action against any city body, consultant, official or employee
for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
§ 423-19. Professional certification.
All plans shall comply with applicable state professional certification laws,
including but not limited to certification laws for professional engineers,
surveyors and landscape architects. All preliminary and final plans and any
required stormwater calculations for a subdivision or land development
shall be certified, signed and stamped by a registered professional engineer.
All subdivisions of land shall be certified, signed and stamped by a
registered surveyor.
§ 423-17 SCRANTON CODE § 423-19
417:774
ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 423-20. General word usage and interpretation.
§ 423-21. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
a subdivision or land development, including his/her heirs, successors and
assignees.
BLOCK — A tract of land or a lot or group of lots, bounded by streets, public
parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies of water, boundary
lines of the city or by any combination of the above.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street or highway designed for
vehicular traffic and paved areas intended for on-street parking.
CHAPTER, THIS — The City of Scranton Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, as amended, and any provisions thereof, enacted by City
Council.
CITY — The City of Scranton, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania. Unless
otherwise stated, this shall mean City Council and their authorized agents.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Scranton.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of Scranton.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and its
successor agencies.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as listed in § 423-21 of this chapter.
B. If a word is not defined by this chapter, but is defined by Chapter 445,
Zoning, as amended, the definition of Chapter 445, Zoning shall apply.
If a word is not defined by this chapter, but is defined by the Chapter
405, Stormwater Management, then Chapter 405, Stormwater
Management, shall apply.
C. The word "includes" shall mean to specifically include an item but not
necessarily limited to such items.
D. Any word or term not defined in this chapter or Chapter 445, Zoning, or
Chapter 405, Stormwater Management, shall have a meaning of
standard usage as determined by the Plans Administrator, within the
context of the word's use within the applicable section of this chapter.
§ 423-20 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-21
417:775
DETENTION BASIN OR POND — A natural or manmade area in which
stormwater is temporarily detained and from which said water is slowly
released at a rate compatible with sound stormwater and soil management
practices as approved by the city and the County Conservation District.
DEVELOPER (SUBDIVIDER) — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or
tenant with permission from a landowner, who makes or causes to be made
a subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations and the
subdivision of land, as well as sewage disposal systems and water supply
systems.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, excavation, storing,
grading, filling or transporting of soil or any other activity which causes soil
to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
DIVERSION — A channel with or without a supporting ridge on the lower
side constructed to intercept and divert surface runoff.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention/
alleviation of flooding.
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation,
a person, group of persons or another tract of land of a use of land for
specified purposes.
ENGINEER, CITY — The registered professional engineer designated by the
City Council and/or the Mayor to perform all duties required of the City
Engineer within the provisions of this chapter.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — A person licensed to practice as a
professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully
indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule for the
timing of their installation, which will effectively minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation. Such measures shall be in accordance with the Lackawanna
County Soil Conservation Service reviews.
EXCAVATION OR CUT — An act by which soil or soils are cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to cutting or filling.
§ 423-21 SCRANTON CODE § 423-21
417:776
FINISHED GRADE — The final elevation of the ground surface conforming
to the proposed design.
FREEBOARD — A margin of safety, expressed in feet above the onehundred-
year-flood elevation.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and City Council of the City of Scranton.
In the event of lack of approval by the Mayor, s super majority of the
members of City Council shall constitute the Governing Body, for the
purposes of this chapter.
GRADE — The elevation of ground or paving.
GRADING — Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling or any combination
thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
GROUND FLOOR — The first floor of a building other than a cellar or
basement.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The process of stormwater entering into
the ground to replenish the underground water table.
IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT — An agreement in a form and manner
acceptable to the city requiring a developer to install the improvements
required by this chapter or which appear on the official approved plans.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LANDOWNER — The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of a formal option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee (if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the right of the landowner) or other
person having a proprietary interest in land.
LOT — A contiguous area of land within defined lot lines that is a distinct
and legally recorded separate parcel of land according to the official
records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
The improvement of one or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of
land for any purpose involving either or both of the following:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential building,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure.
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall specifically not be
considered a "land development": the conversion of an existing building
to create a maximum of three new dwelling units.
B.
§ 423-21 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-21
417:777
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT — The revision or deletion of one or more lot lines
in such a way that all of the following are true:
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot that abuts a public street on one side of
the lot, but has vehicular access only from a public street on the opposite
side of the lot.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the enclosed area, including basement.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — An agreement in a form and manner
acceptable to City Council requiring the developer of required
improvements to make any repairs or reconstructions and to maintain such
improvements for a certain time period, as specified in § 423-47 of this
chapter.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Financial security which is acceptable to
the city to secure the responsibilities of the developer as stated in the
maintenance agreement. See § 423-47.
MAJOR OR MINOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, major" and
"subdivision, minor."
MOBILE HOME SPACE — An area of land in a mobile home park improved
with the utilities and other improvements needed for the placement of a
single mobile home, with the land leased or rented by the park owner to the
occupants of the mobile home.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as may
be further amended, or its successor legislation.99
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — The ground surface in its original state
before any grading, excavation or filling.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, materials, fill or activity that would
impede, retard or change natural or approved stormwater flows.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur every 100 years [such as that has a 1% chance of occurring each year,
although the flood may occur in any year].
OPEN SPACE — The area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory
structures, streets, driveways, parking areas; but may include areas
No additional lots will be created beyond what was previously
approved.
A.
No additional street segments or significant changes in alignment are
proposed other than what was previously approved.
B.
No additional new nonconformities will be created under the Chapter
445, Zoning.
C.
No new land development will occur other than a land development that
was previously approved or buildings to support "crop farming."
D.
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 423-21 SCRANTON CODE § 423-21
417:778
occupied by walkways, picnic pavilions, play equipment and other areas
occupied by noncommercial outdoor recreation facilities.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — The definition in Chapter 445, Zoning, shall
apply.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Common open space owned by a government
agency or the city for public recreation.
PARCEL — A tract, lot or area of land.
PARKING — Outdoor areas or special designed buildings or garages used
for the storage of vehicles. Unless otherwise stated, means off-street
parking.
PATHWAY — A pedestrian accessway which is not adjacent to a street or
access drive and conforms with this chapter.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Financial security which is acceptable to
City Council to ensure that the developer will install required
improvements. (Note: This typically includes acceptable letters of credit,
performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.)
PLAN — A map of a land development or subdivision and accompanying
notations.
PLANNING COMMISSION — See "Commission."
PLANS ADMINISTRATOR — The city staff-person charged by the Mayor
with the primary responsibility to administer the procedures of this chapter.
Such staff-person shall be the Planning Director of the City of Scranton until
and unless the Mayor may designate an alternative staff-person. See also
"City Engineer."
PUBLIC MEETING, REGULAR PLANNING COMMISSION — A regular
meeting of the Planning Commission at which the Commission is authorized
to conduct official action and which has been scheduled based upon an
annual meeting schedule (as may be adjusted by the Chairperson) and
which is not a workshop meeting or the official public meeting on an
ordinance amendment.
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan, identified with the title "sketch
plan" on the map, indicating the general layout of the proposed
subdivision or land development.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A complete plan identified with the title
"preliminary plan" accurately showing proposed streets and lot layout
and such other information as required by this chapter.
B.
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact plan identified with the title "final
plan" including the plan prepared for official recording as required by
this chapter to define property rights and proposed streets and other
improvements.
C.
§ 423-21 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-21
417:779
PUBLIC NOTICE — As defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.[NOTE: As of 1993, this included the following definition:
"notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall state
the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall
not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be
less than seven days from the date of the hearing."]
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood
elevation, plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
RETENTION BASIN OR POND — A natural or man-made area in which
stormwater is retained on a long-term basis.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of solid material, both mineral and
organic, that was in suspension and that has been transported from its site
of origin by any means of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION BASIN — A barrier or dam built across a waterway or at
other suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other materials,
to prevent these materials from entering a creek, river, stream or lake.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system designed to collect, treat and
dispose of sewage from users in compliance with regulations of
Pennsylvania DEP and the city.
SIDEWALK — A pedestrian accessway which is adjacent to a street or
access drive and conforms to the regulations of this chapter.
SITE ALTERATION — Includes regrading the existing topography, filling
lakes, ponds, marshes or floodplains, clearing vegetation or altering
watercourses.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lackawanna County Conservation
District.
SOIL SURVEY — The latest version of the official Soil Survey of Lackawanna
County, published by the United States Soil Conservation Service, or its
successor reference.
CENTRAL SEWAGE SERVICE — Service by a sewage disposal system
which collects, treats and disposes sewage from more than one
dwelling, principal use or lot.
PUBLIC SEWAGE SERVICE — Central sewage service with the
mains and the treatment facility owned by a municipality, a public
authority or the county.
(1)
PRIVATE CENTRAL SEWAGE SERVICE — Central sewage service
that does not meet the definition of "public sewage service."
(2)
A.
ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage disposal system which collects,
treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only one dwelling
unit, principal use or lot.
B.
§ 423-21 SCRANTON CODE § 423-21
417:780
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvements was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure (other than a mobile home) on a site,
such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of
excavation.
STATE — The government of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its
relevant subparts.
STATE PLANNING CODE — See "Municipalities Planning Code."
STORMWATER DETENTION — The holding or slowing down of stormwater
runoff to avoid increased rates of runoff during peak periods.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property or that is an expressway, but not
including an alley or a driveway.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — See the Official Street Classification Map,
which was adopted as part of the City Zoning Ordinance.100 This Map
classifies streets as expressway, arterial, collector or local streets.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A type of street which is terminated at one end
by a permitted turnaround and which intersects another street at the other
end.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A type of local street which is parallel
and adjacent to collector or arterial streets and provides access to abutting
properties.
SUBDIVIDER — See "developer."
SUBDIVISION — As defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.[NOTE: As of 1993, this definition was as follows:
"The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any
means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of
land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution
to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development: provided,l however, that the subdivision by lease of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or residential
dwellings is not a subdivision."]
SUBDIVISION BUREAU — See § 423-17 of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision of land which does not qualify as
a "minor subdivision."
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A proposal involving land, other than a land
development, which is either:
100. Editor's Note: The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the city offices.
§ 423-21 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-21
417:781
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE — The City of Scranton Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as amended.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — In the judgment of the City Engineer at
least 90% (based upon the cost of the required improvements for which
financial security was posted) of those improvements required as a
condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with the
approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
TEMPORARY PROTECTION — Stabilization of erosive sediment-producing
materials.
TRACT — One or more abutting or adjacent lots proposed to be subdivided
or developed following an overall coordinated plan.
USGS — United States Geological Survey, or its successor agency.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek,
ditch, channel, millrace, canal, conduit, gully, ravine or wash in which water
flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently,
and which has a definite channel and bed and shall include any area
adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow of floodwaters.
WATER, CENTRAL SYSTEM OR SERVICE — Service by a water system
which transmit water from a common source to more than one dwelling,
principal use or lot.
WATER, ON-LOT SYSTEM OR SERVICE — Service by a water system which
transmits water from a source on the lot to only one dwelling, principal use
or lot.
A. A lot line adjustment; or
A subdivision:
That results in only one new additional residential lot, or only one
new additional clearly agricultural lot of more than 10 acres each,
in addition to the one preexisting parent lot; and
(1)
Which does not involve an extension or new segment of a street
(other than what was previously approved); and
(2)
Which has not involved the final subdivision approval of four or
more new lots from the same parent tract since January 1, 1973.
(3)
B.
WATER, PUBLIC SYSTEM OR SERVICE — Central water service that
is owned and/or operated by a Municipal Authority or a Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission (PUC) regulated water company and that
serves more than 50 dwelling units or principal uses.
A.
§ 423-21 SCRANTON CODE § 423-21
417:782
ARTICLE IV
Overview of General Procedures
§ 423-22. Purpose.
This Article summarizes the general procedures for the submission and
review of proposed subdivisions and land developments. This Article is only
a general explanation and is not binding on the city or an applicant. See the
actual provisions of the other Articles of this chapter. Two flowcharts are
included at the end of this chapter to show the general process for major
and minor subdivisions.
§ 423-23. General procedure for subdivisions and land
developments.
A. Review and approval stages. Three types of plan submissions are
established: sketch, preliminary and final, as outlined below.
Type of Proposed
Subdivision or Land
Development1
Stage
Article of
this
Ordinance
Land
Development
Major
Subdivision
Minor
Subdivision
or Lot Line
Adjustment
Sketch plan V Recommended RecommendedRecommended
Preliminary
plan
VI Varies4 Required Not
Required
Final plan3 VII Required Required Required2
Guaranty of
improvements
installation
IX Required Required Required
Recording
of final plan
X Varies Required Required
§ 423-22 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-23
417:783
§ 423-24. General plan submission procedures.
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "land development" and other terms in Article III.
2 See Article VII for Minor Subdivision Final Plan submission and
review requirements. See § 423-38C for submission requirements for a
lot line adjustment.
3 At their option, the Planning Commission may grant combined
preliminary/final plan approval if the preliminary plan submission
meets the requirements of a final plan submission and if the Planning
Commission determines that there are no outstanding matters.
4 See § 423-29, which does not require a preliminary plan for many
types of land developments.
B. Sketch plan. While a sketch plan is not required, it is strongly
recommended that it be filed to allow the applicant to consult early and
informally with the Planning Commission before preparing a
preliminary plan. This will often avoid expensive redesign and delay to
the applicant.
C. Preliminary plan. Preliminary plans are required to be submitted for
any major subdivision and for certain land developments, as described
above.
D. Final plan. After approval of the preliminary plan of a major subdivision
or certain land developments, the applicant files a final plan. A final
plan must be approved prior to recording of the plans by the county and
prior to the sale of any lots or the construction of any buildings (see
Article X).
E. Guarantee of improvements installation. Where improvements are
required by this chapter, in most cases, the city will require that the
applicant enter into a development agreement including the posting of
financial security sufficient to guarantee the costs of any improvements
which may be required. See Article IX.
A. Submission. All required plans and information are required to be
submitted to the appropriate city staff.
B. Completeness. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to
reject or table an application that the Commission determines is
significantly incomplete.
C. Attendance at meetings. See § 423-29E.
D. Action by the Commission. The Planning Commission is required to act
upon a preliminary or final plan within 90 days after the first regular
meeting of the Planning Commission that follows an acceptable
§ 423-23 SCRANTON CODE § 423-24
417:784
submission by the applicant, unless the applicant grants a time
extension.
§ 423-24 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-24
417:785

ARTICLE V
Sketch Plan
§ 423-25. Preplan consultation.
Prior to submitting a sketch plan, applicants for larger developments are
encouraged to informally discuss their proposal with the Zoning Officer and/
or other appropriate city staff.
§ 423-26. Sketch plan submission requirements.
Prior to the submission of a preliminary plan, applicants are very strongly
encouraged to submit a sketch plan. A sketch plan review often allows an
applicant to save substantial time and engineering costs, because many
concerns about layout and issues concerning city ordinances can be
resolved prior to detailed engineering. This can often reduce the need
for future redesign at a more detailed stage, thereby saving the applicant
significant money and time. When submitted, sketch plans shall include the
following information:
A. Submission requirement. If submitted, eight print copies of the sketch
plan and the accompanying application should be submitted to the city
staff at least seven days prior to a regular Planning Commission
meeting.
B. Drawing requirements. A sketch plan shall be drafted to approximate
scale [scales of less than one inch equals 100 feet are to be avoided,
scales of one inch equals 50 feet are encouraged] and is recommended
to include the following as applicable:
(1) Approximate boundary line of the development.
(2) Approximate locations of significant physical features (such as
areas of steep slopes, quarries, creeks and major drainage
channels).
(3) Proposed lot and street layout with approximate areas of lots [such
as two acres].
(4) Site data including:
(a) Approximate acreage of the entire tract.
(b) Number of lots and types of dwelling units (if residential).
(c) Zoning District and major applicable lot area and setback
requirements.
(5) Approximate north point and scale and a tentative name of the
project (may be the developer's name).
§ 423-25 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-26
417:787
§ 423-27. Sketch plan review procedures.
(6) Approximate proposed locations of any nonresidential buildings (if
known) and statement of the general proposed types of any
nonresidential uses.
(7) A map showing the general location of the project in relation to
nearby streets (may be a photocopy of USGS or city base map or a
commercial map).
(8) Approximate location of any area within the one-hundred-year
floodplain (from Federal Insurance Administration Map).
(9) General provisions for stormwater management, such as tentative
approximate locations of any stormwater detention basins and any
major stormwater drainage channels.
(10) Note stating the general methods of providing water and sewer
service (such as "public water and public sewage service involving
extension of existing lines along Smith Street").
(11) Names of any adjacent nonresidential uses and any zoning district
boundaries in the area.
(12)Name and address of person responsible for the preparation of the
plan and the date of completion of the plans and any subsequent
revision dates.
(13) Approximate general locations of any possible wetlands (may be
hydric soil locations from the County Soil Survey).
(14) Statement of the proposed uses of the land (if known).
(15) Areas of existing woods, with approximate locations of any
individual trees with a trunk diameter at 4.5 feet above the
surrounding ground level noted.
A. No official action shall be taken on a sketch plan. The city shall not be
bound by comments made or not made as part of a sketch plan review.
B. The city shall distribute copies of the sketch plan to the City Engineer,
the relevant city staff-person and the Planning Commission for advisory
reviews.
§ 423-26 SCRANTON CODE § 423-27
417:788
ARTICLE VI
Preliminary Plan
§ 423-28. Purpose.
A preliminary plan is intended to establish the overall development scheme
to minimize the need for revisions of final plans.
§ 423-29. Submission and review procedure.
A. Preliminary plan submission required.
(1) A preliminary plan submission for a major subdivision or land
development [except as provided in Subsection A(2) below]
meeting all of the requirements of this Article shall be filed by the
applicant and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
(2) A preliminary plan submission is not required for:
(a) A "minor subdivision" (as defined in Article II).
(b) A submission that only involves a "lot line adjustment" (as
defined in Article II) or minor adjustments to a previously
approved plan as specified in § 423-38.
(c) A land development that involves only one new principal
building (other than a shopping center).
(d) The conversion of an existing building to result in a maximum
of three dwelling units (which by itself is not regulated by this
chapter).
B. Required submission.
(1) The applicant shall file with the staff at least 14 calendar days prior
to a regular Planning Commission meeting (not including a
workshop meeting):
(a) The required fees.
(b) The information and plans required under § 423-30.
(2) The staff shall forward applicable plans to the following agencies to
seek their comments prior to preliminary plan approval:
(a) The appropriate city staff [including one complete "file" copy of
all materials submitted by the applicant].
(b) The City Planning Commission (including copies of the
application form, at least one copy of the preliminary plan
checklist, at least one copy of the complete preliminary plan
submittal, additional copies of the preliminary plan submittal
and/or layout plans and at least one copy of the supporting
§ 423-28 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-29
417:789
documents), with such information provided prior to or at
the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting after a
proper submission.
(3) Applicant's distribution. The applicant is fully responsible for the
following:
(a) Supplying the City Fire Chief a layout plan and hydrant and
water system information.
(b) Supplying the City Engineer with the plans, the same day as
the plans are submitted to the Plans Administrator.
(c) Contacting the appropriate utility companies, as appropriate,
including the water supplier and the Scranton Area Sewage
Authority.
(d) Encouraged to seek at least an informal review by PennDOT of
any proposed access onto a state road, and providing PennDOT
with sufficient information for such a review.
(e) Determining whether any permits or approvals are needed
from any agency outside of the city, including Pennsylvania
DEP (including any obstruction to a waterway) and the Army
Corps of Engineers (including determining whether any
wetland will be disturbed).
(f) Providing a copy of the sedimentation and erosion control
plans to the County Conservation District, together with their
required review fees, if any earth disturbance is proposed,
unless the applicant states, in writing, in a signed letter to the
city, that earth disturbance will not occur until approval of the
final plan (in which case the erosion control plan may be
submitted at final plan stage).
(g) Adjacent municipalities. If any portion of a major subdivision or
land development is proposed within 200 feet of the boundary
of another municipality; would clearly have a regional impact
upon another municipality as determined by the Planning
Commission; then the applicant shall provide a copy of the
layout plan to that municipality for an advisory review.
(h) Providing a copy of the plans to the County Planning
Commission, together with all applicable fees.
(4) Each preliminary plan and supporting documents should seek to
incorporate any revisions recommended by the Planning
Commission, the City Engineer and other appropriate city officials
during any sketch plan review.
(5) Revisions. A list of revisions from a previously submitted plan shall
be provided whenever a revised plan is submitted.
§ 423-29 SCRANTON CODE § 423-29
417:790
C. Determination of completeness of the submission.
(1) If the City Engineer determines that a submission is significantly
incomplete, the City Engineer shall have the authority:
(a) Within 14 days after a submission to return the submission to
the applicant.
(b) To recommend action by the Planning Commission as provided
in Subsection C(2) below.
(c) If the submission is returned, the submission shall have been
considered to have never been officially accepted for action by
the city.
(2) Regardless of whether the City Engineer did not return a
submission under Subsection C(1) above, the Commission shall
have authority, at its first regularly scheduled meeting after the
submission is filed in a timely fashion, to determine that a
submission is significantly incomplete and to do one of the
following:
(a) Not officially accept the submission, indicating deficiencies, in
writing, and return the fee (minus the costs of any city review)
to the applicant.
(b) Officially accept the submission as being filed for review on the
condition that the applicant shall file such additional required
materials and information to the staff or appropriate agency or
person by a specific deadline.
(c) Table the official acceptance of the submission until the next
Planning Commission meeting after the applicant has met all of
the submittal requirements within the required time period
prior to the meeting. The ninety-day time limit for action shall
not begin until the plan is accepted as complete.
(d) Reject the application for just cause, such as the submission
being significantly incomplete.
(3) If the Commission determines that the submission is significantly
complete, as filed and as required, the Commission shall accept the
plans and may begin its review.
(4) Zoning variances.
(a) An application under this chapter shall not be considered to be
a complete submission for the purposes of the ninety-day time
limit if one or more zoning variances will be required for the
subdivision or land development to legally occur as submitted,
until such time as the needed zoning variances have been
granted. However, the Planning Commission may review the
plans before the variance(s) are issued.
§ 423-29 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-29
417:791
(b) A subdivision or land development review shall not be delayed
because of a court appeal of a zoning variance that was
granted by the Board to the developer. Instead, satisfactory
resolution of such appeal may be made a condition for approval
under this chapter. If a developer appeals a zoning variance
that was not granted to him/her, then Subsection C(4)(a) above
shall still apply.
D. Review by the Subdivision Bureau.
(1) See determination of completeness in § 423-29C.
(2) The Subdivision Bureau (including the City Engineer) should
review the engineering considerations of the preliminary plan and
prepare report(s) to the Commission. Policy matters that should be
dealt with directly by the Planning Commission should be listed
separately from technical engineering considerations.
(3) The applicant and/or his/her engineer shall make reasonable efforts
to resolve technical engineering considerations outside of and prior
to Planning Commission meetings. The City Engineer may require
the applicant or his/her engineer to meet with the City Engineer for
this purpose.
(4) See provisions regarding fees in § 423-10.
E. Review by Commission.
(1) The applicant or an authorized representative and the preparer of
the plans are expected to attend Planning Commission meeting(s)
where his/her submission will be reviewed, especially for a major
subdivision. If the Commission has insufficient information to
render a decision as a result of such nonattendance, such
attendance may result in disapproval of the submission.
(2) The Planning Commission shall:
(a) Review all applicable reports received from any official
reviewing agencies.
(b) Determine whether the preliminary plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
F. Decision by the Planning Commission.
(1) The Planning Commission shall approve or reject the preliminary
plan submission within the time limits required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.101 [NOTE: As of 1996, this law
requires: (a) the Planning Commission to act not later than
90 days following the date of the first regular meeting of the
Commission held after it has been properly filed for review;
101. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 423-29 SCRANTON CODE § 423-29
417:792
but, in no case shall the Commission's decision be made later
than 120 days following the date the submission was duly
submitted, unless the applicant grants a written extension
of time; and (b) that no subdivision or land development
shall be granted final approval until a report is received from
the County Planning Commission or until the expiration of
30 days from the date the application was forwarded to the
county.]
(2) The decision of the Planning Commission shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or by mail at his/
her last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision.
(3) Approval of the preliminary plan submission shall constitute
conditional approval of the subdivision or land development as to
the character and intensity, but shall not:
(a) Constitute approval of the final plan.
(b) Authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
(4) If the preliminary plan submission is disapproved, the decision
shall: specify defects found the the submission, describe
requirements which have not been met and cite the provisions of
the statute or ordinance relied upon in each case.
(5) At the discretion of the Planning Commission, the Commission may
grant combined preliminary/final plan approval if:
(a) The preliminary plan submission also meets all of the
requirements of a final plan submission.
(b) The Commission determines that there are no significant
outstanding matters regarding the plan.
(6) Acceptance of conditions. Any conditions on the approval shall be
mailed or otherwise provided, in writing, to the applicant or his/her
official representative. If the applicant provides notice to the city
that he/she rejects one or more conditions within 30 days after the
Planning Commission action, then the submission shall be
considered to have been rejected. The applicant is requested to
provide notice, in writing, that the conditions have been accepted.
However, if the applicant does not respond regarding the
conditions or otherwise file an official appeal within 30 days after
the Planning Commission action, then all of the conditions shall
automatically be considered to have been accepted by the
applicant.
G. Final plan submission deadline.
(1) An applicant shall file a final plan within five years from the date of
the approval of the preliminary plan by the Planning Commission,
§ 423-29 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-29
417:793
§ 423-30. Preliminary plan requirements and checklist.102
§ 423-31. Certification; original signature and seals.
unless a written extension is granted by the Planning Commission
in advance.
(2) Failure to comply with this requirement shall render the
preliminary plan null and void, and a new preliminary plan
submission and approval shall be required.
H. Development in stages. See § 423-33H.
A. Information and materials.
(1) All of the following information and materials listed in this section
are required as part of all preliminary plans for any land
development and any major submission. This list of requirements
shall serve both:
(a) To establish the requirements.
(b) As a checklist for the applicant and the city to use to ensure
completeness of submissions.
(2) The applicant shall submit completed photocopies of this section as
part of the application.
B. The required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that all information is clearly
readable.
A. All certifications shall comply with the state professional licensing laws.
All subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a registered
land surveyor.
B. At least one set of copies of all plans shall bear original signatures and
original seals on each page, which should be prominently marked on
the front sheet as the "Official City File Copy."
102. Editor's Note: See § 423-29A, regarding when a preliminary plan is required.
§ 423-29 SCRANTON CODE § 423-31
417:794
ARTICLE VII
Final Plan
§ 423-32. Applicability.
This chapter lists the requirements for final plans for a major subdivision
or any land development. See the requirements of Article VIII for a project
that only involves:
§ 423-33. Submission and review procedure.
A. A minor subdivision.
B. A lot line adjustment.
C. Minor corrections or minor revisions to a previously approved plan as
specified in § 423-38.
A. Final plan submission required.
(1) A final plan submission for each major subdivision or land
development must be filed by the applicant and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of this Article VII.
(2) A final plan shall only be submitted after a preliminary plan has
been approved by the Planning Commission, if a preliminary plan is
required.
B. Final plan submission deadline.
(1) An applicant shall file a final plan submission within five years from
the date of the approval of the preliminary plan by the Planning
Commission.
(2) Failure to comply with this requirement shall render the
preliminary plan submission null and void, and a new preliminary
plan submission must be filed.
C. Filing and distribution.
(1) The applicant shall file with the city staff at least 14 calendar days
prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting (not including
workshop meetings) all of the required plans, information and fees
listed in § 423-34 of this chapter.
(2) The city staff shall forward applicable plans to the following
agencies to seek their comments prior to final plan approval:
(a) The appropriate city staff [including one official file copy of all
materials submitted by the applicant].
(b) The City Planning Commission [including copies of the
application form, at least one copy of the preliminary plan
checklist, several copies of the preliminary plan and at least
§ 423-32 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-33
417:795
one copy of the supporting documents], with such information
provided at or before the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Commission.
(3) Applicant's distribution. It is the applicant's responsibility to:
(a) Provide copies to the City Engineer, the same day as the
submittal is made to the Plans Administrator.
(b) Provide copies to the City Fire Chief (layout plan and hydrant
and water system information, unless such information was
already approved at the preliminary plan level and is not
proposed to change from such plan).
(c) Make agreements with the appropriate utility companies,
including but not limited to the Scranton Area Sewage
Authority and the water supplier.
(d) Provide information to PennDOT that is required for any
needed permit for access to or work within a state road rightof-
way.
(e) Provide information to Pennsylvania DEP or other agencies for
any permits that might be required.
(f) Submit a copy of the soil erosion and sedimentation plan to the
County Conservation District, and pay their required review
fees, if earth disturbance is proposed, and if such erosion
control plan was not approved at the preliminary plan level.
(g) Provide a copy of the plans to the County Planning
Commission.
(4) The filing of the final plan shall conform with the approved
preliminary plan and any conditions and changes recommended by
the city during the preliminary plan review.
(5) Revisions. A list of revisions from a previously submitted plan shall
be provided whenever a revised plan is submitted.
D. Determination of completeness by Commission.
(1) If the City Engineer determines that a submission is significantly
incomplete, the City Engineer shall have the authority:
(a) Within 14 days after a submission to return the submission to
the applicant.
(b) To recommend action by the Planning Commission as provided
in Subsection A(2) below.
(2) If the submission is returned, the submission shall have been
considered to have never been officially accepted for action by the
city.
§ 423-33 SCRANTON CODE § 423-33
417:796
(3) Regardless of whether the City Engineer did not return a
submission under Subsection A(1) above, the Commission shall
have authority, at its first regularly scheduled meeting after the
submission is filed in a timely fashion, to determine that a
submission is significantly incomplete and to do one of the
following:
(a) Not officially accept the submission, indicating deficiencies, in
writing, and return the fee (minus the costs of any city review)
to the applicant.
(b) Officially accept the submission as being filed for review on the
condition that the applicant shall file such additional required
materials and information to the staff or appropriate agency or
person by a specific deadline.
(c) Table the official acceptance of the submission until the next
Planning Commission meeting after the applicant has met all of
the submittal requirements within the required time period
prior to the meeting. The ninety-day time limit for action shall
not begin until the plan is accepted as complete.
(d) Reject the application for just cause, such as the submission
being significantly incomplete.
(4) If the Commission determines that the submission is significantly
complete, as filed and as required, the Commission shall accept the
plans and may begin its review.
(5) If the Commission determines that a final plan submission, as filed,
departs substantially from the approved preliminary plan, the
Commission may classify the submission as a revised preliminary
plan (with the applicable review fees required) and process the
application as such.
E. Review by the Subdivision Bureau.
(1) See determination of completeness in § 423-29C.
(2) The Subdivision Bureau (including the City Engineer) should
review the engineering considerations of the submission and
prepare report(s) to the Commission.
(3) Policy matters that should be dealt with directly by the Planning
Commission should be listed separately from technical engineering
considerations.
(4) The applicant and/or his/her plan preparer shall make reasonable
efforts to resolve technical engineering considerations outside of
and prior to Planning Commission meetings. The City Engineer
may require the applicant or his/her plan preparer to meet with the
City Engineer for this purpose.
§ 423-33 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-33
417:797
F. Review by Commission.
(1) The applicant and the preparer of the plans are expected to attend
Planning Commission meeting(s) where his/her submission will be
reviewed. If the Commission has insufficient information to render
a decision as a result of such nonattendance, such attendance may
result in disapproval of the submission.
(2) The Planning Commission shall:
(a) Review applicable reports received from official review
agencies.
(b) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
G. Decision by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall:
(1) Approve, conditionally approve or reject the final plan submission
within the time required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.103 [NOTE: As of 1994, state law generally
requires: (a) the Planning Commission to act not later than
90 days following the date of the first regular meeting of the
Commission held after it has been property filed; but, in no
case shall the Planning Commission's decision be made later
than 120 days following the date the submission was duly
submitted, unless the applicant grants a written extension of
time; and (b) that no subdivision or land development shall
be granted final approval until a report is received from the
County Planning Commission or until the expiration of 30
days from the date the application was forwarded to the
County Planning Commission.]
(2) Notice to applicant. The decision of the Planning Commission shall
be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant
personally or mailed to him/her at his/her last known address not
later than 15 days following the decision.
(3) Dedications.
(a) The approval of the final plan by the Planning Commission
shall not by itself constitute an acceptance of the dedication of
any street or other proposed public way, space or area, unless
the such acceptance is specified at such time.
(b) Any such acceptance of dedication shall only occur after formal
action of the city at such time.
(c) As part of an improvements agreement, if the City Council
elects to accept lands offered for dedication, the submission
shall be accompanied by duly executed instruments of
103. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 423-33 SCRANTON CODE § 423-33
417:798
§ 423-34. Final plan requirements.
conveyance to the city. Such instruments shall state that the
title thereof is free and unencumbered.
(4) Disapproval. When a final plan submission is disapproved, the
decision shall specify defects found in the submission, shall
describe requirements which have not been met and shall cite the
provisions of ordinance section(s) relied upon.
(5) Conditions. The Planning Commission may attach reasonable
conditions to an approval to ensure the carrying out of the
Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, other city ordinances and state
laws and regulations and to protect the public health and safety.
(6) Acceptance of conditions. Any conditions on the approval shall be
mailed or otherwise provided, in writing, to the applicant or his/her
official representative. If the applicant provides notice to the city
that he/she rejects one or more conditions within 30 days after the
Planning Commission action, then the submission shall be
considered to have been rejected. The applicant is requested to
provide notice, in writing, that the conditions have been accepted.
However, if the applicant does not respond regarding the
conditions or otherwise file an official appeal within 30 days after
the Planning Commission action, then all of the conditions shall
automatically be considered to have been accepted by the
applicant.
H. Development in stages.
(1) If requested by the applicant, the Planning Commission may permit
the undertaking of the required improvements and the preparation
of the final plan to be completed in a series of sections or stages,
each covering a portion of the proposed subdivision or land
development as shown on the preliminary plan.
(2) If final plans are to be filed in sections or stages, each section or
stage shall provide sufficient access, utilities and amenities to allow
the development to properly function if future stages are not built.
(3) The boundaries of phases and the timing of related improvements
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
A. Required information and materials.
(1) All of the information and materials listed in this section are
required as part of all final plans for:
(a) A major subdivision; or
(b) A land development.
§ 423-33 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-34
417:799
(2) This list of requirements shall serve as both a list of requirements,
and as a checklist for the applicant and the city to ensure
completion of submissions. The applicant shall submit completed
photocopies of this section as part of the application.
B. The required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly
readable.
§ 423-34 SCRANTON CODE § 423-34
417:800
ARTICLE VIII
Minor Subdivisions and Lot Line Adjustments
§ 423-35. Purpose.
This Article provides simplified procedures for submitting and reviewing
minor subdivisions, land developments involving only a single
nonresidential building and lot line adjustments.
§ 423-36. Submission and review procedure.
The following submission and review process shall apply for minor
subdivisions, lot line adjustments, annexations, land developments involving
only a single nonresidential building and what the city determines to be
minor revisions of approved plans.
A. Final plan submission required. A minor subdivision or lot line
adjustment is not required to submit a preliminary plan, but shall be
required to submit a final plan meeting the provisions of this Article
VIII.
B. Required submission.
(1) The applicant shall file to the staff at least 14 days prior to a
scheduled Planning Commission regular meeting the required
fee(s) and required number of copies of required plans and
materials (see § 423-37). The applicant shall also deliver one of the
complete copies of the submittal to the City Engineer on the same
day as the submittal is made to the Plans Administrator.
(2) If a state road is involved, the applicant shall forward the required
information to PennDOT and apply for a highway occupancy
permit. If such permit is not granted prior to final plan approval,
then it shall automatically be a condition of final plan approval and
the plans shall not be recorded until it is granted.
(3) Each final plan filed for minor subdivisions shall provide the
information required by § 423-37. Plans for lot line adjustments
shall provide the information required by § 423-38.
(4) The applicant shall provide a copy of the plans for review to the
County Planning Commission. A soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan shall be provided to the County Conservation District if
earth disturbance is involved.
C. Initial actions by the staff.
(1) The staff shall review the submission items filed against a checklist
for completeness and shall report such review to the Commission at
its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(2) The staff shall retain in the Commission's files one copy of all
materials submitted by the applicant.
§ 423-35 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-36
417:801
(3) The staff shall forward to the Commission at or before the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission:
(a) At least one copy of the application form.
(b) At least one copy of the final plan checklist.
(c) Several copies of the final plan.
(d) At least one copy of the supporting documents.
(4) If the City Engineer determines that a submission is significantly
incomplete, the City Engineer shall have the authority:
(a) Within 14 days after a submission to return the submission to
the applicant; or
(b) To recommend action by the Planning Commission as provided
in Subsection C(4)(b)[1] below.
[1] If the submission is returned, the submission shall have
been considered to have never been officially accepted for
action by the city.
D. Determination of completeness by Commission.
(1) Regardless of whether the City Engineer did not return a
submission under the above subsection, the Commission shall have
authority, at its first regularly scheduled meeting after the
submission is filed in a timely fashion, to determine that a
submission is significantly incomplete and therefore to refuse to
review the submission further and to do one of the following:
(a) Not accept the submission, indicating the deficiencies, and
return the fee (minus the costs of any city review) to the
applicant.
(b) Accept the submission as being filed for review on the
condition that the applicant shall file such additional required
materials and information to the staff or appropriate agency or
person within a certain number of days from the date of such
acceptance.
(c) Table the acceptance of the submission until the next Planning
Commission meeting where the applicant has met all of the
submittal requirements and has filed such materials within the
required time period prior to the meeting. The ninety-day time
limit for action shall not begin until such acceptance.
(d) Reject the submission for just cause, such as the submission
being significantly incomplete.
§ 423-36 SCRANTON CODE § 423-36
417:802
(2) If the Commission determines that the submission is significantly
complete, as filed and as required, the Commission shall accept the
plans and may begin its review.
(3) Zoning variances. An application under this chapter shall not be
considered to be complete if one or more zoning variances will be
required for the subdivision or land development to legally occur as
submitted, until such time as the needed zoning variances have
been granted.
E. Review by Subdivision Bureau. The Subdivision Bureau (including the
City Engineer) should review the engineering considerations in the plan
and prepare report(s) on such considerations to the Commission.
F. Decision by the Planning Commission.
(1) The applicant and the preparer of the plans are expected to attend
Planning Commission meeting(s) where his/her submission will be
reviewed. If the Commission has insufficient information to render
a decision as a result of such nonattendance, such attendance may
result in disapproval of the submission.
(2) The Planning Commission shall accomplish the following within the
time limitations of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code104 (unless the applicant grants a written time extension).
(a) Review all applicable reports received from the appropriate
review agencies and officers.
(b) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
(c) Review the final plan submission and recommend any needed
revisions so that the submission will conform to this chapter
and other applicable ordinances.
(d) Approve, conditionally approve or reject the final plan
submission within the time required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. [NOTE: As of 1994, that law
generally requires the Planning Commission to act not
later than 90 days following the date of the first regular
meeting of the Commission held after it has been duly
filed for review; but, in no case shall the Planning
Commission's decision be made later than 120 days
following the date the submission was accepted as being
filed for review, unless the applicant grants a written
extension of time.]
(3) If a final plan submission is disapproved, the decision shall specify
defects found in the submission, shall describe requirements which
104. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 423-36 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-36
417:803
§ 423-37. Minor subdivision final plan requirements.
All of the following information and materials listed in this section are
required as part of all minor subdivision submissions, other than lot line
adjustments or submittals under § 423-38. This list of requirements shall
serve as both a list of requirements and as a checklist for the applicant and
have not been met, and shall cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon in each case.
G. Review by the County Planning Commission. No subdivision or land
development shall be granted final approval until a report is received
from the County Planning Commission or until 30 days have passed
from the date the application was forwarded to the County Planning
Commission.
H. Actions after decision by the Planning Commission.
(1) The decision of the Planning Commission shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to
him/her at the last known address not later than 15 days following
the decision.
(2) Approval.
(a) The approval of the final plan by the Planning Commission
shall not by itself constitute an acceptance of the dedication of
any street or other proposed public way, space or area, unless
such acceptance is specifically made at such time.
(b) Any such acceptance of dedication shall be specifically stated
along with the signatures required for approval.
(c) If the Planning Commission elects to accept lands offered for
dedication, the submission shall be accompanied by duly
executed instruments of conveyance to the city. Such
instruments shall state that the title thereof is free and
unencumbered.
(3) Acceptance of conditions. Any conditions on the approval shall be
mailed or otherwise provided, in writing, to the applicant or his/her
official representative. If the applicant provides notice to the city
that he/she rejects one or more conditions within 30 days after the
Planning Commission action, then the submission shall be
considered to have been rejected. The applicant is requested to
provide notice, in writing, that the conditions have been accepted.
However, if the applicant does not respond concerning the
conditions or otherwise file an official appeal within 30 days after
the Planning Commission action, then all of the conditions shall
automatically be considered to have been accepted by the
applicant.
§ 423-36 SCRANTON CODE § 423-37
417:804
the city to ensure completion of submissions. The applicant shall submit
completed photocopies of this section as part of the application.
§ 423-38. Lot line adjustments, annexations and minor revisions of
approved plans.
A. The reduced submission and approval requirements listed in this
section shall only apply, if either of the following apply: [Amended
4-30-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
(1) The proposal will meet the definition of a "lot line adjustment"; and/
or
(2) In the determination of the City Planning Director, which may be
based upon the advice of the City Engineer, the proposal will
involve revisions to a previously approved plan, and those revisions
involve only changes in the supporting documentation or
engineering details or to correct erroneous data or minor omissions
concerning a plan previously granted final plan approval.
B. The following list of requirements shall serve as both a list of
requirements and as a checklist for the applicant and the city to ensure
completion of submissions. The applicant shall submit completed
photocopies of this section as part of the application. The required
information listed in this section may be combined or separated onto
different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly readable.
C. Additional information. The City Subdivision Bureau may require that a
plan under this section include the submission of specific additional
information that would be required if the plan would be a final minor
subdivision plan, if such specific information is necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter. [Amended 4-30-2018 by Ord. No.
9-2018]
D. Annexed lands under this section shall be made part of the larger lot
and included within the description in the new deed. [Amended
4-30-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
E. Decision by the City Subdivision Bureau. Plans submitted under this
section may be approved by the City Subdivision Bureau instead of the
City Planning Commission. Such approval will be denoted by the both
the signature and date of the City Engineer and City Planner on the
plan. Where the City Subdivision Bureau determines that a plan
submitted under this section warrants review by the City Planning
Commission due to its impact and/or intensity, it shall not take final
action and refer the plan to City Planning Commission for review.
[Added 4-30-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
(1) The City Subdivision Bureau shall accomplish the following within
the time limitations of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code105 (unless the applicant grants a written time extension):
§ 423-37 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-38
417:805
§ 423-39. Certification.
See § 423-31.
(a) Review of applicable reports received from the appropriate
review agencies and officers;
(b) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances;
(c) Review the final plan submission and recommend any needed
revisions so that the submission will conform to this chapter
and other applicable ordinances; and
(d) Approve, conditionally approve or reject the final plan
submission and recommend any needed revisions so that the
submission within the time frame required by Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.106
(2) If a final plan submission is disapproved, the decision shall specify
defects found in the submission, shall describe requirements which
have not been met, and shall cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon in each case.
F. Review by the County Planning Commission. No subdivision or land
development shall be granted final approval until a report is received
from the County Planning Commission or until 30 days have passed
from the date the application was forwarded to the County Planning
Commission. [Added 4-30-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
G. Actions after decision by the Subdivision Bureau. [Added 4-30-2018
by Ord. No. 9-2018]
(1) Acceptance of conditions. Any conditions on the approval shall be
mailed or otherwise provided in writing to the applicant or his/her
official representative. If the applicant provides notice to the City
that he/she rejects one or more conditions within 30 days after the
Subdivision Bureau action, then the submission shall be considered
to have been rejected. The applicant is requested to provide notice
in writing that the conditions have been accepted. However, if the
applicant does not respond concerning the conditions or otherwise
file an official appeal within 30 days after the Subdivision Bureau
action, then all of the conditions shall automatically be considered
to have been accepted by the applicant.
(2) The Subdivision Bureau shall make a report of all plans approved
under this section to the City Planning Commission at the first
regular meeting of the Commission following said approvals.
105. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
106. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 423-38 SCRANTON CODE § 423-40
417:806
§ 423-40. Recording plans.
See Article X.
§ 423-40 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-40
417:807

ARTICLE IX
Improvement Guaranties
§ 423-41. Guaranty of improvements installation required.
§ 423-42. Improvements to be provided by the applicant.
§ 423-43. Development agreement.
A. Before approving any subdivision or land development plan for
recording, the Planning Commission shall require that the city be
assured by means of proper financial security that the improvements
required by this chapter will be installed in strict accordance with the
standards and specifications of this chapter, except: If a developer
chooses to install all required improvements prior to construction of
any building, in place of using performance guaranties, in which case
the city shall, as deemed necessary, require the developer to provide
adequate insurance, hold harmless agreements, an escrow account to
cover the costs of inspections and a professional estimate of the costs of
the improvements (to be used to establish the amount of the inspections
escrow).
B. Purpose of security. The security required by this chapter shall stand as
security for compliance with all city ordinances, other laws, covenants,
stipulations, conditions and resolutions applicable to the subdivision or
land development for which it is filed.
C. In any case, no construction of buildings or sales of any individual lot or
condominium unit within a subdivision or land development shall take
place unless:
(1) There is on file, with the city, current duly executed and approved
financial security; or
(2) All rough grading is complete and all required public
improvements, utilities, streets, drainage facilities, sewers and any
street lights have been completed and accepted by the governing
body.
A. The applicant for a subdivision or the future purchaser of the entire
subdivision shall have the primary responsibility to ensure installation
of all improvements required by this chapter, unless the Planning
Commission specifically approves certain improvements being made
the responsibility of future purchasers of individual lots.
B. The City Engineer or other city designee shall make such inspections of
the required improvements at such intervals as may be reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with this chapter. The reasonable costs
of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivider or land developer,
through use of an escrow account.
A. Development agreement.
§ 423-41 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-43
417:809
(1) All applicants proposing any subdivision or land development
which provides for the installation of improvements required by
this chapter or any improvements or amenities which appear on the
final plan shall be required to enter into a legally binding
development agreement with the city prior to recording of the final
plan, unless:
(a) The applicant agrees to meet § 423-41 concerning the
construction of all improvements prior to the construction of
any buildings or the sale of any lots or homesites.
(b) The governing body determines that a development agreement
is not necessary.
(2) The development agreement shall guaranty the installation of said
improvements in strict accordance with all city requirements.
(3) See § 423-41A concerning financial security.
B. Terms of development agreement. The development agreement shall be
acceptable in legal form to the City Solicitor and shall be acceptable in
content to the governing body. The city may require that a development
agreement include any of the following items, where applicable, and
such additional items as are necessary to carry out this chapter:
(1) The construction depicted on the approved plans, listed in itemized
format, including all approved streets, drainage facilities, utility
lines and other improvements.
(2) A work schedule setting forth the beginning and ending dates of
such work tied to the construction of the development and
provisions to allow proper inspection by the City Engineer.
(3) The provision of a performance guaranty for completion of required
improvements in compliance with § 423-44, including a detailed
breakdown of the estimated costs of the improvements, including
the total amount of the performance guaranty.
(4) Provisions concerning the developer's responsibilities for damage
to other property, including maintenance by the developer of public
liability insurance for the duration of improvements construction,
with a hold harmless clause to protect the city from liability related
to such work. A copy or other evidence of such liability coverage
shall be provided to the city prior to such work.
(5) Provisions requiring that the applicant and/or other responsible
entities ensure that erosion, sedimentation and stormwater
management plans are complied with.
(6) Provisions for the dedication of streets, water and sewer lines and
any other easements or improvements approved to be dedicated.
(7) See § 423-49 concerning the requirement for a record plan.
§ 423-43 SCRANTON CODE § 423-43
417:810
§ 423-44. Performance guaranty.
The performance guaranty for completion of required improvements shall
meet the following requirements:
(8) Provisions for the developer to reimburse the city for all reasonable
engineering costs directly related to the review, construction and
inspection of the proposed development and to the review and
preparation of the development agreements.
(9) Provisions concerning any violations of the development
agreement.
(10) Any other lawful terms which the governing body may require to
carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(11) Signatures. The development agreement shall be signed by all
responsible landowners and/or developers.
C. Ownership of land and guaranty.
(1) A certificate of ownership in the form of Appendix B107 shall be
executed in the exact name in which title is held. If the developer(s)
of a subdivision is someone other than the landowner(s) of the
subdivision, the developer shall also execute this affidavit, along
with a security agreement.
(2) Change in ownership or developer. Any conveyance of all or a
substantial portion of the unimproved lots or public improvements
or streets of any subdivision or change in developers, whether
voluntary or by action of law or otherwise, shall require prior
approval by the governing body. Any such conveyance shall
automatically require that the new landowner and/or developer
fully assume all applicable responsibilities under the development
agreement and post all the appropriate security agreements.
D. Utility agreements. If a development will connect into a public water or
public sanitary sewage system, the applicable authority, agency or
company may also require separate development agreements.
A. Security.
(1) The guaranty shall be secured by any of the following:
(a) An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit of a federal or
state chartered lending institution.
(b) A restrictive or escrow account in a federal or state chartered
lending institution.
107. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the city offices.
§ 423-43 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-44
417:811
(c) Such other financial security approved by the city (which
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld), but not including
a second or third mortgage on unimproved lands.
(2) Such approved security shall provide for, and secure to the public,
the completion of any improvements which may be required within
the date fixed in the development schedule for the completion of
such improvements. It is the responsibility of the developer to
ensure that such security remains in effect during the entire time
period of construction of improvements. The city staff may withhold
or suspend the issuance of permits if such security lapses.
(3) Such financial security shall be posted with an approved institution
or entity authorized to conduct such business within Pennsylvania.
(a) The Mayor may require that evidence be provided that such
institution or entity has adequate and sufficiently secure assets
to cover the security.
(b) The city shall be the authorized signatory on any account in
which the escrow funds are held.
B. Amount.
(1) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer in the official development schedule
(see § 423-43).
(2) The cost of the improvements shall be established by an estimate
prepared by a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer,
which shall be reviewed by the City Engineer, within the arbitration
process permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.108
(3) Inflation. If the party posting the financial security requires more
than one year from the date of posting of the financial security to
complete the required improvements, the amount of financial
security may be increased by a maximum of an additional 10% for
each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from
posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding 100% of
the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished
on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by
using the above procedure.
(4) Inspection fees. The amount of financial security may also be
required to include an additional 5% of the estimated cost of
completion of the work to guaranty payment of inspection fees and
related engineering costs. In any case, the applicant shall
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 423-44 SCRANTON CODE § 423-44
417:812
§ 423-45. Approval of improvements.
compensate the city for all actual costs to the city of the inspections
and related engineering, based upon established hourly rates that
include compensation for employee benefits. If such costs are
higher than the five-percent security, the applicant shall also fund
the difference. If such costs are lower than the five-percent
security, then the remaining funds shall be released by the city.
C. Multiyear or multistage development. In the case where development is
projected over a period of years, the Planning Commission may
authorize submission of final plans by phases/stages of development
subject to such requirements or improvement guaranties concerning
future improvements as it finds necessary for the proper functioning of
each phase and for the eventual development as a whole. Such phasing
may also be approved through a development agreement.
A. In general. As the work of installing the required improvements
proceeds, the party posting the financial security may from time to time
request the city to authorize the release of portions of the financial
security related to the work that has been completed.
B. Notice by developer of work on improvements.
(1) The developer or his/her representative shall provide a minimum of
three days notice to the City Engineer's office (or other inspection
official designated by the Mayor) prior to beginning each major
facet of construction, in order to allow the scheduling of
inspections.
(2) When an improvement has been completed, the developer shall
notify the city and request release of related financial security, in
writing, to City Council by certified or registered mail. The
developer shall send a copy of letter to the City Engineer at the
same time.
C. Engineer's report.
(1) Within 30 days of the receipt of such request, the City Engineer
shall submit a written report certifying which improvements have
been completed in accordance with the approved plan to the Mayor
and mail a copy of such report by certified or registered mail to the
developer or his/her representative at her last known address.
(2) This report shall be based on site inspections and shall recommend
approval or rejection of the improvements, either in whole or in
part.
(3) The City Engineer shall state if any of the improvements related to
the developer's request for release of funds have not been
satisfactorily completed as approved.
§ 423-44 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-45
417:813
D. Decision by the governing body.
(1) After receiving the Engineer's report [but not later than 45 days
after the receipt of the request], the Mayor shall review the City
Engineer's report and shall authorize the release of funds
estimated by the City Engineer to fairly represent the value of the
improvements satisfactorily completed.
(2) The city shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as
requested if the city fails to act within 45 days of receipt of the
developer's request.
(3) Until final release (completion of all improvements), the city may
require that a maximum of 10% of the cost of each completed
improvement be retained.
(4) The City Engineer shall notify the developer, in writing, by certified
or registered mail of the decision.
E. Completion of unapproved improvements. The developer shall
satisfactorily complete any required improvements that the city
determines are not satisfactory or complete. Upon completion, the
applicant may request approval in conformance with the procedures
specified in this § 423-45.
F. Final release.
(1) When the developer has satisfactorily completed all of the required
improvements, the developer shall request final release in
conformance with the procedures specified in this § 423-45. See
time limitations and procedures in Section 510 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.109
(2) Such final release shall include all moneys retained under
§ 423-45D(3).
G. Appeal. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise any determination of the city or the City Engineer.
H. Certificates of occupancy and completion of improvements.
(1) A temporary or final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
and a structure shall not be occupied unless all principal buildings
have access to a clearly permanently passable street with at least a
complete paving base course and any required curbing installed.
(2) In addition to part Subsection H(1) above, no final certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until the structure is completed as
approved with service by all required utilities and with all access
onto a street completed to required standards, if applicable.
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 423-45 SCRANTON CODE § 423-46
417:814
§ 423-46. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
§ 423-47. Maintenance guaranty.
A. Enforcement of security.
(1) In the event that any improvements which may be required have
not been installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the
approved final plan, or in the event of the bankruptcy of the owner
or developer, the city is hereby granted the power to elect to
enforce any security posted under this chapter by appropriate legal
and equitable remedies. This may include taking all actions
necessary to obtain moneys under said security, including but not
limited to seizure of undeveloped lots, seizure of escrow funds,
revocation of building permits and prosecution under this chapter.
(2) Rate of construction. Failure of a developer to construct streets and
other public improvements reasonably at the same time or prior to
the construction of the buildings served by those streets or public
improvements, and at the same rate in time at which buildings are
completed, shall be a violation of this chapter and a cause for
default of the security.
B. Completion by city. If the proceeds of such security are insufficient to
pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the city may at its option install
part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land
development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to
recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements.
C. Proceeds for installation of improvements. The proceeds from use of the
security and/or from any legal or equitable action brought against the
developer shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such security and closely related administrative expenses.
A. Maintenance guaranty required. All applicants proposing any
subdivision or land development which provides for the public
dedication of improvements required by this chapter shall be required
to provide a legally binding maintenance guaranty to the city prior to
acceptance of dedication of the improvements by the city. In most cases,
this guaranty will be part of the security agreement.
B. Terms of maintenance guaranty. The maintenance guaranty shall be
acceptable in legal form to the city solicitor and in content to the
governing body and shall include all of the following:
(1) That the applicant make any repair or reconstruction of any
improvement stipulated in the maintenance agreement which is
specified by the governing body if needed because of faulty
construction, workmanship or materials, prior to acceptance of
such improvement by the city.
§ 423-46 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-47
417:815
(2) That the applicant maintain at his/her own cost all improvements
stipulated in the maintenance agreement, including a maximum
period of 18 months after the date of dedication, unless a lesser
period is specified otherwise.
(3) That the applicant post financial security to secure structural
integrity of and proper functioning of such required improvements
in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the
final plan, for a maximum period of 18 months after the date of
dedication.
(4) That the developer plow snow and maintain all streets until such
time as the city may accept such streets.
C. Public utilities and authorities. If water mains and/or sanitary sewer
lines and related facilities are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
under the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations
of the controlling public utility or municipal authority. This amount of
financial security shall not also be required by the city if it is required
by such utility or authority.
D. Type of security. The maintenance guaranty shall be secured by the
same form of security as is permitted for the improvements guaranties.
E. Security. The financial security shall be payable to and enforceable by
the City of Scranton.
F. Amount. The amount of the maintenance guaranty shall be determined
by the applicant's engineer, conditioned upon acceptance by the city,
but shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of such
improvements.
G. Release. After a maximum of 18 months from the date of completion of
said improvements, the city shall release the maintenance guaranty to
the developer (or party that posted the guaranty) if all improvements
are in satisfactory condition, as determined by the city.
§ 423-47 SCRANTON CODE § 423-47
417:816
ARTICLE X
Recording of Final Plan
§ 423-48. Recording of final plan.
§ 423-49. Record plan.
The applicant shall provide to the city one mylar and one paper clear and
legible copy of the record plan, in addition to providing whatever type
of copies are required by the county. The city copies shall be made after
recording and shall be exact copies of those portions of the approved final
plan that the city requires to be recorded. Such record plan, at a minimum,
shall include all of the following:
A. Deadline.
(1) The applicant is responsible to ensure that the final plan as
approved by the Planning Commission is recorded in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds of the county within 90 days of such final
approval.
(a) If the final plan approval included official conditions that must
be met prior to recording, then the plan shall be recorded
within 90 days following the compliance with such conditions,
up to a maximum total of one year following the final plan
approval.
(2) In any case, specific extensions of these time periods may be
granted, in writing, by the Planning Commission.
(3) The applicant shall mail or deliver a receipt of the recording to the
City Engineer.
(4) No plan shall be recorded unless it bears the signatures of the
Chairperson of the Planning Commission and the City Engineer, at
a minimum.
B. At its option, the city may voluntarily agree in advance to record a final
plan, in which case the applicant shall compensate the city for such
costs.
C. The final plan shall not be recorded unless the plan is signed by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall not sign such plan unless the
applicant proves that they have met all required conditions that the City
Engineer determines would impact the recorded final plan.
A. Street rights-of-way.
B. Any common open spaces or dedicated parkland.
C. Easements and any covenants that the city required to be placed on the
final plan.
§ 423-48 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-49
417:817
§ 423-50. Effect of recording.
Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision or land
development plan that is recorded, as provided herein, shall be deemed
to be a private street, open space or improvement until such time it may
be offered and officially accepted for dedication to the city, or is duly
condemned.
§ 423-51. Postconstruction plans.
D. Lot lines and lot dimensions.
E. Water lines, sanitary and storm sewer lines and stormwater drainage
facilities.
F. The required signatures of city officials and the County Planning
Commission staff.
G. Notations stating whether the streets, any common open space and
other proposed improvements are to be offered or not offered for
dedication to the city.
A. After completion of construction of each defined phase of a submission
or land development, the developer shall provide a mylar and a paper
copy of all of the subdivision and land development plans showing the
improvements as actually constructed. The developer shall provide a
signed and dated notarized statement stating that the postconstruction
plans are accurate, which shall be based upon on-site supervision by
the developer and/or his/her employee, engineer and/or contractor(s). If
the developer is unsure whether any aspects of the construction
occurred as shown on the postconstruction plans, such aspects should
be stated.
B. Applicants are strongly encouraged to continue to have the preparer of
the plans involved throughout the construction process, including
periodic inspections of the construction and to have the plans preparer
note any changes he/she is aware of.
§ 423-49 SCRANTON CODE § 423-51
417:818
ARTICLE XI
Design Standards and Required Improvements
§ 423-52. Minimum requirements.
§ 423-53. Required improvements.
This Article sets forth the design and construction standards for required
improvements, regardless of whether the improvement will be dedicated to
the city.
§ 423-54. Overall requirements.
A. The design standards and improvements required in this Article are the
minimum requirements for approval of a subdivision or land
development. Additional or higher type improvements may be required
in specific cases as a condition of approval where the Planning
Commission determines such improvements are clearly necessary to
protect the public health and safety.
B. The Planning Commission may require reasonable appropriate deed
restrictions on land within a subdivision or land development, with the
restrictions stated in each applicable deed and noted on every recorded
plan, if needed to ensure compliance with city, state and federal laws
and regulations and to protect the public health and safety.
A. Land shall be suitable for the purpose for which it is to be subdivided or
developed.
B. Hazardous conditions. Subdivisions or land developments subject to
hazardous conditions (such as open quarries, hazardous or toxic site
pollution, unconsolidated fill, floods, excessive erosion or unsafe water
supply) shall not be approved until the developer has provided or has
legally committed to provide adequate measures to overcome or
eliminate the hazards, in the determination of the Planning
Commission, to the best of their knowledge. However, the city accepts
no responsibility to identify hazards or to guaranty their resolution.
C. Zoning. All aspects of a proposed subdivision or land development shall
conform to Chapter 445, Zoning, and all other city ordinances and
specifications.
D. Nearby development. A subdivision or land development and its street
pattern shall be coordinated with existing or approved nearby
developments or neighborhoods to help develop the area harmoniously
and to help prevent conflicts with neighboring uses.
E. Safety. No subdivision or land development shall occur in such a way
that would significantly threaten the public health and safety, including
hazards of toxic substances, traffic hazards, explosive hazards and fire
hazards.
§ 423-52 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-55
417:819
§ 423-55. Streets.
A. Access to streets. See Article VIII of Chapter 445, Zoning.
B. Streets and topography. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the
contour of the land to produce usable lots. See the street slope
requirements of Subsection F.
C. Street continuations.
(1) Stub streets. Where deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission for efficient movement of traffic, a subdivision or land
development shall include the extension of a proposed street with
right-of-way to the boundary line of the tract to provide for an
eventual extension into the adjacent tract for efficient circulation of
traffic throughout the area.
(2) Widening. Where a subdivision or land development abuts or
contains an existing street of inadequate cartway or right-of-way
width, additional right-of-way and/or cartway width shall be
required where determined by the Planning Commission to be
necessary, up to the widths stated in Table 1, Design Standards for
Streets.
D. Intersections.
(1) The center lines of streets shall intersect at right angles except
where the Planning Commission determines that a right angle
intersection is not feasible. In such case, the intersection shall be at
as nearly a right angle as possible, with an absolute minimum angle
of 75°.
(2) Alignment of street intersections.
(a) No more than two streets shall intersect at one point.
(b) Where a proposed street or business driveway intersects an
existing cross street, such proposed street or business
driveway shall be aligned with any street intersecting on the
other side of the cross street, unless the Planning Commission
or PennDOT determine that such alignment is not reasonable
or feasible.
(c) If a proposed street cannot intersect at the same point as a
street intersecting on the other side of the cross street, then
the proposed street shall be offset by the following minimum
distances from the nearest intersection of streets:
[1] 150 feet along a local street.
[2] 300 feet along a collector street.
[3] 800 feet along an arterial street.
§ 423-55 SCRANTON CODE § 423-55
417:820
[4] Measurement. The minimum distances of this subsection
shall be measured between the points where the center
lines of the rights-of-way of the intersecting streets
intersect with the center line of the cross street.
(3) At street intersections, lot lines shall be rounded by arcs with the
radii listed below. For arterial streets, the Planning Commission
may require a larger radius than stated below, if recommended by
the City Engineer.
Type of Street
Minimum Radius
of Arc at
Intersection of
Cartway Edge or
Curbline
(in feet)
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection
of Right-of-Way
(in feet)
Arterial 40 30
Collector 35 25
Local 25 15
E. Arterial street frontage.
(1) Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission shall
require one or more of the following methods of layout and site
design if it determines one or more of these methods will be
reasonable, feasible and necessary to avoid increased traffic
congestion and improve traffic safety. The Commission's decision to
use one or more of the following methods shall consider any
recommendations of the City Engineer, PennDOT and any
professional traffic studies that have been submitted:
(a) The use of a marginal access or frontage street or access only
onto side or interior streets, to collect traffic from numerous
driveways and direct it to a select few number of entrances to
the arterial street.
(b) The minimization of the number and length of driveway cuts or
street intersections onto an arterial street, which may include
requiring the use of shared driveways between adjacent uses
§ 423-55 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-55
417:821
or lots and/or driveways providing cross-connections between
abutting business lots.
(c) The restriction of ingress and egress involving left-hand turns
onto or off of the arterial street.
(d) Prohibiting driveways of individual dwellings from directly
entering onto an arterial street.
(2) Where individual driveways are permitted to access onto an
arterial street, each driveway shall have adequate turnaround
space for vehicles provided within the lot so that vehicles do not
back onto the street.
F. Street design standard.
(1) Minimum street design standards shall be as shown in Table 1,
unless PennDOT establishes a more restrictive requirement for a
state road.
TABLE 1
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
(All Dimensions in Feet Unless Specified)
Design
Specifications
Type of Street
Arterial Collector Local
Right-of-way
width5
60 to 80 50 to 60 50
Cartway width As determined
by PennDOT to
be necessary
30 to 365 26 to 325
Minimum sight
distance1
475 300 200
Minimum
tangent
between
reverse curves2
200 100 100
§ 423-55 SCRANTON CODE § 423-55
417:822
TABLE 1
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
(All Dimensions in Feet Unless Specified)
Design
Specifications
Type of Street
Arterial Collector Local
Minimum
center-line
radii for
horizontal
curves
4003 300 150
Maximum
grade4
6% 8% 10%
NOTES:
1 Horizontal sight distances shall be measured from a point
3.50 feet above the road surface to a point six inches above
the road surface, and shall be based upon standards of the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO).
2 All tangents shall be measured along the street center line.
3 Larger radii may be required as determined to be needed
by the City Engineer or PennDOT.
4 Minimum grades for all streets and alleys shall be 0.5%.
5 The Planning Commission shall determine the appropriate
width within the ranges provided in this table based upon:
the width of connecting streets, the need for on-street
parking, the amount of traffic expected over the long-run
once any street extensions are completed and
recommendations of the city staff. Generally, local streets
in most cases are intended to have a minimum cartway
width of 30 feet, except:
(a) Cul-de-sac streets that ultimately will serve fewer than 20
dwelling units shall be permitted to have a minimum cartway
width of 26 feet.
(b) If single-family detached residential lots of 20,000 square feet
or more will be located on both sides of a local street, then that
street may have a minimum cartway width of 20 feet, provided
that four feet wide shoulders of approved construction are
provided on each side of the street.
(2) Horizontal curves shall connect street lines that are deflected in
excess of 2°.
§ 423-55 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-55
417:823
(3) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1%.
The length of the vertical curve shall be determined by the required
site distance specified in Table 1.
(4) All approaches to an intersection of two or more streets shall have
a leveling area not greater than 5% grade for a distance of 25 feet,
measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting
street.
(5) The minimum grade of any street gutter shall be 0.75%.
(6) For a proposed subdivision or land development, an alley having a
right-of-way of 20 feet or less shall only be used for secondary
vehicle access. However, an alley may be used for primary vehicle
access for buildings that existed prior to the adoption of this
chapter, even if such existing buildings are subdivided onto
separate lots. An alley serving one-way traffic shall have a
minimum cartway width of 10 feet and a minimum right-of-way
width of 16 feet. An alley serving two-way traffic shall have a
minimum cartway width of 16 feet and a minimum right-of-way
width of 22 feet.
G. Easements. See § 423-62C
H. Sight distance. See Section § 445-74 of Chapter 445, Zoning.
I. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Cul-de-sac streets shall be permitted with a maximum length of
1,000 feet. Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with a turnaround
with a minimum paved cartway radius of 40 feet to the face of the
outside curb, except: The 40 feet minimum paved cartway radius
may be reduced to 35 feet if and when the applicant proves that
such street would meet PennDOT requirements for liquid fuels
reimbursement, considering any changes in PennDOT standards
that may occur after the adoption of this chapter.
(2) The circular right-of-way of the cul-de-sac shall maintain a
minimum 10 feet width between the edge of paving and the edge of
the legal street right-of-way. The circular paving of the cul-de-sac
shall be connected to the approach paving by an arc having a
radius of not fewer than 25 feet.
(3) The Planning Commission may permit acceptable alternative
turnaround designs, including a turnaround of acceptable radii
incorporated into a parking court or a landscaped island (with an
acceptable system for maintenance) within a cul-de-sac.
(4) No street shall dead-end without an approved turnaround at the
end of the street. Temporary stub streets shall be required to
include a temporary cul-de-sac if the stub would be longer than 150
feet or serve more than three dwellings or lots.
§ 423-55 SCRANTON CODE § 423-55
417:824
(5) The maximum cross slope on the circular part of a cul-de-sac shall
be 80%.
(6) A cul-de-sac street, or a combination of cul-de-sac streets
connected so as to effectively form a system with only one point of
entry, shall serve a total maximum of 20 dwelling units.
J. Maintenance. As a condition for final plan approval, the developer must
enter into a legally binding agreement which shall state who is to be
responsible for the improvement and maintenance of any street not
offered for dedication. If an association of lot owners is to be made
responsible, such association must be legally organized prior to plan
approval by an agreement approved by the city.
K. Street design and construction standards.
(1) Streets shall be graded, improved and surfaced to the grades and
dimensions shown on plans, profiles and cross-sections submitted
by the developer that meet applicable city standards. See width
and slope requirements in § 423-55F.
(a) All new and extended streets shall be constructed of the
following materials, except as provided in Subsection K(3)
below, or unless the city adopts differing standards by
resolution or ordinance:
[1] Six inches compacted aggregate base course.
[2] 1.5 inches compacted ID-2 binder course.
[3] One inch compacted ID-2 wearing course.
(b) In any case, any street intended to be dedicated to the city
shall meet the minimum standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation that apply for city eligibility to
receive state liquid fuels reimbursement for such street.
(2) Right-of-way grading.
(a) The entire right-of-way shall be graded to the approved crosssection.
All trees, stumps and other material deemed
unsuitable by the City Engineer shall be removed. The
excavation shall be backfilled and suitably compacted to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer.
(b) The finished street surface shall be crowned in conformance
with the city specifications.
(3) Alternative street specifications. An applicant may, if recommended
by the City Engineer and approved by the Planning Commission,
use an alternative road bed design that is specifically
recommended for that type of street by a current official
publication of PennDOT. The alternate design must provide load
§ 423-55 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-55
417:825
capabilities equivalent to or higher than the capabilities of the
designs set forth above.
(4) Grading beyond right-of-way.
(a) The subdivider or developer may be required to grade beyond
the right-of-way line in order to provide continuous slope from
the right-of-way line to the proposed elevation of the abutting
property.
(b) Such grading beyond the right-of-way shall maintain the
original conditions of slope and contours except where
stormwater runoff designs dictate or warrant improvement or
alteration of the original slope and contours.
(c) Approved plans, either preliminary or final, showing proposed
grading, shall be a covenant running with the land, unless
altered by written permission from the Planning Commission in
conjunction with the County Conservation District.
(d) In areas of earth excavation or earth fill, such grading shall be
done to a maximum slope of three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical.
(5) Drainage of streets.
(a) Parallel and cross drainage facilities shall be properly located,
designed and installed to maintain proper drainage of the
completed streets.
(b) Proper design and construction in accordance with those
requirements may require the use of curb and gutter or paved
drainage swales to prevent erosion. Drainage facilities shall be
designed in accordance with requirements of § 423-59.
(c) The minimum diameter of any cross drainage or culvert pipe
shall be 15 inches.
(d) Open pipe ends must be fitted with concrete end walls or wing
walls or prefabricated end sections and with protective safety
gratings.
(e) No open pipes shall be allowed to end within the city street
right-of-way, except in cases where new driveways must cross
existing deep road side swales adjacent to existing city streets.
In the case of these exemptions to the standard, the pipe shall
be located as far off the edge of pavement as possible [at least
20 feet from the street center line].
(f) Energy dissipators shall be placed at the outlets of all pipes
where flow velocities exceed maximum permitted channel
velocities.
§ 423-55 SCRANTON CODE § 423-55
417:826
(g) Bridges and culverts shall be designed to support expected
loads in accordance with applicable federal and/or state
standards to accommodate expected stormwater flows and be
constructed to adequate width in accordance with PennDOT
standards. The applicant shall apply for and obtain a DEP
permit when required.
(h) Consideration shall be given for subgrade drainage of those
soils subject to frost heave. Design of the road bed in such
locations may require parallel drainage facilities and/or
underdrains to properly stabilize the subgrade. The Planning
Commission may require that such drainage facilities be
provided. The design of such subgrade drainage facilities shall
be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
(i) Erosion control. See § 423-71.
(j) Stormwater drainage. See § 423-59.
(k) A set of approved design plans shall be maintained on file at
the site during construction as record drawings.
L. Private streets. Any private street or accessway that will eventually
serve traffic from four or more residential lots or three or more
industrial, commercial and/or institutional lots shall be designed and
constructed to city construction standards, including the provision of a
street right-of-way.
M. Required traffic improvements.
(1) Purpose. In recognition of the authority and limitations provided by
Article V-A and Sections 503(2)(ii) and 503(3) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,110 this section is primarily intended
to ensure that streets bordering a submission or land development
are coordinated and of such widths and grades and in such
locations as deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic
and to facilitate fire protection and to ensure that the access into
and out of subdivisions and land developments is sufficiently safe.
(2) Process. This Subsection M shall be carried out through
determinations of the Planning Commission, after considering any
recommendations of the City Engineer, the applicant, the
applicant's professional representatives, any comments from
PennDOT that may be provided regarding a state road and any
professional traffic studies that may have been submitted.
(3) On-site/abutting traffic improvements. If, in the determination of
the Planning Commission, there is a reasonable relationship
between the need for an on-site improvement of a street and the
traffic created by a proposed subdivision or land development, the
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq. and 53 P.S. § 10503(2)(ii) and (3), respectively.
§ 423-55 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-55
417:827
applicant for such subdivision or land development shall be
required to complete the needed improvement or fund his/her fair
share of the cost of such traffic improvement and to dedicate
sufficient street right-of-way for needed improvements.
(a) Widening of abutting roads. Where an existing abutting public
street is of inadequate width, an applicant for any land
development or major subdivision shall be required to widen
the cartway of abutting streets to city standards to result in a
minimum paved cartway width of 14 feet on each side of the
center line.
[1] The applicant shall only be responsible for improvements
from the center line of the street right-of-way inward
towards the project's lot lines, unless the Planning
Commission determines that improvements on the other
side of the center line are essential for public safety.
[2] A lesser width may be permitted where the Planning
Commission determines that such would be appropriate
and/or would save mature trees.
[3] A wider width may be required by the Planning
Commission where needed along a collector or arterial
street.
(b) Such improvements and right-of-way shall be required unless
the Planning Commission determines:
[1] That there is not a reasonable relationship between the
improvements and the traffic created by the the proposed
development.
[2] That widening or right-of-way or other improvements are
not needed or that a lesser improvement is sufficient.
[3] That PennDOT specifically refuses, in writing, to allow
such improvement to a state road in the foreseeable
future, in which case the city may still require that
abutting right-of-way be dedicated to the city or reserved
for future dedication if needed in the future.
(c) Any improvement to a state street shall meet all PennDOT
standards.
(4) Types of required traffic improvements.
(a) The following shall be the definition of on-site improvement
(unless this definition is amended by state law): all street
improvements constructed on the applicant's property or the
improvements constructed on the property abutting the
applicant's property necessary for the ingress or egress to the
applicant's property.
§ 423-55 SCRANTON CODE § 423-55
417:828
(b) On-site improvements may include, but are not limited to a new
or upgraded traffic signal, land dedication to improve an
abutting intersection, realignment of an abutting curve in a
road or the widening of the abutting cartway and right-of-way.
(c) The city shall not require an applicant to fund or complete a
road improvement that is an off-site improvement, unless the
Planning Commission determines that such improvement is
clearly essential for the physical safety of the occupants/
residents of the proposed development (such as for emergency
vehicle access).
(5) Funding. In place of completing a required street improvement as a
condition of final approval, an applicant may enter into a legally
binding development agreement with the city for the applicant to
fund the improvement or his/her fair share of such improvement as
determined by the Planning Commission.
(6) Accounting. Any such funds may be placed in escrow until such
time as sufficient funds are available for a more comprehensive
improvement, with interest being used towards the cost of the
improvement. Any such funds received under this subsection shall
be accounted for separately.
(7) Staging. Any completion or funding of a required road
improvement may occur in stages in relationship to the stages of
the development, if so stated in a legally binding development
agreement and/or as a condition of final plan approval.
(8) Multi-bridge project. [Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 55-2019]
(a) Delegation of authority. The City of Scranton hereby delegates
to the Secretary of Transportation its authority to acquire the
rights-of-way necessary for the multi-bridge project described
and enumerated in Agreement 04M173, passed by City Council
on November 27, 2018, said agreement containing all
applicable multi-bridge project terms and conditions
incorporated by reference therein as if fully set forth.111
(b) Duration. This delegation shall continue until all multi-bridge
project terms and conditions of Agreement No. 04M173 shall
be fully satisfied or, at the election of the parties as set forth
herein, the same shall be otherwise terminated.
(c) Purpose and scope of delegation. The Secretary of
Transportation shall have the authority to acquire the rights-ofway
necessary for the multi-bridge project described and
enumerated in Document No. 04M173, passed by City Council
on November 27, 2018, subject to review and approval of the
City of Scranton Business Administrator and City of Scranton
111. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the City offices.
§ 423-55 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-55
417:829
§ 423-56. Blocks.
Residential blocks shall not exceed 1,500 feet in length, unless specifically
permitted by the Planning Commission.
§ 423-57. Lots.
Engineer as to the extent of the rights-of-way necessary for any
project.
(d) Financing. 100% of the right-of-way costs, along with all other
costs under Agreement No. 04M173, is being funded with the
combination of federal funds available through the Surface
Transportation Plan, Z240; state funds available through the
State Bridge Funds - Local, 183; and through the City of
Scranton 2018 Capital Budget.
(e) Organizational structure. The multi-bridge project shall be
managed, directed and performed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation.
(f) Property. The Secretary of Transportation shall acquire
property pursuant to all applicable policies and procedures as
necessary for the multi-bridge project as authorized by Section
2003(e) of the Administrative Code 71 P.S. § 513(e), for all
transportation purposes, which shall include, and not be
limited to, acquisitions for local roads and streets.
N. Flood-prone areas and streets. The finished elevation of proposed
streets shall not be more than one foot below the one-hundred-year
elevation, except for a perpendicular crossing of a street that may be
approved by the City Engineer if the applicant proves that such depth of
floodwaters would not prevent vehicular access to principal buildings.
The one-hundred-year-flood elevation shall be shown on street profiles
where such flood may impact such street. Sufficient inlets and other
drainage measures shall be provided to control such flooding.
A. The average depth-to-width ratio of a lot shall generally not be greater
than three to one, unless otherwise permitted by the Planning
Commission.
B. Side lot lines shall abut and be approximately at right angles to straight
streets and on radial lines to curved streets, unless otherwise permitted
by the Planning Commission. Pointed or very irregularly shaped lots
shall be avoided (see figures below).
§ 423-55 SCRANTON CODE § 423-57
417:830
C. Lots shall conform to the applicable minimum lot sizes, lot widths,
setback and all other requirements as set forth in Chapter 445, Zoning.
D. Street frontage. All lots shall meet the street frontage requirements of
§ 445-72 of Chapter 445, Zoning.
E. Double frontage lots. If a residential lot has street frontage along both
the front lot line and rear lot lines, then each lot shall include a fifteenfoot
deep planting strip along one of the streets, with vehicle access
across this strip clearly prohibited by notes on any approved plan (see
figure below).
(1) In addition to the street trees required by § 423-69 of this chapter,
this planting strip shall include evergreen plantings meeting the
requirements of § 445-74D of Chapter 445, Zoning. Such
evergreens are not required to create a complete visual screen, but
instead shall be spaced to result in a screening of approximately
50% within four years. Any fencing in the rear of such lots shall be
placed on the inside side of such plantings.
(2) This planting strip is intended to be placed along the street that the
Planning Commission determines will eventually serve the most
through-traffic (for example, if a lot abuts a collector and a local
street, the planting strip shall be placed along the collector street
and the lot shall only have vehicular access onto the local street).
F. If the remnants of land (other than rights-of-way) exist after
subdividing, they shall be incorporated in existing or proposed lots. No
lot shall be created that would abut a minor arterial street that would
not be suitable for a use permitted in that Zoning District.
§ 423-57 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-58
417:831
§ 423-58. Monuments and lot pins.
§ 423-59. Stormwater management.
A. Monuments.
(1) Location. Permanent reference monuments shall be located at each
intersection of rights-of-ways of street(s) constructed by the
developer, at the beginning and ending of all street curves and at
exterior corners of the subdivision or land development, unless an
alternate arrangement is approved by the City Engineer that still
permits a surveyor to stake out accurately any building lot shown
on the record plan.
(2) Type. Reference monuments shall be constructed of steel
reinforced portland cement concrete or to other materials
preapproved by the City Engineer and should have a minimum size
of 4 x 4 inches at the ground level and shall have the top be flush or
slightly above the grade level.
B. Lot pins. All lot corner markers shall be permanently located and shall
be at least a 3/4 inch metal pin or pipe with a minimum length of 20
inches, located in the ground to existing grade, or other of lot pin
approved by the City Engineer.
A. General provisions.
(1) Act 167 ordinances. See the provisions of Chapter 405, Stormwater
Management, for the Lackawanna River Watershed. This
stormwater ordinance, as amended, is included by reference in this
chapter, and shall be referenced herein by the term "the Act 167
ordinance." Where necessary for public safety, the Planning
Commission may require adjustments to such Act 167 plan
provisions, within the limitations of the approved Act 167 plan.
(2) Consistency with Act 167. The provisions of this § 423-59 shall
apply except where a specific provision of a city-adopted Act 167
ordinance supersedes this chapter under a specific provision of the
Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act,112 such as regarding
release rates. In case of any differences between an Act 167
ordinance and this section where the Act 167 ordinance does not
supersede, then the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
(3) Velocity control measures. The Planning Commission, based upon
the recommendations of the City Engineer, may require specific
sizes or types of stormwater velocity control measures based upon
both the need to control the velocity and upon long-term
maintenance concerns.
112. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 423-58 SCRANTON CODE § 423-59
417:832
(4) Stormwater runoff from any subdivision or land development
(including during construction and earthmoving) shall not occur at
a peak rate (measured in cubic feet per second) that is greater after
development than occurred prior to development.
(5) Runoff shall be controlled from a site using appropriate means of
detention of water on the site and/or other approved types of
stormwater management, within the requirements of this chapter.
(6) Runoff that is detained shall be held and released at a
predetermined controlled rate by appropriately installed devices.
The release shall be in the same manner as the natural or
predevelopment means of discharge from a site (such as point
discharge or sheet flow).
(7) Stormwater runoff shall not be increased or redirected in such a
way that it results in hazards to persons or property or interferes
with the normal movement of vehicles.
(8) All stormwater management methods are subject to approval by
the City Engineer, including all outlet locations.
(9) All lots shall be laid out and graded to prevent cross-lot drainage, to
provide positive drainage away from proposed building locations
and any primary or alternate septic system locations. Stormwater
shall also not be redirected towards buildings or on-lot septic
systems off of the site.
(10) All stormwater management plans shall take into account and
provide for existing flow from upstream areas within the entire
watershed.
(11) The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered to increase flows nor shall the
concentration of water runoff be increased because of development
without the written approval of all affected landowners.
(12)No stormwater runoff or watercourse shall be diverted in a way
that overloads existing drainage systems, or creates flooding or the
need for additional drainage structures on other private properties
or public lands, without city approval of provisions to be made by
the developer for properly handling such conditions, including
water runoff impoundments, if necessary.
(13) An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets and
underground drainage pipes with approved outlets shall be
constructed where the runoff of stormwater and the prevention of
erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage
facilities, as determined by the Planning Commission, based upon
the recommendation of the City Engineer, based upon the expected
velocity and depth of the stormwater flows and the proximity of
dwellings.
§ 423-59 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-59
417:833
(14) Sequence of construction. No substantial grading shall occur and
no building permits shall be issued for any building unless any
detention basin, situation basin or improved major swale approved
to handle the resulting runoff is in place. Any detention basin shall
be seeded and stabilized and have an installed outlet structure
prior to the construction of any streets or buildings within that
drainage basin.
(15) Phasing of stormwater improvements.
(a) The phasing of a development shall ensure that all stormwater
facilities needed to manage runoff from a phase are in place
and functioning adequately prior to and after the construction
of buildings in that phase. This shall, for example, include the
extension of the main outfall line. This may require the use of
temporary structures, which shall be shown on submitted
plans. If the development occurs in phases, the entire system
shall be shown as part of the preliminary plan submission.
(b) When subdivisions or land developments are submitted to the
city for approval in sections, a complete general storm sewer
design for the proposed subdivision or land development shall
be submitted at the preliminary plan level. The proposed
design must take into account the entire tract and the
watershed.
(c) A development shall be required to include the construction of
stormwater controls in areas of future phases of a development
prior to construction of earlier phases if the City Engineer
determines that is necessary to make sure that the system will
work after the completion of each phase. This shall, for
example, include the extension of the main outfall line.
(16) For downstream properties, the applicant shall study areas where
the development could have significant impact, considering the size
of drainage areas and the amount of runoff from the development.
(17) Drainage structures that are located on state highway rights-ofway
shall be found to be acceptable to PennDOT, and PennDOT
approval shall be a condition of any final approval of the city.
B. Calculations of stormwater runoff. The methods described in the Act
167 ordinance(s) shall apply.
(1) The stormwater calculations shall include the following:
(a) Information required for preliminary and final plans within
Articles VI, VII and VIII of this chapter.
(b) Pre- and postdevelopment drainage maps showing existing and
proposed grades and including any off-site tributary area.
(c) Pre- and postdevelopment runoff calculations.
§ 423-59 SCRANTON CODE § 423-59
417:834
(d) Detention basin design calculations (as applicable).
(e) Pipe and swale sizing calculations.
(f) Such information as the City Engineer determines is needed to
determine compliance with this chapter, including, but not
limited to slopes, proposed elevations, typical cross sections
and details.
(2) Stormwater calculations shall be submitted in a clear and legible
manner for any lot or tract that would result in an increase of
10,000 square feet or greater of total impervious cover.
(3) The stormwater calculations shall follow a method preapproved by
and acceptable to the City Engineer. The following methods are
recommended:
(a) Rational method. See description in Appendix D.113
(b) Soil cover complex method. See United States Soil
Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55, Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
(4) Where crop farming or disturbed earth exists on the site prior to
development, meadow in good condition shall be used as the
starting base for the calculation.
C. Design submission and design storms. The following shall apply unless
superseded by PennDOT standards within PennDOT's jurisdiction:
(1) Within the one-hundred-year floodplain, any stormwater
management structures and systems shall be designed to handle a
one-hundred-year storm. A twenty-four-hour Type II storm shall be
used if using the soil complex method.
(2) The stormwater management plan shall show that a one-hundredyear,
twenty-four-hour storm can be safely conveyed without
jeopardizing any principal building on or adjacent to of the site.
(3) All plans showing the proposed storm drainage construction must
be accompanied by a complete design stamped and signed by a
Pennsylvania registered engineer or Pennsylvania registered
landscape architect.
(4) At a minimum, the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer that no increase in peak stormwater discharge will
leave the tract during earthmoving, construction or after
development than occurred prior to any of these activities, under
the following conditions and storm frequencies (considered
individually), unless any more restrictive requirements of an
113. Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the city offices.
§ 423-59 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-59
417:835
applicable official stormwater management plan approved by DEP
and the county pursuant to state Act 167 of 1978, as amended:
(a) Five-year storm.
(b) Ten-year storm.
(c) Twenty-five-year storm.
(d) If using the SCS calculation method, a twenty-four-hour Type II
storm shall be used in the calculations required by this
subsection.
(e) In addition, the City Engineer may require that the above
requirement also apply to a two-year storm if there are critical
stormwater conditions in the area.
(5) Storm sewer piping, roadside swales and inlet systems shall be
designed for a twenty-five-year storm. A twenty-four-hour Type B
rainfall shall be used if using the Soil Complex Method. The
openings of culverts and under bridges shall be designed for a fiftyyear,
twenty-four Type II rainfall (except within the one-hundredyear
floodplain). Bridges shall be designed with one foot of
freeboard.
D. Methods of detention and flow delay. The following methods of
detention or flow-delay devices may be found to be acceptable by the
City Engineer:
(1) Wet or dry ponds and detention basins.
(2) Roof storage and increased roof roughness.
(3) Parking lot detention.
(4) Infiltration trenches.
(5) Porous pavements, grassed channels and vegetated strips.
(6) Cisterns, underground reservoirs or covered ponds.
(7) Increasing the roughness coefficients on the development's surface
area.
(8) Decreasing the percentage of impervious area.
(9) Promoting groundwater recharge.
(10) Routing flow over lawns in swales within stormwater easements.
(11) Detention storage within the storm sewer.
(12) Another method that may be approved by the City Engineer.
§ 423-59 SCRANTON CODE § 423-59
417:836
E. Detention basins standards. For the purpose of this section, a retention
basin shall be required to meet the same standards as a detention
basin.
(1) Perforated risers, staggered offices, V notch wires or other outlet
structures as approved by the City Engineer may be required for
outlet control.
(2) Emergency spillways. All detention basins shall be designed with
an emergency spillway.
(a) The emergency spillway shall be able to pass the one-hundredyear-
postdevelopment peak discharge at a height of 0.75 foot.
(b) The emergency spillway shall convey the one-hundred-year
storm at a maximum depth of one foot over the spillway. The
downstream slope of the spillway shall as a minimum extend to
the toe of the berm embankment. The edge of the basin
grading shall be within the subject property.
(c) All detention basin outflow structures shall be designed with
trash racks over the outflows.
(d) Whenever possible, the emergency spillway for detention
basins shall be constructed on undisturbed ground. If the
emergency spillway cannot be constructed on undisturbed
ground, it shall be constructed of suitable material adequately
compacted in accordance with specifications preapproved by
the City Engineer.
(e) Emergency spillways shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete, mortared in place rip-rap or concrete rubble. All
emergency spillways shall be constructed so that the detention
basin berm is protected against erosion.
(3) The emergency spillway and the outfall of the detention basin shall
be lined with mortared rip-rap and shall meet requirements of
PennDOT Publication 408, or its successor.
(4) The minimum top width of a detention basin berm shall be five feet,
unless the City Engineer determines that a differing width is
needed for maintenance and structural purposes.
(5) In order to provide proper drainage, a minimum grade of 1.5%,
directed toward the outlet structure, shall be maintained across the
basic floor. A lesser grade may be permissible, provided that a
concrete low flow channel is provided.
(6) Slopes of basin. The maximum inside and outside slope of earth
detention basin embankments shall be three horizontal to one
vertical.
§ 423-59 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-59
417:837
(7) Outfall. Where no existing point of concentration exists, the outfall
from a detention basin shall not discharge closer than 10 feet from
the adjoining property line, unless permission is given, in writing,
by said adjacent property owner.
(8) Basins not having direct access to a public street shall have a
fifteen-foot wide, usable access easement to a public street for the
purpose of maintenance.
(9) For the purpose of this section, a retention basin shall be required
to meet the same standards as a detention basin.
(10) Landscaped screening of detention basins.
(a) A detention basin with a basin depth of greater than 30) inches
shall be screened from view of existing dwellings, a residential
zoning district or a public street, unless the basin would meet
all of the following conditions:
[1] It would have an average slope of less than 4:1 on the
inside of the berm of the basin.
[2] Either:
[a] Both the inside and outside of the basin would be
planted in grass and intended to be mowed or planted
in other attractive vegetative ground cover; or
[b] Would be designed to closely resemble a natural pond;
and
[3] The basin would not be surrounded by a primarily metal
fence.
(b) The required screening shall primarily include evergreen trees
and shrubs of sufficient number to provide an approximately
50% year-round visual screen of five feet minimum height
approximately four years after planting. This landscaping shall
not be required along an area where natural vegetation will be
maintained that will completely fulfill this purpose.
(c) Thorny and prickly shrubs (that are also attractive) are
encouraged to be used around detention basins to discourage
entry by children.
(11) Areas of stormwater basins that are visible from streets and
dwellings shall be attractively maintained.
(12) All outflow structures from storage facilities shall be equipped with
a regulatory device that will permit modification to regulate the
amount of outflow. Entrances to stormwater pipes, including
outflow pipes in detention basins, shall have childproof grates or
similar devices.
§ 423-59 SCRANTON CODE § 423-59
417:838
(13) Antiseep collars. Antiseep collars shall be installed around the
principal pipe barrel within the normal saturation zone of the
detention basin berms. Antiseep collars shall not be required on
basins designed to have a depth of water of fewer than three feet.
The antiseep collars and their connections to the pipe barrel shall
be watertight. The antiseep collars shall extend a minimum of two
feet beyond the outside of the principal pipe barrel. The maximum
spacing between collars shall be 10 times the minimum projection
of the collar measured perpendicular to the pipe.
(14) Fencing of basins.
(a) The city may require an applicant to surround a detention
basin with galvanized vinyl clad chain link metal fencing or an
alternative type of fence acceptable to the city if any of the
conditions are present:
[1] The maximum depth of water in the basin after a twentyfive-
year storm is greater than 30 inches.
[2] The basin is intended to hold water for periods of longer
than three hours after the rainfall subsides.
[3] The basin is to be dedicated to the city and the Planning
Commission request fencing.
[4] The earthen inside slopes of the detention basin will be
steeper than four horizontal to one vertical.
(b) Fencing of a detention basin under the above subsection shall
not be required if the nearest residential district, school, daycare
center, existing residence or recreation facility is at least
1,500 feet away in walking distance from the basin.
(15) Multiple basins. The use of multiple detention basins should be
investigated over the use of one larger storage facility.
(16) An outflow control structure shall be provided at the outlet of all
detention basins. This structure shall be constructed of metal or
concrete and shall be designed so that the rate of outflow is
controlled by the pipe barrel through the basin berm when the
depth of water within the basin exceeds the height of the structure.
The crest elevation shall be set at a minimum of 12 inches below
the emergency spillway.
(17) Retention basins. Aeration devices may be required, dependent
upon the quality of the influent and detention time.
F. Construction standards.
(1) Standards. Construction and materials of storm drainage and
control facilities (including pipes) and erosion control facilities
shall be in accordance with the approved plans and any
§ 423-59 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-59
417:839
accompanying specifications. The construction details and
standards of the following publications, or their successor
publications, in their most recent revision shall be used:
(a) PennDOT, Form 408, Specifications.
(b) PennDOT, RC Series, Roadway Construction Standards.
(c) In cases where the above documents conflict with city
specifications, the city's specifications shall supersede, except
in areas of PennDOT jurisdiction.
(2) Pipe materials. All pipe materials shall meet PennDOT standards.
(3) A set of approved design plans shall be maintained on file at the site
during construction, as record drawings.
(4) Rooftop storage. If a roof is to be used for detention, a condition of
such use shall be that the applicant submit appropriate calculations
and a signed statement from a registered architect or registered
engineer that the structure will be able to support the roof
loadings. This statement shall be required prior to issuance of the
building permit.
(5) Parking lot storage. A maximum of 30% of paved parking lot may be
found acceptable as a stormwater detention but not a retention
facility. Ponding shall be arranged so that pedestrians may cross
the parking lot relatively dryly. There shall be a maximum designed
depth of six inches, and the pavement shall be designed to
withstand the effects of ponded water. The area used for the
storage shall be the least used portions of the parking.
G. Drainage pipe, culvert and catch basin design.
(1) Open pipe ends must be fitted with rip-rap and/or energy
dissipaters if deemed appropriate by the City Engineer.
(2) Drainage pipes shall have a minimum slope of 0.5% and drainage
swales and gutters, 2.0%. As a minimum, the tops of all pipes
should be at the same elevation when changing pipe sizes.
(3) Manholes or inlets shall be used at all changes in horizontal
alignment, at changes of vertical grade and at all pipe
intersections. No run of pipe shall exceed 400 feet in length,
without appropriate measures to allow cleanout. Trash racks shall
be placed on all stormwater entrance structures.
(4) Grating. Appropriate safety grates shall be attached to all catch
basins, stormwater inlets, pipe openings and other stormwater
receiving structures, as needed, to ensure that maximum openings
do not exceed 25 square inches. Along streets and pedestrian
areas, bicycle-safe grates shall be used as needed.
§ 423-59 SCRANTON CODE § 423-59
417:840
(5) Storm sewer outfall. Storm sewer outfalls shall be designed, with
respect to the elevation of the invert or other features, that when
the receiving watercourse is within a twenty-five-year storm, the
storm sewer will continue to drain the area it is designed to serve.
(6) To minimize sheet flow of stormwater across lots located on the
lower side of streets, and to divert flow away from building areas,
the cross section of the street as constructed shall provide for
parallel ditches or swales or curbing on the lower side which shall
discharge only at approved locations.
(7) Inlet spacing shall be designed such that in a twenty-five-year
storm, one traffic lane of at least 10 feet in width shall be free from
stormwater.
(8) Driveway crossings of drainageways. See § 423-63F.
H. Stormwater easements.
(1) Where required. Where a subdivision or development is traversed
by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream that the City
Engineer determines is subject to significant stormwater flows,
there shall be provided a drainage easement established along the
following:
(a) The one-hundred-year floodway, where that is defined.
(b) Where a one-hundred-year floodway is not defined, the onehundred-
year floodplain.
(c) Where a one-hundred-year floodplain is not defined, a width
shall be used that includes a minimum of five feet on each side
of the center of the waterway.
(2) The drainage easements required by the above subsection are
intended to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage and to
provide for future possible widening, deepening, relocating,
improving or protecting of such drainage facilities.
(3) If a major man-made drainage channel would pass within close
proximity to homes and possibly threaten the safety of persons, the
Planning Commission, based upon the advice of the City Engineer,
may require such certain lengths of such channel to be placed
within appropriate underground pipes.
(4) Structures that could obstruct stormwater flow shall be prohibited
within stormwater easements. Also, areas where stormwater
easements have or will be granted shall not be obstructed during or
after construction.
(5) Stormwater easements shall grant the city the right at its option to
enter the easement to accomplish maintenance and channel
§ 423-59 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-59
417:841
improvement work, although the city assumes no responsibility to
accomplish such work.
(6) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all
stormwater easements on, over or through other properties that
are needed to carry out the proposed storm management plan.
(7) See also the easement requirements in § 423-62 of this chapter.
I. Surface waters. All natural streams, channels, swales, drainage
systems and/or areas of concentration of surface water shall be
maintained in their existing condition and alignment, without any
blocking, impeding or redirecting of the watercourse, unless such
alteration is preapproved by the City Engineer. The applicant shall be
responsible to obtain all necessary DEP permits (see Chapter 105 of
Title 25 of the state regulations).
J. Ownership and maintenance of stormwater facilities. A system for the
ownership and maintenance responsibilities of all temporary and
permanent stormwater facilities and erosion and sedimentation control
facilities that is satisfactory to the Planning Commission shall be
established prior to final plan approval including:
(1) Identification of responsible individual, corporation, association or
other entity for ownership and maintenance of both temporary and
permanent stormwater management and erosion and
sedimentation control facilities.
(2) Establishment of suitable easements for access to all facilities for
maintenance.
(3) The city may, at the complete discretion of the City Council, decide
not to accept an offer by the applicant for city ownership of
stormwater facilities.
(4) Stormwater facilities shall be designed to require minimal
maintenance. Low-maintenance vegetation is encouraged.
(5) All storm drainage facilities shall be properly maintained by the
party designated as responsible on the final subdivision plan,
unless the Planning Commission agrees to accept a change in the
party responsible or the party owning the facility.
(6) Should a facility not be maintained in proper working order, the
City Council, may after due notice to the responsible party, arrange
for the needed maintenance to be accomplished with all such
expenses charged to the responsible party. These expenses shall be
collectible as municipal claims are now collected by law.
(7) The City Engineer and Code Enforcement staff shall have the right
to enter private property to inspect storm drainage facilities.
Reasonable effort should be made to contact the property owner
prior to any such inspection.
§ 423-59 SCRANTON CODE § 423-59
417:842
§ 423-60. Sanitary sewage disposal systems.
K. Joint storm drainage facilities.
(1) Stormwater management facilities may be planned and
constructed in coordination by two or more developments,
provided that all other parts of this section are complied with.
(2) The city may require a development to contribute its fair share of
the costs of a comprehensive regional or subregional stormwater
system in place of requiring an on-site detention basin.
L. Storm sewers. The construction of new storm sewers or the connection
into acceptable existing storm sewers shall be required or allowed by
the Planning Commission if the Planning Commission determines on the
basis of the recommendation of the City Engineer that this is the most
feasible and reasonable option.
A. In general.
(1) All subdivisions and land developments shall be served with an
approved and adequate sewage disposal system (either on-lot or
public) that will meet state and city regulations.
(2) Public sewage connections. Any principal building or use within a
subdivision or land development that generates wastewater and
that in the determination of the Planning Commission, based upon
the advice of any applicable authority and the City Engineer, could
reasonably connect into a public sewage system shall be required
to connect into that system. The applicant shall be responsible to
pay such reasonable capital expenses that are necessary for such
connection.
B. Central sewage service.
(1) If a municipality, authority or public utility is to provide the central
sewage service, such agency shall have the authority to approve or
reject the proposed sewage collection system for just cause.
(2) Nonpublic sewage service. If central sewage service is proposed
through a system that is not owned by a municipality or authority,
the Planning Commission shall have the authority to permit or not
permit such service to meet the sewage requirements of section
based upon:
(a) Whether public sewage service is expected to be available
within five years of the date of preliminary plan approval and
could be efficiently and properly connected into the public
system at such time.
(b) Whether the proposed system would be consistent with the
city's official sewage facilities plan.
§ 423-59 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-60
417:843
§ 423-61. Water supply systems and fire hydrants.
(c) Whether the system would include an appropriate permanent
system for professional operation and maintenance.
C. On-lot sewage disposal system. If connection to an approved central
sewage system is not required at the time of occupancy, then each lot
shall be required to be served by an on-lot sewage disposal system that
will meet all applicable state regulations. Each such proposed location
shall be tested and approved by City Sewage Enforcement Officer, prior
to approval of the final plan.
A. In general.
(1) All subdivisions and land developments shall be served with an
adequate on-lot or central water supply system that will meet DEP
and city requirements.
(2) Connections to central water systems. The Planning Commission
shall require all lots and principal uses within a subdivision or land
development to be connected to an existing public or PUCregulated
central water system, unless the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of Planning Commission that such connection would
not be feasible, cost-effective and reasonable.
B. Central water supply system.
(1) Water supplier approval. Proposed extensions of central water
systems shall meet all applicable procedures, reviews and
requirements of any appropriate municipal authority or water
company. Such extension shall be approved by such agency prior to
final plan approval, although specific detailed service agreements
are not required to be signed until prior to recording.
(2) Nonpublic supplier. Service by a new central water system that is
not owned by an existing PUC-regulated water company, public
authority or municipality shall only be permitted if the system is
found to be acceptable in capacity, pressure, design and
construction by the Planning Commission, based upon review of
the City Engineer. The Planning Commission may deny permission
for a subdivision or land development to be served by a new central
water system if such system cannot guaranty sufficient water
pressure and capacity and would not include a suitable process for
long-term operation and maintenance.
C. On-lot water system (wells). When a subdivision or land development is
not required to connect to a central water system, acceptable locations
for on-lot water systems shall be shown on plans and shall be
constructed in accordance with regulations of DEP.
D. Fire hydrants and fire flow.
§ 423-60 SCRANTON CODE § 423-61
417:844
§ 423-62. Waste dumpsters, utilities and utility easements.
(1) All subdivisions and land developments that will be served by
central water service shall provide fire hydrants as needed with
appropriate water pressure so that all dwelling units and principal
buildings are within 600 feet of an active fire hydrant.
(2) If requested by the City Engineer or Planning Commission, the
applicant shall provide proof of adequate available fire flow of
water for fire fighting. Such information shall be subject to review
of the City Engineer, Planning Director and Fire Bureau.
A. Utilities. All electric power, telephone and natural gas service lines
within a new subdivision or land development shall:
(1) Be placed underground except where the Planning Commission
determines it is not feasible.
(2) Be installed in accordance with the current standards of the utility
serving the subdivision or land development.
B. Dumpsters. All apartment developments shall include conveniently
located refuse collection facilities for the residents. All uses within
nonresidential land developments and subdivisions shall include
appropriate refuse collection facilities. All bulk refuse collection
dumpsters shall be screened on three of four sides by walls or
evergreen landscaping from view of existing dwellings, adjacent
undeveloped residentially zoned lots and public streets.
C. Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows:
(1) Drainage, sanitary sewage and central water easements shall be
provided as determined to be needed by the city and as indicated
on the plans.
(2) Locations. Where determined to be necessary and reasonable by
the City Engineer, all lots shall include a drainage and utility
easement around the perimeter of each lot, including adjacent to
the street right-of-way. However, such easements shall not be
required where buildings (such as townhouses) are to be attached
at a lot line.
(3) Width. The minimum width of an easement shall be 10 feet, except
that the City Engineer may require wider easements where
necessary, especially where an easement is unlikely to be provided
on the abutting side of the abutting lot.
(4) See also drainage easement provisions in § 423-59 of this chapter.
(5) Additional width of easements shall be provided for additional
utilities if required by the water or sanitary sewage supplier or the
City Engineer. The easement widths along side lot lines may be
reduced if Chapter 445, Zoning, allows a principal building setback
§ 423-61 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-62
417:845
§ 423-63. Access drives and driveways.
that is more narrow than the width of the easement that would
otherwise be required.
(6) Separation. Minimum separation distances between utility lines
shall be as required by the applicable utility or as deemed by the
City Engineer.
(7) Pipelines. If any activity is proposed within the right-of-way of an
underground fuel or gas pipeline, the applicant shall provide
written evidence from the operator of such pipeline that such
activity is acceptable under their safety standards and the terms of
that right-of-way.
(8) Easements shall be placed along lot lines or street rights-of-ways,
to the maximum extent possible, as opposed to the center of a lot.
A. Construction standards for private streets. See § 423-55.
B. State roads. A state highway occupancy permit is required for all access
onto or work within the right-of-way of a state road.
C. Separation distances. See Article VIII of Chapter 445, Zoning.
D. Sight distance. See § 445-74 of Chapter 445, Zoning.
E. Driveway slopes. Grades of access drives or driveways shall not exceed
12% for any horizontal distance longer than 25 feet, except a driveway
or access drive shall have a maximum slope of 5% for the first 20 feet
from and within the legal right-of-way of an intersecting street.
F. Drainage. The developer shall make adequate provisions to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a street where intersected by an
access drive or driveway. Access drives and aisles within parking lots
shall be graded and drained to keep the primary travel lane free of
stormwater. The following typical details shall be used as applicable for
residential driveway entrances along streets, unless differing standards
are preapproved by the City Engineer or required by PennDOT. The first
detail involves a typical condition where the City Engineer requires a
drain pipe, and the second detail involves a typical condition where a
drain pipe is not required.
§ 423-62 SCRANTON CODE § 423-63
417:846
§ 423-64. Off-street parking and loading.
See Article VI of Chapter 445, Zoning.
§ 423-65. Sidewalks, pathways and driveway aprons.
G. Emergency access. Driveways shall be designed to be accessible to
emergency vehicles. Driveways shall have a minimum of 10 feet
horizontal clearance, a 12 feet minimum vertical clearance and be
designed to support the weight of a loaded fire engine pumper truck.
A. Sidewalks built to city specifications shall be required, unless the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that
they would not be necessary for safe pedestrian movement. See the
separate city ordinance regarding sidewalk and curb standards.114 In
any case, sidewalks shall not be required along single-family detached
dwelling lots of greater than 20,000 square feet in lot area, unless the
Planning Commission determines that a situation exists that is
exceptionally hazardous to pedestrians and/or within close proximity to
a public school.
B. Pathway or bikeway. If deemed necessary for the convenient and safe
circulation of bicycles and pedestrians, the Planning Commission may
114. Editor's Note: See Chapter 412, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 423-63 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-65
417:847
§ 423-66. Street lighting.
§ 423-67. Street names.
Street names are subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and
shall continue the name of any street with the same or similar alignment
and not duplicate or be closely similar to the name of another street within
the city or the same ambulance service district. Unless otherwise approved
by the Planning Commission, east-west streets shall be named "streets"
and north-south streets shall be named "avenues," except that streets with
a maximum length of 1,000 feet should be named "place" or "lane" and
curving streets should be named "circle" or "drive."
require that a major subdivision or land development include the
construction of a pathway or bikeway. Such bikeway or pathway shall
have a minimum width of five feet and shall be paved to city standards.
It may be required to be placed within a street right-of-way in place of
a sidewalk, or may be placed elsewhere on a lot within an easement or
other right-of-way.
C. Location and width of sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks, where required or provided, shall be located within the
street right-of-way.
(2) Any required sidewalks shall have a minimum width of:
(a) Five feet along arterial streets.
(b) Four feet along collector or local streets.
D. Handicapped access. All sidewalks and curbs at the intersection of two
or more public streets shall include a sloped curb cut suitable for use by
wheelchairs.
E. Maintenance. Each property owner shall ensure that sidewalks that are
within the right-of-way immediately adjacent to his/her property are
properly maintained, repaired and reasonably clear of snow and ice.
A. Street lights shall be placed along streets within and abutting a
proposed subdivision or land development where the Planning
Commission deems them necessary, after considering any
recommendations of the City Engineer, to provide safe traffic or
pedestrian circulation. If required, street lights should be provided at
street intersections, curves in streets and the more isolated areas of a
development. The city may limit the number and intensity of street
lights as appropriate if the city would be responsible for paying for the
electricity for the lighting.
B. Such lights shall meet lamp and wiring standards established by the
applicable electric company. Pole types shall be acceptable to the city.
§ 423-65 SCRANTON CODE § 423-68
417:848
§ 423-68. Regulatory signs.
The developer shall supply and install needed traffic regulatory signs and
street name identification signs on new or extended streets. All traffic
regulatory signs shall meet current standards of PennDOT. All signs shall
meet requirements of the city.
§ 423-69. Street trees, tree preservation and buffer yards.
A. Street trees.
(1) Street trees are required to be planted within all land
developments and major subdivisions, except:
(a) Along a single-family detached residential lot with a lot area of
greater than two acres or
(b) Where the Planning Commission determines that existing
healthy trees proposed to be preserved will serve generally the
same function.
[1] The Planning Commission may approve other species of
trees than those listed below if the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the trees
would be sturdy, attractive and resistant to disease and
road salt.
[2] A tree required by this chapter shall be of one of the
following species. This list shall not regulate types of trees
that are not required to be planted by this chapter.
Deciduous Trees
Acer bungeranum - Trident maple
Acer campestre - Hedge maple
Acer ginnala - Amur maple
Acer rubrum - American red maple
Acer tartaricum - Tartarian maple
Amelanchier arborea - Shadblos serviceberry
Amelanchier X grandiflora (many cultivars) -
Serviceberry
Amelanchier lavis - Alleghany serviceberry
Carpinus betulus - European hornbeam
Carpinus caroliniana - American hornbeam
Cornus mas - Conelian dogwood
Celtis jessoensis - Jesso hackberry
Celtis laevigata - Hackberry
Celtis occidentalis - Common hackberry
§ 423-68 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-69
417:849
Corylus colurna - Turkish filbert
Crataegus curg-galli Inermis - Thornless hawthorn
Eucommia ulmoides - Hardy rubber tree
Fraxinus americana - White ash
Fraxinus pennsylvania (seedless variety) - Green ash
Ginko biloba - Maiden hair tree (male only)
Koelreuteria paniculata - Golden rain tree
Liquidambar styraciflue - Sweet gum
Liriodendron tulipifera- Tulip poplar
Metasequoia glyptostroboides - Dawn redwood
Nyssa sylvatica - Black gum
Macckia amurensis - Amur macckia
Malus floribunda - Japanese flowering crabapple
Maus cultivars that are disease resistant - Adams,
Baskatong, Bob White, Evelyn, Liset, Madonna, Ormiston
Roy, Professor Spengei, Red Jewel, Sentinel, Sugar Tyme,
Strawberry Parfait, Donald Wyman, Centurion -
Crabapple
Malus sieboldii X Zumi Calocarpa - Zumi crabapple
Ostrya virginiana - Hophornbeam
Phellodendron amurense - Amur corktree
Prunus sargentii - Sargent cherry
Pyrus calleryanna (not Bradford) - Callery pear selections
Quercus - All varieties of oak
Prunus Accodlade - Flowering cherry
Prunus serrulata varieties - Japanese flowering cherry
Prunus yedoensis - Yoshino cherry
Sophora japonica - Japanese pagoda tree
Sorbus alnifolia - Mountain ash
Sorbus amurensis - Amur mountain ash
Syringa reticulata - Japanese lilac tree
Taxodium distichum - Bald cypress
Tilia cordata - Little leaf linden
Tilia X euchlora (ungrafted only) - Crimean linden
Tilia petiolaris - Pendant silver linden
Tilia tomentosa - Silver linden
Ulmus parvifolia - Chinese lacebark elm
Zelkova serrata - Japanese zelkova
§ 423-69 SCRANTON CODE § 423-69
417:850
(c) Evergreens. The city may permit the following types of
evergreen trees to be substituted for deciduous street trees if
needed to buffer a residential area from a high-traffic road and
if such trees are located to avoid sight distance hazards:
Cedrus altlantica - Atlas cedar
Chamaecyparis obtusa - Hinoki cedar
Chamaecyparis pisifera - Hinoki false cypress
Chamaecyparis thyoides - Atlantic white cedar
Cupressocyparis leylandii - Leyland cypress
Ilex opaca - American holly
Picea ables - Norway spruce
Picea omorika - Serbian spruce
Picea orientalis - Oriental spruce
Picea pungens - Colorado spruce
Pinus bungeana - Lace bark pine
Pinus densiflora - Japanese red pine
Pinus nigra - Austrian pine
Pinus strobus - Eastern white pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii - Douglas fir
Pseudotsuga taxifolia - Douglas fir
Sciadopitys verticillat - Japanese umbrella pine
Taxus sp. - Yew varieties
Thuja occidentalis cv. Nigra, Emerald or Techy - Dark Green
Arborvitae
Tsuga canadensis - Canada hemlock
Tsuga caroliniana - Carolina hemlock
(d) Prohibited trees. The following trees shall not be planted
within the street right-of-way and shall not be used to meet any
city requirement. Such trees may be planted by a propertyowner
on private property if such tree is in addition to city
requirements.
Acer negundo - Box elder
Acer saccharinum - Silver maple
Ailanthus altissima - Tree of heaven
Catalpa speciosa - Catalpa
Elaeagnus spp. - Russian olive
Ginkgo - female only
Maclura pmifera - Osage orange
§ 423-69 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-69
417:851
Morus spp. - Mulberry
Populus spp. - Poplar
Salix spp. - Willow
Ulmus americana - American elm
Ulmus pumila - Siberian elm
(e) Waiver for medical reasons. The plans administrator shall
waive requirements to plant street trees and/or permit street
trees to be removed if the existing or intended resident of a
dwelling provides a signed letter from a medical doctor stating
that the trees would be harmful to a resident because of a valid
medical condition (such as serious allergies).
(2) Quality of trees.
(a) Trees shall be of symmetrical growth, free of insect pests and
disease and durable under the maintenance contemplated.
(b) Trees which have died or have become diseased or pest-ridden
within 18 months from the time of planting shall be replaced by
the developer.
(3) Minimum size. The trunk diameter [measured at a height of six
inches above the finished grade level] shall be a minimum of two
inches.
(4) Planting and maintenance.
(a) Trees shall be planted in conformance with good landscaping
practices.
(b) Trees adjacent to or within parking areas shall be properly
protected from damage by vehicles through raised curbs,
raised earth, similar devices and/or sufficient setback.
(c) Required trees shall be properly maintained and shall not be
removed by the developer without being replaced by another
tree that meets the requirements of this section.
(5) Required number and spacing of street trees.
(a) Within and abutting all land developments and major
subdivisions, along any street or any access drive serving more
than one commercial, industrial or institutional principal use,
an average of one street tree shall be required for every 60 feet
of distance along the street right-of-way line on each affected
side of the street or such access drive.
(b) Spacing. The trees required under this section shall be spaced
throughout the development along the street, but are not
required to be planted at exact intervals and may be clustered
§ 423-69 SCRANTON CODE § 423-69
417:852
§ 423-70. Curbs.
following an approved plan. Trees shall be located so that
they do not restrict sight distance at driveway and street
intersections.
(6) Location of street trees. The trunks of required street trees shall be
planted within a street right-of-way but at a minimum of:
(a) Two feet from any established curbline.
(b) Five feet from the cartway if there will be no curbing.
(7) Other requirements. The street trees required under this section
shall be in addition to any trees required under other city
regulations.
B. Protection of existing trees during construction.
(1) Reasonable efforts shall be taken during any construction to ensure
that trees protected by this section are not intentionally or
accidentally injured or effectively destroyed, including root
compaction by equipment and materials, mechanical damage or
change in grade level. The area to be protected should at a
minimum include the outer limits of land areas ("the dripline")
under the branches of trees.
(a) Such area around trees to be preserved shall be separated
from all construction, storage and vehicle areas by a
substantial temporary fence with a minimum four feet height.
Such fence may include snow fencing or wood planks or strong
wires or ropes attached to metal posts or a similar secure
method. Such fence shall be removed only after completion of
the work. Trees that are to be removed may also be used as a
temporary buffer to protect trees to be preserved.
C. Buffer yards. See the requirements for buffer yards in Chapter 445,
Zoning, as amended.
A. Curbs shall be provided along both sides of all public and private
streets, unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission that curbs would not be necessary, based upon review by
the City Engineer. In no case shall curbs be required along single-family
detached lots of greater than one acre, unless the Planning Commission
determines that curbs are essential for stormwater management, based
upon a recommendation of the City Engineer.
B. If curbs are not provided, appropriate stabilized drainage channels
designed to handle a twenty-five-year storm shall be required along all
streets, within the street right-of-way or drainage easements.
§ 423-69 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-70
417:853
§ 423-71. Erosion control and grading.
§ 423-72. Flood-prone areas.
See § 445-51, of the Zoning Chapter, as amended. See also § 423-55N of this
chapter.
C. All required curbs shall meet specifications stated in Chapter 412,
Streets and Sidewalks, concerning sidewalks and curbs. New
bituminous curbing shall not be permitted as part of a new subdivision.
D. Gutter design shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer
based upon standard engineering practices.
A. Ground cover and top soil. After completion of construction on a lot, all
exposed ground surfaces that are not paved and that are not covered by
approved gravel areas or decorative stones or similar material shall be
covered by a minimum of four inches of topsoil and an attractive
nonpoisonous vegetative ground cover that will prevent soil erosion and
the raising of dust.
B. Erosion control.
(1) Any earth disturbance should be controlled by proper measures to
prevent soil erosion and sedimentation, following DEP regulations
and standards of the County Conservation District.
(a) Compliance with a submitted soil erosion control plan shall be
an automatic condition of any approval or permit under this
chapter.
(b) City permits may be suspended if earth disturbance does not
comply with such approved plan.
(2) Both the owner of the property at the time of any earth disturbance
and the person(s)/company accomplishing the work shall be
responsible to ensure that adequate erosion control measures are
used.
§ 423-70 SCRANTON CODE § 423-72
417:854
ARTICLE XII
Mobile Home Park Design Standards and Required Improvements
§ 423-73. Applicability.
§ 423-74. Exemptions.
The following shall not be considered to be a mobile/manufactured home
park, but instead shall be ruled by the applicable sections of this chapter
and Chapter 445, Zoning.
§ 423-75. Other requirements of this chapter.
All provisions of this chapter shall apply to a mobile/manufactured home
park, except provisions of this chapter that specifically differ from or
conflict with such provisions. A mobile home park in most cases can be
considered a land development and be required to submit plans and be
approved under the provisions of Articles VI and VII.
§ 423-76. General standards and requirements.
A. The requirements in this chapter shall apply to a mobile home park as
defined by Chapter 445, Zoning, which primarily involves the lease of
individual home sites.
B. Mobile home parks proposed to be developed for sale of lots shall be
designed in accordance with all requirements set forth for single-family
dwelling residential development.
C. Every proposed mobile home park shall be submitted, reviewed,
approved and recorded as a land development, at a minimum.
D. Terms. The terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall have
the same meaning.
A. Mobile/manufactured home sales as a principal use, other than sales of
mobile homes intended to be placed on the same property as the sales.
B. The storage or garaging of mobile homes not being used for living or
sleeping purposes within a building or structure.
C. A single mobile home used as a residence on a lot with no other
dwellings.
D. A mobile home that is used only as a field office or work or tool house
during a construction project, and not for residential purposes.
A. See the mobile/manufactured home park provisions and the individual
mobile/manufactured home provisions of § 445-34CC of the Zoning
Chapter.
§ 423-73 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-76
417:855
§ 423-77. Design standards.
B. If the mobile/manufactured home park has an average density of higher
than one dwelling unit per acre, all dwelling units shall be served by
both central water and central sewer service.
C. All mobile/manufactured homes sites within a mobile/manufactured
home park shall be located on land with an average natural slope of less
than 15%.
D. The mobile/manufactured home park shall have paved access to a
paved public street.
E. The mobile/manufactured home park shall have adequate access by
emergency vehicles and shall include fire hydrants and a water tank to
provide adequate water pressure.
F. All mobile/manufactured home parks of more than 20 dwelling units
shall include a responsible resident manager.
A. Access.
(1) Access to individual mobile home spaces shall be from interior
parking courts, access drives or private streets and shall not be
from public streets exterior to the development. Streets within the
development providing access to 20 or more dwellings shall have a
paved cartway width of at least 26 feet, and other streets shall have
a paved cartway width of at least 22 feet.
(2) All streets within the mobile home park shall be private and be
maintained as part of the mobile home park. All construction of
streets that serve a minimum of 20 dwelling units shall conform to
the construction requirements for streets contained in § 423-55. All
construction of access drives and driveways shall meet the
requirements of § 423-63.
B. Parking.
(1) Every mobile home space shall be provided with a minimum of two
paved off-street parking spaces. In addition, an average of 0.5 offstreet
parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided in
convenient locations for visitor parking. Parking courts are
encouraged to be used for off-street parking.
(2) An appropriate area shall be set aside for the parking of
recreational vehicles of residents.
C. Other design standards and improvements.
(1) Every mobile home space shall be graded to provide a level, stable
and well-drained stand for the mobile home.
§ 423-76 SCRANTON CODE § 423-77
417:856
(2) Every space shall be provided with underground electric, telephone
and television cable (if available) connections.
(3) All fuel storage and supply systems shall be constructed and
maintained in conformity with the regulations of all authorities
having jurisdiction and, if above ground, shall adequately be
screened with landscaping or a screen wall compatible with the
home.
(4) An average of one deciduous street tree shall be provided for each
50 feet of frontage along a private street. These trees shall meet
the requirements of Article XI of this chapter.
§ 423-77 STRIKEBREAKERS § 423-77
417:857
Chapter 428
TAXATION
§ 423-77 SCRANTON CODE § 423-77
417:858
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 30, Art. I, of the 1979 Code]
§ 428-1. Treasurer as collector of delinquent taxes.
The Office of Delinquent Taxes shall be under the charge of the City
Treasurer, who shall have charge of the collection of delinquent taxes.
§ 428-2. Discounts and delinquent penalties on real estate taxes.
§ 428-3. Scale license required; fee. [Amended by Ord. Nos.
95-1987; 186-1994]
A. All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes assessed on real estate by
the City shall be entitled to a discount of 2 1/2%, if paid within 30 days
of the date the tax statements are mailed from the tax office, and a
discount of 2% if paid within 31 to 60 days of the date the tax
statements are mailed from the tax office.
B. Said taxes shall be paid at face after 60 days from being mailed until
April 30, 1979. Said tax shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject
to a payment of penalties on the face amount of said taxes at the rate of
0.8333% per month for each and every month after April 30, 1979.
C. The penalties shall not exceed 10% per annum, and the penalties shall
be added to the taxes by the collector or the delinquent tax collector
and be collected by the collector or delinquent tax collector.
A. It shall not be lawful for any person or group of persons to operate a
scale within the City of Scranton without having first paid a license fee
required by this section and obtained a permit from the Director of the
Department of Community Development for the same activity.
B. The term "scale" shall be defined as any weight, measure, measuring
device or other computing instrument used commercially in the receipt
or disbursement of goods and commodities in the City. It shall include
but not be limited to counter scales, produce scales, spring scales, meat
scales and computer scales.
C. Every person, copartnership, association or corporation owning or
operating a scale within the City shall obtain a license for each scale
and shall pay a fee in conformance with the schedule below:
Scales Cost Per Scale
1 to 4 $20
5 or more $30
§ 428-1 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-3
417:859

ARTICLE II
Land Tax Sales
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 30, Art. II, of the 1979 Code]
§ 428-4. Former owners may repurchase unredeemed lands.
Whenever any parcel of land shall be purchased by the City at a City
Treasurer's sale for unpaid taxes and shall have remained unredeemed by
the parties interested therein for the full period of two years allowed by
law, the former owners thereof, their heirs and assigns, shall, for a further
period of two years, be entitled to receive quitclaim deed for all the City's
right, title and interest in such parcel of land, upon the payment of all taxes,
municipal liens, penalties and costs, including charges in the nature of taxes
accrued subsequent to the sale as hereinafter set forth.
§ 428-5. Assessment of unredeemed lands.
The Board of City Assessors, after the expiration of two years from the date
of every City Treasurer's sale, shall, assess, both in the name of the City and
also in the name of the former owner, all parcels of land purchased by the
City at such sale and remaining unredeemed, and shall, for the purposes of
this article, charge each year against such parcels of land such amounts as
would have been assessed as taxes had the lands remained the property of
private persons.
§ 428-6. Disposition of unredeemed lands.
A. After the expiration of four years from the date of any City Treasurer's
sale, any lands purchased at such sale by the City and remaining
undisposed of by the City may thereafter be conveyed by quitclaim deed
to any person whatsoever upon the payment of such sum of money as
may be fixed by Council. However, before any such sale shall be made,
10 days' previous notice thereof shall be given by the City Treasurer to
the prior owner of such land or lands, his executors, administrators,
heirs, known successor or assigns, by registered letter mailed to such
prior owner, his executors, administrators, heirs, known successor or
assigns, at his or her last known residence and also by the posting of a
similar notice on the premises. The City Treasurer shall permit such
prior owner, known successor or assigns, to purchase such land under
the terms herein provided, within such ten-day period.
B. Before any quitclaim deed shall be executed as above provided, such
land or lands shall be offered for sale to the highest bidder, which offer
shall be advertised in two newspapers of the City, once in each paper.
The sale shall be held within 30 days after such advertisement, or on
some adjourned date or dates, and shall be further advertised by
placing two placards on or about the premises to be sold announcing
the date upon which bids will be received in the office of the Mayor. The
costs of such advertisements shall be paid by the purchaser. Council, by
motion, shall fix a minimum amount for such bids. The bid or bids shall
§ 428-4 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-6
417:861
§ 428-7. Quitclaim deeds; execution and form.
All quitclaim deeds under this article shall be executed by the Mayor for and
in the name of the City and under the Seal of the City, duly attested by the
City Clerk, upon the approval of the form thereof by the City Solicitor.
§ 428-8. Prior sales ratified; exceptions.
All sales heretofore made and quitclaim deeds executed and delivered
pursuant to the original ordinance are hereby ratified and confirmed, except
in cases where lots or lands have been improperly assessed or assessed
by erroneous lot or block numbers or erroneously described in any such
quitclaim deed.
§ 428-9. Disposition of coal lands owned by the City.
be opened by the Mayor and returned by him to Council, which shall, by
motion, direct and authorize the Mayor to execute such deed or deeds
as it may deem most advantageous for the City.
A. No lease, sale or conveyance of coal land or coal in place shall be made
by any officer of the City on behalf of the City, either under the authority
of this article or otherwise. Any attempted lease, sale or conveyance in
violation of this section shall be null and void.
B. Any person desiring to purchase or lease coal lands owned by the City
shall make written application therefor to the Mayor and Council.
§ 428-6 SCRANTON CODE § 428-9
417:862
ARTICLE III
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 30, Art. III, of the 1979 Code]
§ 428-10. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for "domicile" is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. "Domicile" is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed
the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until
some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In
the case of businesses or associations, the domicile is that place considered
as the center of business affairs and the place where its functions are
discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and, other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent, and whether in cash or in property, not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workers' compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation or payments commonly recognized as "old age benefits,"
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as "public assistance," or unemployment compensation
payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
§ 428-10 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-10
417:863
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — The person, public employee or
private agency designated by the Council to collect and administer the tax
on earned income and net profits, more particularly, the tax collector for the
City.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 428-11. Imposition of tax. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 9-1990; 2-1991;
2-1992; 14-1993; 8-1994; 41-1994; 1-24-1996 by Ord. No. 23-1996;
1-15-1997 by Ord. No. 4-1997; 1-14-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998;
2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 3-1999; 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 5-2000;
1-29-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001; 2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 5-2002;
1-27-2003 by Ord. No. 108-2003; 1-29-2004 by Ord. No. 5-2004;
1-20-2005 by Ord. No. 96-2005; 1-26-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006;
1-18-2007 by Ord. No. 75-2007; 1-29-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008;
1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 55-2009; 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010;
1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011; 1-12-2012 by Ord. No. 3-2012;
10-11-2012 by Ord. No. 62-2012; 9-4-2014 by Ord. No. 41-2014;
1-29-2015 by Ord. No. 77-2015; 12-10-2015 by Ord. No. 131-2015;
1-5-2017 by Ord. No. 77-2017; 12-7-2017 by Ord. No. 131-2017;
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 42-2018]
An annual tax for general revenue purposes of 2.4% is hereby imposed on
the earned income received and net profits earned, in the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 annually by all persons, individuals,
associations, and businesses who are residents of the City of Scranton,
and 1% on nonresidents of the City of Scranton, for work done, services
performed or business conducted within the City of Scranton.115
§ 428-10 SCRANTON CODE § 428-12
417:864
§ 428-12. Declaration and payment.
A. Net profit.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the officer, on a form prescribed or
approved by the officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits
during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
the current year and pay to the officer in four equal quarterly
installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at
the time of filing the declaration and the other installments on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the officer, on a form prescribed or approved by
the officer, a final return showing the amount of net profits earned
during the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the officer, on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the
final return as hereinabove required.
(4) Where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove
required anticipates additional net profits not previously declared
or finds that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits, he
shall file an adjusted declaration of estimated net profits before the
next following quarterly payment date and shall pay the balance of
tax due in equal installments on the remaining quarterly payment
dates.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
B. Earned income.
115. Editor's Note: See also Art. XIII, Act 205 Pension Funding Tax.
§ 428-12 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-12
417:865
§ 428-13. Collection at source.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the officer, a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due
thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon
that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the
collection at source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing
the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or
shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source shall make and file with the officer,
on a form prescribed or approved by the officer, a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer making such
return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the
amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the City who employs one or more
persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission
or other compensation, who has not previously registered shall, within
15 days after becoming an employer, register with the officer his name
and address and such other information as the officer may require.
B. Payments.
(1) Every employer having an office, factory, workshop branch,
warehouse or other place of business within the City who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation shall deduct at the time
of payment thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned
income due to his employee or employees and pay to the officer the
amount of City taxes deducted in accordance with the following
schedule of payment and deposit dates. This schedule of payment
and deposit dates is intended to be in accordance with the federal
system as to the time to make deposits as more specifically referred
to in Section 31.630 (c)-1 of the United States Treasury Regulations
§ 428-12 SCRANTON CODE § 428-13
417:866
as promulgated under 26 U.S.C. § 6302 (Section 6302 of the 1954
Internal Revenue Code).
Amount of City and School
Deducted and Undeposited
Taxes
Payment of City Taxes
Withheld Due By
If $2,000 or more in taxes
deducted and unde- posited by an
end of any quarter-monthly period
(a period ending on the 7th, 15th,
22nd or last day of any month)
3rd banking day after the end
of quarter-monthly period
which deducted and
undeposited taxes reach
$2,000
If $200 or more, but less than
$2,000 in taxes are deducted and
undeposited by last day of first or
second month of calendar quarter
15th day of following month
If $200 or more, but less $2,000 in
taxes are deducted and
undeposited by last day of third
quarter.
Last day of following than
month
If less than $200 in taxes are
deducted and unde- posited by last
day of third month of calendar
quarter
Pay by last day of following
month or pay with return
(2) Such employers shall file a return on or before April 30 of the
current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current
year and January 31 of the succeeding year. Such return, unless
otherwise agreed upon between the officer and employer, shall
show the name, residence and social security number of each
employee, the earned income of such employee during such
payment period, the tax deducted therefrom and paid, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the total earned
income of all such employees during such payment period and the
total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
C. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period,
the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the
§ 428-13 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-13
417:867
§ 428-14. Powers and duties of officer.
tax upon such employee and the amount of tax paid to the officer.
Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year, shall within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
E. Every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes
have not been recovered from the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the City and the other political subdivisions
appointing him.
(1) Each such bond shall be joint and several, with one or more
corporate sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to
do business in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the
Insurance Commissioner of this commonwealth.
(2) Each bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided in
him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all duties
required of him by virtue of his office, upon the just and faithful
accounting or payment over, according to law, of all moneys and all
balances thereof paid to, received or held by virtue of his office and
upon the delivery to his successor or successors in office of all
books, papers, documents or other official things held in right of his
office.
(3) Each such bond shall be taken in the name of the City and the other
political subdivisions appointing him and shall be for the use of the
City and the other political subdivisions appointing him and for the
use of such other person or persons for whom money shall be
collected or received, or as his or her interest shall otherwise
appear, in case of a breach of any of the conditions thereof by the
acts or neglect of the principal on the bond.
§ 428-13 SCRANTON CODE § 428-14
417:868
(4) The City or the other political subdivisions appointing him, or any
person may sue upon said bond in its or his own name for its or his
own use.
(5) Each such bond shall contain the name or names of the surety
company or companies bound thereon. The council and the other
political subdivisions appointing the officer shall fix the amount of
the bond at an amount equal to the maximum amount of taxes
which may be in the possession of the officer at any given time.
(6) The Council and the other political subdivisions appointing the
officer may, at any time upon cause shown and due notice to the
officer and his surety or sureties, require or allow the substitution
or the addition of a surety company acceptable to the Council and
the other political subdivisions appointing the officer for the
purpose of making the bond sufficient in amount, without releasing
the surety or sureties first approved from any accrued liability or
previous action on such bond.
(7) The Council and the other political subdivisions appointing the
officer shall designate the custodian of the bond required to be
given by the officer.
C. The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce, rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in cases of overpayment, for any period
of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration of
this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by resolution of the Council and the other
political subdivisions appointing the officer. A copy of such rules and
regulations currently in force shall be available for public inspection.
D. The officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, earned
income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary business
expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, is hereby
directed and required to give to the officer, or to any agent designated
§ 428-14 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-14
417:869
§ 428-15. Compensation of income tax officer.
The income tax officer shall receive such compensation for his services and
expenses as the Council and the governing bodies of the other political
subdivisions appointing him shall determine by resolution. The City shall
share in the compensation and expenses of the officer, his assistants and
employees, according to the proportionate share that the total annual
collections for the City bears to the total annual collection of taxes, except
that the Council of the City and the other political subdivisions appointing
the officer may by resolution substitute a different manner of sharing the
compensation and expenses.
§ 428-16. Suit for collection of tax.
by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations, as are hereby authorized.
F. Any information gained by the officer, his agents or by any other official
or agent of the taxing district, as a result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article, shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law.
G. The officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The officer may sue in the name of the City and join therein other
political subdivisions appointing him for the recovery of taxes due and
unpaid under this article and like legislation of the other subdivisions.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes,
there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
§ 428-14 SCRANTON CODE § 428-16
417:870
§ 428-17. Interest and additional penalties.
If for any reason the tax imposed under this article is not paid when due,
interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of the tax, and an
additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each
month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be
added and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such
tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 428-18. Violations and penalties.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the officer
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the City from recovering
delinquent taxes by any other means.
C. The officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided that
such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the
suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the
refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Any taxpayer who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article; any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees; any taxpayer or employer who refuses to permit the officer,
or any agent designated by him, to examine his books, records and
papers; and any taxpayer who knowingly makes any incomplete, false
or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the
full disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order
to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article, shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice or
court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $500 for each offense, and costs, and in default of payment of the
fine and costs to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice, or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and, in default
of payment of the fines and costs to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 428-16 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-18
417:871
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 428-18 SCRANTON CODE § 428-18
417:872
ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 30, Art. IV, of the 1979 Code; amended in
its entirety 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 145-2007116]
§ 428-19. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended (53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended).
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS OR HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended (53 P.S. § 6913, as amended).
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the City
of Scranton.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 231-9 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
116. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective on 1-1-2008.
§ 428-19 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-20
417:873
§ 428-20. Levy of tax. [Amended 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 58-2009;
1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 7-2010; 11-15-2012 by Ord. No. 69-2012;
1-30-2014 by Ord. No. 6-2014; 1-29-2015 by Ord. No. 79-2015;
5-7-2015 by Ord. No. 95-2015; 1-28-2016 by Ord. No. 9-2016;
3-2-2017 by Ord. No. 92-2017; 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 61-2019117]
§ 428-21. Exemption and refunds. [Amended 5-7-2015 by Ord. No.
95-2015118]
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2019, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the City of
Scranton during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for
that year in the amount of $156, assessed on a pro-rata basis, in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by the City of Scranton from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
C. The political subdivision shall use no less that 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services.
D. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the political subdivision.
E. The tax shall be no more than $156 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $15,600 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
117. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective retroactive to 1-1-2019.
118. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be retroactive to 1-1-2015.
§ 428-20 SCRANTON CODE § 428-21
417:874
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$15,600 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $15,600 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $15,600 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
§ 428-21 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-21
417:875
§ 428-22. Duty of employers to collect.
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The City of Scranton, in consultation with the collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The City of Scranton or the collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
§ 428-21 SCRANTON CODE § 428-22
417:876
§ 428-23. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $156 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer. [Amended
5-7-2015 by Ord. No. 95-2015119]
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 231-9.1 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
119. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be retroactive to 1-1-2015.
§ 428-22 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-23
417:877
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 428-24. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 428-25. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 428-26. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 428-27. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed.
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 428-23 SCRANTON CODE § 428-27
417:878
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 428-28. Administration of tax.
§ 428-29. Suits for collection.
§ 428-30. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
§ 428-27 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-30
417:879
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 428-31. Interpretation.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 428-30 SCRANTON CODE § 428-31
417:880
ARTICLE V
Mercantile License Tax
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 30, Art. V, of the 1979 Code; amended in
its entirety by Ord. No. 16-1980]
§ 428-32. Definitions, word usage.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Value received, regardless of form.
LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period from January first through
December thirty-first.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association or corporation. Whenever used in any section prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations
shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT — Any place indoors
or outdoors where the general public or a limited or selected number
thereof, may, upon payment of an established price, attend or engage
in any amusement, entertainment, exhibition, contest, recreation,
including, among other places, theaters, opera houses, motion-picture
houses, amusement parks, stadia, arenas, baseball or football parks or
fields, skating rinks, circus or carnival tents or grounds, fairgrounds,
bowling alleys, billiard or poolrooms, shuffleboard rooms, ninepin or
tenpin alleys, riding academies, golf courses, bathing and swimming
places, dance halls, tennis courts, archery, rifle or shotgun ranges,
arcades and other like places. The term does not include any
exhibitions, amusement, performances or contests conducted by a
nonprofit corporation or association.
RESTAURANT OR OTHER PLACE WHERE FOOD, DRINK OR
REFRESHMENTS ARE SOLD — Shall not include such facilities of
nonprofit corporations or beneficial associations which are deemed or
considered to be services under either statutory or case law, or any
other such facility which is exempt by law.
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer
in or vendor of goods, wares and merchandise, who is not a wholesale
dealer or vendor, whether or not such vending or dealing is the primary
business activity.
SCRANTON TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector of the City of
Scranton.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business
that is conducted for a limited period of time.
§ 428-32 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-32
417:881
§ 428-33. Imposition of tax.
Beginning with the tax year 1980, and annually thereafter, the City hereby
imposes a mercantile license tax in the manner and at the rates set forth in
this article.
§ 428-34. Licenses.
Every person desiring to continue to engage in, or hereafter to begin to
engage in, the business or occupation of wholesale or retail vendor or dealer
in goods, wares and merchandise, any person conducting a restaurant or
other place where food, drink or refreshments are sold, whether or not
the same be incidental to some other business or occupation, any person
conducting or operating a place of amusement or entertainment, whether
or not the same be incidental to some other business or occupation, shall,
on or before the first day of January 1980, and annually thereafter, or prior
to commencing business in any license year, procure a mercantile license
for this place of business or occupation in the City, from the Scranton Tax
Collector, as required by law. Such license shall be conspicuously posted at
the place of business or occupation of every such person at all times.
§ 428-35. Rate of tax. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 2-1985; 148-1986;
7-1990; 5-1990; 22-1993; 1-14-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998; 2-1-1999
by Ord. No. 6-1999; 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000; 1-29-2001 by Ord.
No. 3-2001; 2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002; 1-27-2003 by Ord. No.
105-2003; 1-29-2004 by Ord. No. 2-2004; 1-20-2005 by Ord. No.
93-2005; 1-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006; 1-18-2007 by Ord. No.
73-2007; 1-29-2008 by Ord. No. 6-2008; 1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
56-2009; 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2-2010; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No.
3-2011; 1-12-2012 by Ord. No. 4-2012; 11-15-2012 by Ord. No.
66-2012; 1-30-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014; 1-29-2015 by Ord. No.
75-2015; 1-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2016; 1-5-2017 by Ord. No.
75-2017; 12-7-2017 by Ord. No. 129-2017; 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
40-2018; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 84-2019]
Every person engaging in any of the following occupations or businesses in
the City shall pay a mercantile license tax for the year 2020 and annually
thereafter at the rate set forth:
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who
sells to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to
no other persons, whether or not such vending or dealing is the primary
business activity of such person.
B. Exceptions. The terms "person," "wholesale dealer," "wholesale
vendor," "retail dealer" and "retail vendor" shall not include agencies of
the government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any person vending or disposing of articles of his own
growth, production or manufacture.
§ 428-32 SCRANTON CODE § 428-35
417:882
§ 428-36. Computation of volume of business
A. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, at the
rate of one mill (0.001) on each dollar of the volume of the annual gross
business transacted by them;
B. Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, at the rate
of one mill (0.001) on each dollar of the volume of annual gross business
transacted by them;
C. All persons or entities engaged in conducting restaurants or other
places where food, drink or refreshments are sold, whether or not the
same be incidental to some other business or occupation, and all
persons or entities conducting places of amusement or entertainment,
whether or not the same be incidental to some other business or
occupation, at the rate of one mill (0.001) on each dollar of the volume
of the annual gross business transacted by them; and
D. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the dollar volume of
annual business covering the resale of goods, wares or merchandise
taken by a dealer as a trade-in or part-payment for other goods or
wares, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds the trade-in
allowance.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed under this
article, who has commenced his business at least one full year prior to
the beginning of any license year, shall compute his annual gross
volume of business upon the annual gross amount of business
transacted by him during the preceding calendar year.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed under this
article, who has commenced or who commences his business less than
one full year prior to the beginning of any license year, shall compute
his annual gross volume of business for such license year upon the
gross volume of business transacted by him during the first month he
engages in business multiplied by 12.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed under this
article, who commences his business subsequent to the beginning of
any license year, shall compute his annual gross volume of business for
such license year upon the gross volume of business transacted by him
during the first month of his engaging in business, multiplied by the
number of months or fraction thereof he engages in business in such
license year.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed under this
article, who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by
its nature, shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon the
actual gross amount of business transacted by him during such license
year.
§ 428-35 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-36
417:883
§ 428-37. Returns.
§ 428-38. Payment at time of filing return.
At the time of filing the return under this article, the person making the
same shall pay the amount of tax shown as due thereon to the Scranton Tax
Collector.
E. Every person who shall discontinue business during any license year
after having paid the mercantile tax for the entire year, upon making
proper application to the Scranton Tax Collector, shall be entitled to
receive a refund or pro rata amount of the tax paid, based upon the
period of time he was not in business during the license year.
A. Every return under this article shall be made upon a form furnished by
the Scranton Tax Collector.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
the license year, shall, on or before the 15th day of April following, and
annually thereafter, file with the Scranton Tax Collector a return setting
forth his name, business and business address and such other
information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount
of business transacted by him during the preceding calendar year and
the amount of the tax due.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of the license year, shall, on or before the 15th day of April following
and annually thereafter, file with the Scranton Tax Collector a return
setting forth his name, business, business address and such other
information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount
of business transacted by him during his first month of business and the
amount of the tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the license year, shall, within
40 days from the date of commencing such business, file a return with
the Scranton Tax Collector setting forth his name, business, business
address, and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during his first
month of business and the amount of the tax due.
E. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article,
who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature, shall, within seven days from the date he completes such
business, file a return with the Scranton Tax Collector setting forth his
name, residence, business, business address and such other
information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount
of business transacted by him during such period and the amount of the
tax due.
§ 428-36 SCRANTON CODE § 428-39
417:884
§ 428-39. Powers and duties of Scranton Tax Collector.
§ 428-40. Suit on collection; additional penalty.
§ 428-41. Payment under protest; refunds.
The Scranton Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under
protest of the amount of mercantile tax claimed by the City in any case
A. It shall be the duty of the Scranton Tax Collector to collect and receive
the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his
duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Scranton Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and is hereby
empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provision for the reexamination
and correction of return, and payments alleged or found to be incorrect
or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred.
Any person aggrieved by any final decision of the Scranton Tax
Collector shall have the right of appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction within 60 days of the date of the Treasurer's decision.
C. The Scranton Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books,
papers and records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to
verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made, to
ascertain the tax due. Every such taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer, is
hereby directed and required to give to the Scranton Tax Collector the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
D. No deficiency assessment may be made more than five years after the
date on which such taxes should have been paid, except where a
fraudulent return or no return has been filed.
A. The Scranton Tax Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and
unpaid under this article. Such suits shall be begun within one year
after such taxes have been assessed.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of the tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of
1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
C. The Solicitor for the City and the Solicitor for the Scranton School
District shall mutually agree upon procedures to be followed when the
same subject tax matter for both governing bodies is involved.
§ 428-39 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-41
417:885
where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the city's claim
for tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction that the City has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment
shall be refunded to the taxpayer.
§ 428-42. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on his return or who refuses
to permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in his
custody or control when the right to make such inspection by the Scranton
Tax Collector is requested, and whoever fails or refuses to file a return
required by this article, and whoever fails or refuses to procure a mercantile
license, when so required under this article, or fails to keep his license
conspicuously posted at his place of business as required herein, shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $500.00 for each offense and, in default of payment of said fine, be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense.
§ 428-43. Conflict with other provisions, severability; transfer of
files.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City
to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person, business or
any portion of any business not within the taxing power of the City
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws and
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the right to impose the taxes or the validity of the
taxes so imposed upon other persons as herein provided.
C. The City Treasurer is authorized to transfer all files in the Treasurer's
Office, current or delinquent, to the single tax office for collection in
accordance with this article.
§ 428-41 SCRANTON CODE § 428-43
417:886
ARTICLE VI
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. 30, Art. VI, of the 1979 Code; amended
in its entirety by Ord. No. 146-1986]
§ 428-44. Definitions.
The following words when used in this article shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, joint venture or any
other form of unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or
more persons.
CORPORATION — A corporation or a joint-stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
any other state, territory or foreign country or dependency, including but
not limited to banking institutions.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, articles of merger or consolidation instrument or
writing whereby any lands, tenements or hereditaments situate within the
City of Scranton, or any interest therein, shall be granted, bargained, sold
or otherwise conveyed to a grantee, purchaser or any other person. The
term does not include wills or transfers under the intestate law, mortgages
or leases; documents effecting transfers between husband and wife or
transfers between parent and child or the spouse of such child, transfers
by and between a principal and straw party for the purpose of placing
a mortgage or ground rent upon the premises; correctional deed without
consideration; transfers to the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or to any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or in lieu thereof; conveyances to political
subdivisions of tax-delinquent properties pursuant to Sheriffs sale or
Treasurer's sale; or a conveyance to a trustee under a recorded trust
agreement for the express purposes of holding title in trust as security for a
debt contracted at the time of the conveyance under which the trustee is not
the lender and requiring the trustee to make reconveyance to the grantorborrower
upon the repayment of the debt.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person,"
as applied to associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
TREASURER — The City Treasurer of the City of Scranton.
VALUE — In the case of any document granting, bargaining, selling or
otherwise conveying any land, tenement or hereditament, or interest
therein, the amount of the actual consideration therefor, including liens or
other encumbrances thereon and ground rents or a commensurate part of
the liens or other encumbrances thereon and ground rents where such liens
or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged
§ 428-44 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-44
417:887
against other lands, tenements or hereditaments; provided that where such
document shall set forth a small or nominal consideration, the "value"
thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual
consideration for the contract of sale, or, in the case of a gift or any other
document without consideration, from the actual monetary worth of the
property granted, bargained, sold or otherwise conveyed, which in either
event shall not be less than the amount of the assessment of such property
made by the Lackawanna County Board of Assessment.
§ 428-45. Imposition of tax. [Amended 1-24-1996 by Ord. No.
19-1996; 1-15-1997 by Ord. No. 8-1997; 1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
6-1998; 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999; 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 4-2000;
1-29-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001; 2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002;
1-27-2003 by Ord. No. 104-2003; 1-29-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004;
1-20-2005 by Ord. No. 92-2005; 1-26-2006 by Ord. No. 4-2006;
1-18-2007 by Ord. No. 72-2007; 1-29-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008;
2-20-2009 by Ord. No. 51-2009; 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010;
1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011; 1-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012;
11-15-2012 by Ord. No. 65-2012; 1-30-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014;
1-29-2015 by Ord. No. 74-2015; 1-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016;
1-5-2017 by Ord. No. 74-2017; 2-2-2017 by Ord. No. 82-2017;
12-7-2017 by Ord. No. 128-2017]
For calendar year 2018, the City of Scranton adopts the provisions of Article
XI-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax
as authorized under that article, subject to the rate limitations therein on
each transfer of real property situate within the City of Scranton, or any
interest therein, regardless of where the instruments making the transfers
are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfers take place. On and after the effective date of this article, every
person who accepts delivery of any document, or on whose behalf delivery
of any document is accepted, shall be subject to pay a tax of 2.2% of the
value of the property represented by such documents, which tax shall be
payable at the time of the acceptance of delivery of the document. Where
any document is delivered to the commonwealth, to a political subdivision,
or to an authority created by the commonwealth or a political subdivision,
the person by whom the document was made, executed, issued or delivered
shall be subject to pay the tax, unless the transfer is between such
governmental agencies, in which case no tax shall be paid. Where any lands,
tenements or hereditaments are situate partly within and partly without the
boundaries of the City of Scranton, the tax shall be paid on the value of the
portion of the lands, tenements or hereditaments situate within the City of
Scranton.
§ 428-46. Evidence of payment of tax; authority of Treasurer.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid in the office of the
Treasurer. The payment of the tax shall be evidenced by the affixing of a
documentary stamp or stamps to every document by the person
making, executing, issuing, delivering or accepting such document. The
§ 428-44 SCRANTON CODE § 428-46
417:888
§ 428-47. Evidence of value.
stamps shall be affixed in such manner that their removal will require
the continued application of steam or water. The Treasurer may
prescribe a method for a cancellation of the stamps.
B. The City Treasurer is authorized and directed to have adequate and
necessary transfer stamps printed or manufactured; to make the
necessary rules and regulations for the tax and the distribution and sale
of such transfer stamps; and to deputize the Recorder of Deeds of
Lackawanna County, or any other person, to collect such transfer tax
and enforce the provisions of this article, at a commission to be agreed
upon, subject to the approval of the Council.
A. Where the document does not set forth the true, full and complete value
thereof, the value shall be as set forth in the affidavit accompanying the
document prepared for the purpose of calculating the realty transfer
tax payable to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with
the Act of December 27, 1951, P.L. 1742, or any amendments or
reenactments thereof.120
B. In all cases, except deeds without consideration and gifts, where the
full consideration for the document is not set forth in the deed, a
certified copy of the affidavit prepared for the purpose of determining
the real estate transfer tax payable to the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall be filed in the office of the Treasurer at the time the
tax is paid.
C. In all cases where a document represents a transfer without
consideration, including but not limited to gifts, documents in
connection with merger or consolidation of corporations and
documents conveying real estate from stockholders to corporations,
deeds conveying realty in connection with the conversion of
partnerships into corporations or documents distributing realty in
connection with the dissolution or liquidation of corporations, a
certified copy of the affidavit prepared for the purpose of determining
the real estate transfer tax payable to the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and setting forth the actual monetary worth of the realty
conveyed shall be filed with the office of the Treasurer at the time the
tax is paid.
D. Whenever the taxability of any transfer of real property or the amount
of the tax depends upon the relationship of the parties to the
transaction, or upon any other facts not recited in the document, the
Treasurer may require that such facts be established by affidavit.
120. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed May 5, 1981, by P.L. 36, No. 14. See now 72 P.S.
§ 8101-C et seq.
§ 428-46 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-48
417:889
§ 428-48. Enforcement; powers and duties of Treasurer.
The Treasurer is hereby charged with enforcement of this article and is
authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article. The
Treasurer may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this
article.
§ 428-49. Interest. [Amended 1-18-2007 by Ord. No. 72-2007;
1-29-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008; 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009;
1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011;
1-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012; 11-15-2012 by Ord. No. 65-2012;
1-30-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014; 1-29-2015 by Ord. No. 74-2015;
1-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016; 1-5-2017 by Ord. No. 74-2017;
2-2-2017 by Ord. No. 82-2017; 12-7-2017 by Ord. No. 128-2017]
Any tax under § 428-45 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear
interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the
Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended,
known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall
be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent commonwealth
taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343,
No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as the "Fiscal Code," or the
maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens
Act for tax claims.
§ 428-50. Payment under protest and refunds.
The Treasurer or Recorder of Deeds of Lackawanna County is hereby
authorized to accept payment under protest of the amount of tax claimed
by the City in any case where a person disputes the validity or amount of
the City's claim for the tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a
court of competent jurisdiction that there has been an overpayment to the
Treasurer, the amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to the person
who paid under protest.
§ 428-51. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Make, execute, issue, deliver or accept or cause to be made, executed,
issued, delivered or accepted any document without the full amount of
the tax thereon being duly paid.
B. Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from a document any documentary
stamp or other evidence of payment.
C. Fraudulently affix to any document upon which a tax is imposed by this
article any documentary stamp or other evidence of payment which has
been cut, torn or removed from any other document upon which a tax is
imposed by this article or any documentary stamp of insufficient value
§ 428-48 SCRANTON CODE § 428-51
417:890
§ 428-52. Fines; violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof before any District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 for each offense
and costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned
in the Lackawanna County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. The
penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other
penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
or any forged or counterfeited stamp or any impression of any forged
or counterfeit stamp, die, plate or other article.
D. Willfully remove or alter the cancellation marks of any documentary
stamp or receipt or restore any such documentary stamp with intent to
use or cause the same to be used after it has already been used, or
knowingly buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any such altered or
restored stamp to any person for use, or knowingly use the same.
E. Knowingly have in his possession any altered or restored documentary
stamp which has been removed from any document upon which a tax is
imposed by this article, provided that the possession of such stamp
shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to violate the provisions of
this article.
F. Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his
possession any forged or counterfeited documentary stamps.
G. Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the rules and
regulations adopted by the Treasurer under the provisions of this
article.
§ 428-51 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-52
417:891

ARTICLE VII
Exemption for Certain Deteriorated Industrial, Commercial
Property
[Adopted 4-21-2016 by Ord. No. 22-2016121; amended in its entirety
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 50-2018]
§ 428-53. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section:
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other
business property owned by an individual, association or corporation and
located in the City of Scranton, as hereinafter provided, or any such
property which has been the subject of an order by a government agency
requiring the unit to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of
noncompliance with laws, ordinance or regulations.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety,
health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — A county, city, borough, incorporated town,
township, institution district or school district having authority to levy real
property taxes.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BODY — A city, borough, incorporated town or
township.
OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITY — Includes, but is not limited to, apartment
to condominium conversions, condominium and townhouses where the title
has not yet been transferred to homeowner from developer, new
townhouses, new condominiums.
§ 428-54. Exemption.
A. Full ten-year tax exemptions from real property shall be limited to:
(1) The exemption schedule as established by this article; and
(2) The assessment valuation attributable to the cost of construction of
the improvement to the deteriorating residential property and
area.
B. In all cases, the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of
the additional assessment attributable to the new construction and for
121. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. VII, Exemption for Certain
Deteriorated Industrial, Commercial Property, adopted 6-7-2012 by Ord. No. 37-2012.
§ 428-53 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-54
417:893
§ 428-55. Exemption schedule.
§ 428-56. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
which a separate assessment has been made by the Lackawanna
County Board of Assessment Appeals and for which an exemption has
been separately requested.
C. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not
secure the necessary and proper permits prior to construction.
D. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner is delinquent in
the payment of real property taxes on any property within the City of
Scranton at the time of application for the tax exemption.
A. The following real estate tax exemption schedule commences in the tax
year immediately following the year in which the building permit is
issued. For the 10 years for which the newly constructed improvement
would otherwise be taxable, 100% of the eligible assessment shall be
exempted.
B. This exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
newly constructed improvement on the deteriorating property and area
residential property and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange
of the property but shall continue for the full time originally granted.
C. If a deteriorating property and area containing a new improvement is
granted tax exemption pursuant to this article, the property shall not,
during the exemption period, be considered as a factor in assessing that
value of other properties in the same area.
D. If the use of the deteriorating property and area at the time the
exemption is granted is modified, terminated, or changed during the
ten-year period in any way which would have affected the exemption if
the property had been so used when the exemption was granted, then,
at the election of the governing body of the City of Scranton, the
exemption shall terminate as of the date the use was modified or
terminated.
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article shall apply to
the City of Scranton at the time a building permit is secured. The
application shall be in writing upon forms specified by the City of
Scranton setting forth the following information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued;
(2) The parcel number must be included in the location of the property
to be improved;
(3) The cost of the improvement;
(4) A verification that the property has been inspected by the Building
Code Official or his agent;
§ 428-54 SCRANTON CODE § 428-56
417:894
§ 428-57. Eligible areas.
It is hereby determined and declared by City Council that the following
portion of the City qualify and are hereby designated as areas eligible for
tax exempt status: The whole City of Scranton.
§ 428-58. Amendments.
No amendments to this article shall be effective unless consented to by
ordinance of the governing body of the City of Scranton.
§ 428-59. (Reserved)122
§ 428-59.1. Severability.
In any sentence, clause, section, or part of this article is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
(5) Such additional information as the City of Scranton may require.
B. There shall be placed on the form application for building permits, the
following:
NOTICE OF TAXPAYERS
Under the provisions of File to Council No. 57, 1996, you may be
entitled to a property tax exemption on your contemplated new
construction. An application for exemption may be secured from the
Department of Licensing Inspections and Permits and must be filed
with the City at the time a building permit is secured.
C. A copy of the exemption requests shall be forwarded to the Lackawanna
County Board of Assessment by the Building Code Official. The Board
shall, after completion of the construction, assess separately the
improvement and the land upon which the new residential construction
stands, calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax
exemption in accordance with the limits established by this article, and
notify the taxpayer and the local taxing authorities of the amounts of
the assessment eligible for exemption.
D. The cost of construction per improvement to be exempted and the
schedules of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request
for tax exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request, and
subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests
initiated prior to their adoption.
E. Appeals from the assessment and/or the amounts eligible for exemption
may be taken by the City of Scranton or by the taxpayer as provided by
law.
122. Editor's Note: Former § 428-59, Inapplicability, was repealed 3-11-2019 by Ord. No.
57-2019.
§ 428-56 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-59.1
417:895
illegality, or invalidity shall not effect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Council of the City of Scranton that this article
would have been adopted as such as if such unconstitutional, illegal, or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof had not been included
herein.
§ 428-59.2. Automatic termination.
This article shall automatically terminate 10 years from the effective date
of this article. Any person who obtains an exemption hereunder shall be
entitled to the entire exemption period of 10 years even if said ten-year
period goes beyond the termination date.
§ 428-59.1 SCRANTON CODE § 428-59.2
417:896
ARTICLE VIII
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted by Ord. No. 147-1986 (Ch. 30, Art. VIII, of the 1979 Code]
§ 428-60. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance."
§ 428-61. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context indicates clearly a different
meaning, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ANNUAL GROSS RECEIPTS —
§ 428-62. Imposition and rate of tax. [Amended by Ord. Nos.
5-1990; 9-1993; 23-1993; 1-15-1997 by Ord. No. 6-1997; 1-14-1998
by Ord. No. 4-1998; 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 5-1999; 2-7-2000 by Ord.
No. 7-2000; 1-29-2001 by Ord. No. 2-2001; 2-4-2002 by Ord. No.
8-2002; 1-27-2003 by Ord. No. 106-2003; 1-29-2004 by Ord. No.
3-2004; 1-20-2005 by Ord. No. 94-2005; 1-26-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006; 1-18-2007 by Ord. No. 74-2007; 1-29-2008 by Ord. No.
The amount of any allowance made for goods, wares or merchandise
taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part-payment for other goods,
wares and merchandise in the usual and ordinary course of his
business.
A.
In the case of financial business, the cost of securities and other
property sold, exchanged, paid at maturity or redeemed and moneys or
credits received in repayment of advances, credits and loans, but not to
exceed the principal amount of such advances, credits and loans, and
shall also exclude deposit.
B.
In the case of a broker, commissions paid by him to another broker on
account of a purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared in
conjunction with such other broker.
C.
Receipts by dealers from sales to other dealers in the same line where
the dealer transfers title or possession at the same price for which he
acquired the goods, wares or merchandise, as long as said dealers, are
not the parent or subsidiary organization of the vendor or have no other
affiliation or cooperative arrangement with the vendor.
D.
Receipts or that portion thereof attributable to interstate or foreign
commerce or to an office or place of business regularly maintained by
the taxpayer, outside the limits of the City and not for the purpose
of evading payment of this tax and those receipts which the City is
prohibited from taxing by law. Such receipts shall be segregated as set
forth in § 428-63 of this article.
E.
§ 428-60 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-62
417:897
7-2008; 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 52-2009; 1-26-2010 by Ord. No.
3-2010; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 4-2011; 1-12-2012 by Ord. No.
5-2012; 11-15-2012 by Ord. No. 67-2012; 1-30-2014 by Ord. No.
3-2014; 1-29-2015 by Ord. No. 76-2015; 1-14-2016 by Ord. No.
4-2016; 1-5-2017 by Ord. No. 76-2017; 12-7-2017 by Ord. No.
130-2017; 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 41-2018]
Beginning with the tax year 2019, and annually thereafter, every person
engaging in any business in the City of Scranton shall pay an annual tax at
the rate of one mill (0.001) on each dollar of volume of the gross annual
receipts thereof.
§ 428-63. Computation of gross annual receipts.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
any tax year shall compute his annual gross receipts upon the actual
receipts received by him during the preceding calendar year.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced or who commences his business less than one full year
prior to the beginning of any tax year shall compute his annual gross
receipts for such tax year upon the gross receipts generated by the
business transacted within the City during the first month he engages
in such activity multiplied by 12.
C. Where a receipt in its entirety cannot be subjected to the tax imposed
by this article by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the
United States, or any other provisions of law, including the exemptions
within this article, the tax collector shall establish rules and regulations
and methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part of such
receipt which is attributable and allocable to the doing of business in
the City of Scranton shall be taxed hereunder. The tax collector may
make such allocation with due regard to the nature of the business
concerned on the basis of millage division of the receipt according to
the number of jurisdictions in which it may be taxed; the ratio of the
value of the property or assets of the taxpayer owned and situated in
the City of Scranton to the total property or assets of the taxpayer
wherever owed and situated or any other method or methods of
calculation other than the foregoing, calculated to effect a fair and
proper allocation.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in business, temporary seasonal or itinerant by its nature, shall
compute his annual gross receipts upon the actual gross receipts
received by him during such tax year.
E. Every person who ceases to carry on business during any tax year after
having paid the business privilege tax for the entire year shall, upon
making proper application to the treasure, be entitled to receive a
refund of the pro rata amount of the tax paid based upon the period of
§ 428-62 SCRANTON CODE § 428-63
417:898
§ 428-64. Returns and registration.
time he was not in business during the license year. In the event that
a person who discontinues business during any tax year does so before
payment of his tax becomes due for such year, he shall be permitted
to apportion his tax for such tax year and shall pay an amount to
be computed by multiplying his gross receipts for the preceding full
calendar year by a fraction whose numerator shall be the number of
months such person was in business during the tax year and whose
denominator shall be 12.
F. Every individual subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed and
who is also subject to and has paid the emergency municipal services
tax levied by § 428-20 of this chapter may deduct said emergency
municipal services tax payment from the amount of tax due and owing
under the provisions of this article. [Amended 2-26-2006 by Ord. No.
10-2006]
A. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall forthwith
register with the tax collector and set forth his name, address, business
address and the nature of the business activity in which he is engaged.
B. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the tax collector.
Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
any tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of April following, and
annually thereafter, file with the tax collector a return setting forth his
name, his business and business address and such other information as
may be necessary in arriving at the annual gross volume of business
transacted by him during the preceding year and the amount of the tax
due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of the tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of April following, file
with the tax collector a return setting forth his name, his residence, his
business, business address and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual volume of business transacted by
him during the period of operation prior to January 1 of that tax year
and the amount of the tax due.
E. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year, shall, within 40
days from the date of commencing such business, file a return with the
tax collector setting forth his name, his business, business address and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual
volume of business transacted by him during his first month of business
and the amount of business and the amount of the tax due.
§ 428-63 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-64
417:899
§ 428-65. Payment at time of filing return.
The person making the return shall at the time of filing the return pay the
amount of tax shown as due thereon to the tax collector.
§ 428-66. Powers and duties of tax collector.
§ 428-67. Suit for collection; penalty.
F. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article,
who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature, shall, within seven days from the day he completes such
business, file a return with the tax collector setting forth his name, his
business, his business address and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume of business during the
tax period and the amount of the tax due.
A. It shall be the duty of the tax collector to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to
keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person
paying the tax and the date of such receipts.
B. The tax collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provision for the reexamination and correction
of return, and payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred and to make
refunds where necessary. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
tax collector shall have the right to appeal to court as in other cases
provided.
C. The tax collector is hereby authorized to compel the production of
books, papers and records and the attendance of all persons before him
whether as parties or witnesses whom he believes to have knowledge of
such receipts.
D. The tax collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and
records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer, in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Every such taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed
and required to give to the tax collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
A. The tax collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid
under this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at
the rate of six percent per annum, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of
§ 428-64 SCRANTON CODE § 428-67
417:900
§ 428-68. Fine and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on his return, or who refuses
to permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in
his custody or control when the right to make such inspection by the tax
collector is requested and whoever fails or refuses to file a return required
by this article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense and, in default of
payment of said fine, shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days
for each offense.
§ 428-69. Conflict with other provisions; severability.
§ 428-70. Payment under protest; refunds.
The tax collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of
the amount of business privilege tax claimed by the City in any case where
the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the city's claim for tax. If
it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
that the City has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be
refunded to the taxpayer.
1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected.
There suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City
of Scranton to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person
or any business or any portion of any business not within the taxing
power of the City of Scranton under the Constitution of the United
States and the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article, shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the right to impose the tax or the validity of the tax
so imposed upon other persons as herein provided.
C. If a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any
provision of this article or the application of any provision to any
circumstances to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other provisions of
this article or the application of such provision to other circumstances,
shall remain in full force and effect. The intention of Council is that the
provisions of this article shall be severable and that this article would
have been adopted if any such illegal or unconstitutional provisions had
not been included.
§ 428-67 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-70
417:901

ARTICLE IX
New Construction Tax Exemption
[Adopted 4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 57-1996]
§ 428-71. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning set forth below:
§ 428-72. Exemptions.
§ 428-73. Exemption schedule.
A. The exemption from real property shall be limited to:
(1) The exemption schedule as established within this article.
(2) The assessment valuation attributable to the cost of construction of
the new improvement to the unimproved residential property not in
excess of $500,000. [Amended 6-23-2016 by Ord. No. 35-2016]
B. In all cases, the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of
the additional assessment attributable to the new construction and for
which a separate assessment has been made by the Lackawanna
County Board of Assessment Appeals and for which an exemption has
been separately requested.
C. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not
secure the necessary and proper permits prior to construction.
D. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner is delinquent in
the payment of real property taxes on any property within the City of
Scranton at the time of application for the tax exemption.
A. The following real estate tax exemption schedule commence in the tax
year immediately following the year in which the building. For the first,
second and third year for which the newly constructed improvement
would otherwise be taxable, 100% of the eligible assessment shall be
exempted. [Amended 6-23-2016 by Ord. No. 35-2016]
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
newly constructed improvement on the unimproved residential
property and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property, but shall continue for the full time originally granted.
C. If an unimproved property containing a new improvement is granted
tax exemption pursuant to this article, the property shall not, during the
exemption period, be considered as a factor in assessing the value of
other properties in the same area.
D. If the use of the unimproved property at the time the exemption is
granted is modified, terminated or changed during the two-year period
§ 428-71 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-73
417:903
§ 428-74. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
§ 428-75. Eligible areas. [Amended 4-21-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016]
It is hereby determined and declared by City Council that the following
portion of the City qualify and are hereby designated as areas eligible for
tax exempt status: All those land, areas and neighborhoods zoned by the
City of Scranton as R1, R1(a), R2, R2/0, R3, CN and CD zoning districts as
defined by the City of Scranton's Zoning Ordinance, File of Council No. 74,
1993.
in any way which would have affected the exemption if the property had
been so used when the exemption was granted, then, at the election
of the governing body of the City of Scranton, the exemption shall
terminate as of the date the use was modified or terminated.
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article shall apply to
the City of Scranton at the time a building permit is secured. The
application shall be in writing upon forms specified by the City of
Scranton setting forth the following information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued.
(2) The location of the property to be improved.
(3) The cost of the improvement.
(4) A verification that the property has been inspected by the Building
Code Official or his agent.
(5) Such additional information as the City of Scranton may require.
B. There shall be placed on the form application for building permits, the
following:
C. A copy of the exemption requests shall be forwarded to the Lackawanna
County Board of Assessment by the Building Code Official. The Board
shall, after completion of the construction, assess separately, the
improvement and the land upon which the new residential construction
stands, calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax
exemption in accordance with the limits established by this article and
notify the taxpayer and the local taxing authorities of the amounts of
the assessment eligible for exemption.
D. The cost of construction per improvement to be exempted and the
schedules of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request
for tax exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request, and
subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests
initiated prior to their adoption.
E. Appeals from the assessment and/or the amounts eligible for exemption
may be taken by the City of Scranton or by the taxpayer as provided by
law.
§ 428-73 SCRANTON CODE § 428-76
417:904
§ 428-76. Amendments.
No amendment to this article shall be effective unless consented to by
ordinance of the governing body of the City of Scranton.
§ 428-77. Nonpermissible exemptions.
Any exemption made permissible under this article shall not be applied to
any industrial, commercial or other business property.
§ 428-78. Effective date. [Amended 6-23-2016 by Ord. No. 36-2016]
This article shall become effective upon adoption by the school district of
the City of Scranton and the Lackawanna County Board of Commissioners
of a resolution exempting from real property, taxation properties in
accordance with the terms of this article. In the event that the Scranton
School District and the Lackawanna County Board of Commissioners fail
to adopt such a resolution within 90 days from the approval of this article
by the governing body of the City of Scranton, then this article shall
automatically be repealed the next day.
§ 428-79. Automatic termination. [Amended 4-12-1999 by Ord. No.
65-1999; 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 16-2002; 4-21-2016 by Ord. No.
6-2016]
This ordinance shall automatically terminate 10 years from the effective
date of this Ordinance. Any person who obtains an exemption hereunder
shall be entitled to the entire exemption period of three years even if said
three-year period goes beyond the termination date.
§ 428-76 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-79
417:905

ARTICLE X
Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax Regulations
[Adopted 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 17-1999]
§ 428-80. Adoption of regulations by reference.
The regulations entitled "Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax Regulations
of the City of Scranton" are adopted to facilitate the assessment and
collection of business privilege and mercantile tax due the City of Scranton
from sources based in the City of Scranton.
§ 428-80 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-80
417:907

ARTICLE XI
(Reserved)123
§ 428-81. through § 428-91. (Reserved)
123. Editor’s Note: Former Art. XI, Parking Lot Operators Tax, adopted 4-26-2012 by Ord. No.
30-2012, as amended, was repealed 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 40-2016.
§ 428-81 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-81
417:909

ARTICLE XII
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 12-6-2012 by Ord. No. 75-2012]
§ 428-92. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City Amusement Tax
Ordinance."
§ 428-93. Levy of tax.
The Council of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania, under and by virtue
of the authority vested in it by the Act of December 31, 1965, being Act
No. 511, known as the "Local Tax Enabling Tax," as amended, does hereby
ordain that a tax to provide revenue for general City purposes is hereby
levied, assessed and imposed upon the privilege of admission to a place of
amusement in the City of Scranton in accordance with the following.
§ 428-94. Authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of Act 511 of December 31, 1965
(P.L. 1257), and its amendments, specifically 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 428-95. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT — All manner and form of entertainment, including, among
others, but not intended to be a comprehensive list thereof, theatrical
or operatic performances, concerts, vaudeville, circuses, carnivals, fairs,
side shows and museums; all forms of entertainment at fairgrounds and
amusement parks; swimming pools, swim clubs, athletic contests or
diversions, including, among others, wrestling matches, boxing and
sparring exhibitions, football, basketball and baseball games, skating,
golfing, golf driving and miniature golf ranges, sport exhibitions, athletic or
sport participation, tennis, hockey, bathing, swimming, archery, shooting,
riding, dancing and all other forms of diversion, sport, recreation or
pastime; shows, trade shows, craft shows, and similar exhibits, exhibitions,
contests, displays and games; as well as all other methods of obtaining
monetary admission charges, donations, contributions or monetary charges
of any character from the general public or a limited or selected number
thereof, directly or indirectly, in return for other than tangible property.
ASSOCIATION — Any partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated association or other form of unincorporated enterprise
owned or organized or operated by one or more persons.
ESTABLISHED PRICE — A regular monetary charge of any character
whatever, including donations and contributions, fixed and exacted, or in
any manner fixed and received by producers, as herein defined, from the
§ 428-92 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-95
417:911
general public or a limited or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly,
for the privilege to attend or engage in any entertainment or amusement,
provided that, when such entertainment or amusement is conducted at
any roof garden, nightclub, cabaret or other place where the charge for
admission is wholly or in part included in the price paid for refreshment,
service or merchandise, the amount paid for admission to such amusement
shall be deemed to be the amount of the cover or minimum charge, if any.
PERSON — Every natural person and individual, copartnership, association,
corporation, unincorporated enterprise owned by one or more persons
or corporation, domestic or foreign, or an agent who provides admission
at an established price to a place of amusement. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person," as applied
to copartnerships or associations, means the partners or members thereof,
and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place where the maximum venue capacity
is greater than 500 people, indoors or outdoors, within the City where the
general public or a limited or selected number thereof may, upon payment
of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement as herein
defined, including, among others, theaters, opera houses, amusement
parks, stadiums, arenas, baseball parks, skating rinks, circus or carnival
tents or grounds, fairgrounds, halls, lodge rooms, riding academies, golf
courses, bathing and swimming places, dance halls, tennis courts, archery,
rifle or shotgun ranges, roof gardens, cabarets, nightclubs and other like
places. Any place where the maximum venue capacity is 500 people or less
is not subject to the amusement tax imposed herein, without the necessity
of seeking any exemption.[Amended 6-5-2014 by Ord. No. 27-2014]
PRODUCER — Any person conducting any place of amusement, as herein
defined, where the general public or a limited or selected number thereof
may, upon the payment of an established price, attend or engage in any
amusement.
TEMPORARY AMUSEMENT — An amusement to be conducted at one
location for a period of less than one month.
§ 428-96. Exempt activities and manner of procuring exemption.
A. The following activities shall be exempt from the amusement admission
tax:
(1) Student activities. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to
admission to any form of amusement which involves participation
of students in high school or younger and/or which is sponsored,
organized and promoted by, and whose benefits inure to, a public
school(s) and private school(s) or public school district(s) and
private school district(s) within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
for students of high school age or younger, or to the students of
such public school(s) and private school(s) or public school
district(s) and private school district(s) or a nonprofit organization
created and operated to coordinate such events, such as the
§ 428-95 SCRANTON CODE § 428-96
417:912
§ 428-97. Permits; fees.
Pennsylvania Interscholastic Athletic Association, or
organization(s) or association(s) comprised of public school
officials or public school educators, if a majority of the members of
such nonprofit organization consist of public schools, public school
districts, public school officials or public school educators.
(2) Free amateur performances. Admission to any voluntary, live
production, performance, or show. The term "voluntary," as used
herein, refers to and shall mean one who performs in a live
production or show gratuitously and without monetary
compensation therefor, including, but not limited to, nonpaid
amateur and student performers.
(3) Nonprofit, IRS 501(c)(3) organizations. The amount charged and
paid for admission to any amusement sponsored by any
organization of the type listed in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3),
contributions to which are tax-deductible as charitable
contributions under other provisions of said Internal Revenue
Code.
(4) National, state, county or local government. The amount charged
and paid for admission to any amusement sponsored by any arm,
branch, department or agency of the United States federal
government, Pennsylvania state government or a local government,
county, school district or other political subdivision, where the
proceeds collected by such organization from charges paid for
admissions to such amusement go directly to said governmental
organization.
B. Procurement of exemption. In order to obtain an exemption from
payment of this tax, the entities listed in Subsection A(1) through (4)
above must request the exemption from the City of Scranton Treasurer,
in writing, no later than 30 days prior to the scheduled event. A failure
to strictly follow this requirement and/or failure to fully and accurately
provide any relevant information requested by the City to verify the
basis for the exemption shall be cause for the City to deny the
exemption.
A. Required. No producer shall continue to conduct or begin to conduct
any form of amusement at any permanent or temporary place of
amusement or any itinerant form of amusement within the City unless
an amusement permit shall have been issued to him as hereinafter
prescribed and the tax herein imposed paid in accordance with the
provisions made herein.
B. Applications fee term; no transferability.
§ 428-96 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-97
417:913
(1) Every producer desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to
begin to conduct any amusement within the City shall file an
application for a permanent, temporary or itinerant amusement
permit or permits, as the case may be, with the office of the City
Treasurer or its designee. Every application for such permit shall
be made upon a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the
office of the City Treasurer or its designee and shall set forth the
name under which the applicant conducts or intends to conduct a
permanent or temporary place or an itinerant form of amusement,
the location of the permanent or temporary place of amusement,
and such other information as the office of the City Treasurer or its
designee may require. If the applicant has or intends to have more
than one place of amusement, and in the case of an itinerant form
of amusement, the date and length of time such amusement is to be
conducted at each place shall be provided. In the case of an
applicant for a permit for a temporary place of amusement, the
applicant shall state the name and address of the owner, lessee or
custodian of the premises upon which such amusement is to be
conducted. If the applicant is an association or a corporation, the
application shall state the names and addresses of the principal
officers thereof and any other information prescribed by the office
of the City Treasurer or its designee for purposes of identification.
The application shall be signed by the producer, if a natural person,
and in the case of an association, by a member or partner thereof,
and in the case of a corporation, by an officer thereof.
(2) At the time of making such application, the applicant shall pay to
the City Treasurer or its designee a permit fee for each annual
permit or for each temporary permit. The amounts of the annual
and temporary permit fees are governed by File of Council 7 of
1987 and File of Council 8 of 1987, which are attached hereto and
incorporated herein as Exhibits A and B, respectively.124
(3) Upon approval of the application and the payment of any permit fee
herein required, the office of the City Treasurer or its designee
shall grant and issue to each applicant an annual or temporary
amusement permit for each place of amusement within the City set
forth in the application. Amusement permits shall not be assignable
and shall be valid only for the persons in whose names they are
issued and for the conduct of amusements at the places designated
therein and shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the
places for which they are issued. All permits for permanent places
of amusement shall expire on December 31 next succeeding the
date upon which they are issued, unless sooner suspended,
surrendered or revoked for cause by the proper authorities of the
City. Permits for temporary places of amusement or for forms of
itinerant amusement shall expire at the time specified therein. The
producer of an itinerant form of amusement shall notify the office
124. Editor's Note: Said exhibits are on file in the City offices.
§ 428-97 SCRANTON CODE § 428-97
417:914
§ 428-98. Imposition of tax.
of the City Treasurer or its designee promptly of any change in
the original contemplated itinerary, either as to date or time of the
conduct of the amusement at each place.
C. Renewals; duplicates. Permits issued for permanent places of
amusement under the provisions of this article shall be renewed
annually before January 1, upon application made to the office of the
City Treasurer or its designee and the payment of a renewal fee as set
forth in Exhibits A and B herein. Whenever any permit issued under the
provisions of this article is defaced, destroyed or lost, the office of the
City Treasurer or its designee may issue a duplicate to the holder of the
defaced, destroyed or lost permit upon the payment of a fee of $50.
D. Suspension and revocation; hearing. The Office of Licensing,
Inspections and Permits or its designee may suspend or, after hearing,
revoke an amusement permit whenever it finds that the holder thereof
has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article. Upon
suspending or revoking any amusement permit, the Office of Licensing,
Inspections and Permits or its designee shall request the holder thereof
to surrender to it immediately all permits or duplicates thereof issued
to it, and the holder shall surrender promptly all such permits to the
Office of Licensing, Inspections and Permits or its designee, as
requested. Whenever the Office of Licensing, Inspections and Permits
or its designee suspends an amusement permit, it shall notify the holder
immediately, and Council shall afford him a hearing, if requested, within
five days of such notice. After such hearing, Council shall either rescind
the order of suspensions or, good cause appearing therefor, shall
continue the suspension or revoke the permit.
A. Imposition; rate. A tax is imposed upon the sale of admission or
privilege to attend or engage in any amusement at the rate of 5% of the
established price.
B. Permanent seats or boxes. In the case of persons having the permanent
use of boxes or seats in any place of amusement, or in the case of a
person admitted at a reduced rate or season or subscription ticket, or a
lease for the use of such box or seat in such places of amusement, the
tax imposed by this article shall be computed on the established price
for which a similar box or seat is sold for each performance or
exhibition at which the box or seat is used or reserved by or for the
lessee or holder, such tax to be paid by the producer.
C. Free or complimentary tickets. In the case of the person admitted free
or with complimentary ticket for which no price of admission is
charged, no tax shall apply, except that the producer of any amusement
within the City shall not issue complimentary tickets or allow free
admission in an amount in excess of 10% of the total number of paid
admissions to any individual amusement event.
§ 428-97 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-98
417:915
§ 428-99. Collection of tax.
§ 428-100. Computing taxes; reports; interest.
D. No fixed admission charged. Where no fixed admission is charged, the
tax shall be based upon the gross admissions collected and shall be paid
by the producer.
A. Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this article and shall be liable
to the City as agents thereof for the payment of the same into the City
Treasury through the office of the City Treasurer or its designee, as
hereinafter provided in this article.
B. When permits are obtained for conducting temporary amusements by
persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the places
where the amusements are to be conducted, or where the temporary
amusement is permitted by the owner, lessee or custodian of any place
to be conducted without the procurement of a permit required by this
article, the tax imposed by this article shall be paid by the owner, lessee
or custodian of such place where such temporary amusement is held or
conducted, unless paid by the producer conducting the amusement.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax payable by the
producers to the City, it shall be the duty of:
(1) Every producer conducting a permanent place of amusement, on or
before the last day of each month following the end of each quarter
of each year, after the effective date of this article, to transmit to
the office of the City Treasurer or its designee, on a form
prescribed and prepared by the City, a report of the amount of tax
collected by the producer during the preceding quarter of the year.
Quarters of the year shall end as follows: March 31, June 30,
September 30, December 31. Reports shall be due, respectively, for
each quarter, on or before April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31.
(2) Every producer conducting a temporary place of amusement or
itinerant form of amusement to file a report with the office of the
City Treasurer or its designee or its duly authorized agent promptly
after each performance not more than 30 days thereafter.
B. All reports required under this section shall show such information as
the office of the City Treasurer or its designee shall prescribe.
C. Every producer, at the time of making every report required by this
section, shall compute and pay to the office of the City Treasurer or its
designee the taxes collected by the producer and due to the City during
the period for which the report is made. All taxes shall bear interest at
the rate of 12% per annum from the last day of the month from which
such payment is due until paid. Interest will be calculated at 1% for
each month or partial month.
§ 428-98 SCRANTON CODE § 428-101
417:916
§ 428-101. Penalty on delinquent payments.
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report or payment as
herein required, an additional 10% of the amount of the tax shall be added
by the office of the City Treasurer or its designee and collected. All such
taxes shall be recoverable by the City Solicitor as other debts due the City
are now by law recoverable, including costs of collection.
§ 428-102. Examination of records.
If the office of the City Treasurer or its designee is not satisfied with the
report and payment of tax made by any producer under the provisions
of this article, the City Treasurer is authorized and empowered to make
a determination of the tax due by such producer, based upon the facts
contained in the report or upon any information within the City Treasurer's
possession or that shall come into the City Treasurer's possession; and for
this purpose, the office of the City Treasurer or its designee is authorized to
examine the books, papers, tickets, ticket stubs and records of any producer
taxable under this article to verify accuracy of any report or payment make
under the provisions thereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by
this article have been paid.
§ 428-103. Neglect or refusal to pay.
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report or payment of
tax required by this article, or if, as a result of an investigation by the office
of the City Treasurer or its designee, a report is found to be incorrect, the
office of the City Treasurer or its designee shall estimate the tax due by
such producer and determine the amount due by the producer for taxes,
penalties and interest thereon.
§ 428-104. Disposition of moneys.
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or received under the provisions
of this article shall be paid into the Treasury of the City for the use and
benefit of the City.
§ 428-105. Authority of the City Treasurer.
The office of the City Treasurer or its designee is authorized and directed
to make and keep such records, prepare such forms and take such other
measures as may be necessary or convenient to carry this article into effect
and may, in its discretion, require deposits to be made by applicants for
temporary permits.
§ 428-106. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be convicted for violating or failing to carry out
any of the provisions of this article or of neglecting, failing or refusing to
furnish completed and correct returns or to pay over any tax levied by this
article at the time required or of knowingly making any incomplete, false
§ 428-101 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-106
417:917
or fraudulent returns or of doing or attempting to do anything whatever to
the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed under this article
shall be liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding $500 for each and every
offense, and the cost of prosecution thereof, and, in default of payment of
any such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Each
day's operation without complying with the provisions of this article shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation of this article.
§ 428-107. Severability; amendment.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of this article,
so long as it remains legally enforceable minus the invalid portion. The City
reserves the right to amend this article or any portion thereof from time to
time as it shall deem advisable in the best interests of the promotion of the
purposes and intent of this article and the effective administration thereof.
§ 428-108. When effective.
This article shall become effective January 1, 2013.
§ 428-106 SCRANTON CODE § 428-108
417:918
ARTICLE XIII
Act 205 Pension Funding Tax
[Adopted 7-31-2014 by Ord. No. 36-2014]
§ 428-109. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Act 205 Tax Ordinance."
§ 428-110. Authority.
This article is enacted under and pursuant to the authority of Act 205 of
December 18, 1984 (P.L. 1005, No. 205), and its amendments, specifically
53 Pa. C.S.A. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 428-111. Compliance with Local Tax Enabling Act.
This article is enacted in compliance with the procedural requirements of
53 Pa. C.S.A. § 6904 et seq., known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."
§ 428-112. Imposition and rate of tax.
An annual tax for revenue funding of the severely distressed pension(s)
of the City of Scranton in the amount of 0.75% is hereby imposed on the
earned income received and net profits earned by nonresidents for work
done, services performed, business conducted and income earned within
the City of Scranton.
§ 428-113. Collection of tax.
H.A.B. Berkheimer Tax Administrator shall be charged with the
responsibility of collection of the pension tax herein contained and shall
promptly remit payment to the City of Scranton of all collections of the
same. H.A.B. Berkheimer Tax Administrator shall put in place procedures
for the efficient collection on the behalf of and distribution to the City
of Scranton. Collection for 2014 and employer withholding of same shall
commence in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year and will be done on a prorata
basis for 2014.
§ 428-109 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-113
417:919

ARTICLE XIV
Exemption for Deteriorated Residential Property
[Adopted 4-21-2016 by Ord. No. 21-2016; amended in its entirety
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 49-2018]
§ 428-114. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this
section:
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — A dwelling unit located in the City of
Scranton, as hereinafter provided, or a dwelling unit which has been or
upon request is certified by a health, housing or building inspection agency
as unfit for human habitation for rent withholding, or other health or
welfare purposes, or has been the subject of an order by such an agency
requiring the unit to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of
noncompliance with laws, ordinances or regulations.
DWELLING UNIT — Unless otherwise defined in the ordinance or
resolution providing for tax exemption, a house, apartment, or group of
rooms intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by family or other
groups or a person living alone, containing a kitchen or cooking equipment
for the exclusive use of the occupants.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a structure so
that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of housing safety,
health or amenity or is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances
or regulations governing housing standards; ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
§ 428-115. Exemption.
A. Full ten-year tax exemption from real property shall be limited to:
(1) The exemption schedule as established by this article; and
(2) The assessment valuation attributable to the cost of construction of
the improvement to the deteriorating residential property and
area.
B. In all cases, the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of
the additional assessment attributable to the new construction and for
which a separate assessment has been made by the Lackawanna
County Board of Assessment Appeals and for which an exemption has
been separately requested.
C. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not
secure the necessary and proper permits prior to construction.
§ 428-114 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-115
417:921
§ 428-116. Exemption schedule.
§ 428-117. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
D. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner is delinquent in
the payment of real property taxes on any property within the City of
Scranton at the time of application for the tax exemption.
A. The following real estate tax exemption schedule commences in the tax
year immediately following the year in which the building permit is
issued. For the 10 years for which the newly constructed improvement
would otherwise be taxable, 100% of the eligible assessment shall be
exempted.
B. This exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
newly constructed improvement on the deteriorating property and area
residential property and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange
of the property but shall continue for the full time originally granted.
C. If a deteriorating property and area containing a new improvement is
granted tax exemption pursuant to this article, the property shall not,
during the exemption period, be considered as a factor in assessing that
value of other properties in the same area.
D. If the use of the deteriorating property and area at the time the
exemption is granted is modified, terminated, or changed during the
ten-year period in any way which would have affected the exemption if
the property had been so used when the exemption was granted, then,
at the election of the governing body of the City of Scranton, the
exemption shall terminate as of the date the use was modified or
terminated.
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article shall apply to
the City of Scranton at the time a building permit is secured. The
application shall be in writing upon forms specified by the City of
Scranton setting forth the following information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued;
(2) The parcel number must be included in the location of the property
to be improved;
(3) The cost of the improvement;
(4) A verification that the property has been inspected by the Building
Code Official or his agent;
(5) Such additional information as the City of Scranton may require.
B. There shall be placed on the form application for building permits the
following:
§ 428-115 SCRANTON CODE § 428-117
417:922
§ 428-118. Eligible areas.
It is hereby determined and declared by City Council that the following
portions of the City qualify and are hereby designated as areas eligible for
tax exempt status: The whole City of Scranton.
§ 428-119. Amendments.
No amendments to this article shall be effective unless consented to by
ordinance of the governing body of the City of Scranton.
§ 428-120. Applicability.
Any exemption made permissible under this article shall not be applied to
any industrial, commercial or other business property.
§ 428-121. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality,
or invalidity shall not effect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared
as the intent of the Council of the City of Scranton that this article would
have been adopted as such as if such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof had not been included herein.
NOTICE OF TAXPAYERS
Under the provisions of File to Council No. 57, 1996, as Amended, you
may be entitled to a property tax exemption on your contemplated
new construction. An application for exemption may be secured from
the Department of Licensing, Inspection and Permits and must be
filed with the City at the time a building permit is secured.
C. A copy of the exemption requests shall be forwarded to the Lackawanna
County Board of Assessment by the Building Code Official. The Board
shall, after completion of the construction, assess separately the
improvement and the land upon which the new residential construction
stands, calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax
exemption in accordance with the limits established by this article, and
notify the taxpayer and the local taxing authorities of the amounts of
the assessment eligible for exemption.
D. The cost of construction per improvement to be exempted and the
schedules of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request
for tax exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request, and
subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests
initiated prior to their adoption.
E. Appeals from the assessment and/or the amounts eligible for exemption
may be taken by the City of Scranton or by the taxpayer as provided by
law.
§ 428-117 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-122
417:923
§ 428-122. Automatic termination.
This article shall automatically terminate 10 years from the effective date
of this article. Any person who obtains an exemption hereunder shall be
entitled to the entire exemption period of 10 years even if said ten-year
period goes beyond the termination date.
§ 428-122 SCRANTON CODE § 428-122
417:924
Chapter 434
TREES AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 18, Art. VI.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 360.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 412.
§ 428-122 STRIKEBREAKERS § 428-122
417:925

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 434-1. Interference with public ways prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow shade trees, hedges
or shrubs to become so overgrown as to interfere with passage along
sidewalks or streets, or to impede safe vision of oncoming traffic at or near
street intersections.
§ 434-2. Injuring vegetation.
The pulling up, breaking, injuring, destroying or in any way disturbing
or interfering with the growth of any plant, vegetable, flower, tree or
shrubbery by any person, without the consent of the owner thereof, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 434-1 STRIKEBREAKERS § 434-2
417:927

ARTICLE II
Trees
[Added by Ord. No. 4-1981; amended 6-2-2003 by Ord. No.
165-2003]
§ 434-3. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Tree Ordinance of the
City of Scranton, County of Lackawanna, State of Pennsylvania."
§ 434-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY FORESTER — A person who has earned at least a B.S. degree in forest
management or forest science working for the City of Scranton in a paid or
volunteer status as appointed by the Mayor of the City of Scranton.
PARK — Includes all public parks having individual names and maintained
by the City of Scranton. All such parks are identified on an official list
maintained by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PLACES — Includes all other grounds for which the City of
Scranton has fee simple ownership.
STREET, HIGHWAY, LANE, ALLEY or AVENUE — The entire width of every
public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and/or pedestrian
traffic.
TREES — Trees now or hereafter growing along the City of Scranton's rightof-
way, on any city street, highway, lane, alley or avenue (normally such
trees are situated between curb and sidewalk) and trees on public parks
and places owned by the City of Scranton. (See exception in § 434-6 only.)
§ 434-5. Rules and regulations; penalty.
A. This article contains rules and regulation pertaining to street, highway,
lane, alley or avenue trees solely within the right-of-way of such streets,
highways, lanes and avenues within the City of Scranton as well as
trees on public parks and all other grounds for which the City of
Scranton has record ownership. This article does not pertain to private
property, except as stated in § 434-6 only.
(1) The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or
enhance the symmetry and beauty of such trees. The City Shade
Tree Commission and/or City Forester may remove or cause or
order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is an unsafe
§ 434-3 STRIKEBREAKERS § 434-5
417:929
condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers,
sidewalks, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest resulting in a potential danger to life and
property.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or city
department, without the permission of the Shade Tree Commission
and/or City Forester, to plant or set any tree within the City of
Scranton; or to cause or authorize or procure any person to plant or
set out any trees without first obtaining permission from the Shade
Tree Commission and/or City Forester.
(3) It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm,
corporation or city department to top any tree. "Topping" is defined
as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than five inches
in diameter within the tree's top to such a degree so as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged
by storms or other causes such as disease or insect attack or
certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other
pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this
article at the determination of the Shade Tree Commission and/or
City Forester.
(4) During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building or
structure within the City of Scranton, it shall be unlawful for the
person or persons in charge of such erection, repair, alteration or
removal to leave any tree in the vicinity of such building or
structure without such good and sufficient guards or means of
protection as shall prevent injury to said tree, arising out of or by
reason of said erection, repair, alteration or removal.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or city
department to place or maintain upon the ground any stone,
cement or other impervious material or substance in such manner
as may obstruct a tree's growth and health.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or city
department to cause, or authorize or procure, a wire or conductor,
charged with electricity, to come in contact with any tree in such a
manner as may injure such tree.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or city
department to cause, or authorize or procure, any chemicals, oil or
other substance deleterious to tree life to lie, pour, flow or drip on
or into the soil about the base of a tree or unto a sidewalk, road or
pavement therein at a point whence such substance may lie, flow,
drip or seep into such soil, or in any other manner whatsoever to
injure such trees.
(8) The City of Scranton shall have the right to prune or cause the
pruning of any tree when it interferes with the proper spread of
§ 434-5 SCRANTON CODE § 434-5
417:930
§ 434-6. Licensing of vendors of tree services; fee; penalty.
§ 434-7. (Reserved)
§ 434-8. (Reserved)
§ 434-9. (Reserved)
§ 434-10. (Reserved)
light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with the
visibility of any traffic control or device or is a hazard to pedestrian
and/or vehicular traffic.
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or city
department to remove any tree without first obtaining permission
from the Shade Tree Commission and/or City Forester.
(10) It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere
with the City Shade Tree Commission and/or City Forester, or any
of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating,
mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any trees, as
authorized in this article.
(11) Property owners have the responsibility for the removal of leaves,
twigs or branches from sidewalks on their property.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection A above shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $250 per violation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of tree removal, tree pruning, stump removal and tree
planting without first registering with the Office of Attorney General,
Business of Consumer Protection, as required by the Home
Improvement Consumer Protection Act, 73 P.S. § 517.1 et seq.
("HICPA"). The requirement is applied on work being performed either
on private property or publicly owned property. Application for
registration can be obtained by writing to the Bureau of Consumer
Protection, Harrisburg Office, Regulatory Compliance and Enforcement
Unit, 15th Floor, Strawberry Square, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania 17120,
or you can review online or pick up at the local office of the Attorney
General at 417 Lackawanna Avenue, Scranton, Pennsylvania 18503.
The Scranton Office does not handle consumer regulations. Insurance
for vendors of tree service remain the same: Liability insurance in the
minimum amount of $500,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 for
property damage. In addition, worker's compensation insurance shall
also be required.
B. Any person violating any provisions of Subsection A above shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 per violation.
§ 434-5 STRIKEBREAKERS § 434-11
417:931
§ 434-11. (Reserved)
§ 434-12. (Reserved)
§ 434-13. (Reserved)
§ 434-14. (Reserved)
§ 434-15. (Reserved)
§ 434-16. (Reserved)
§ 434-17. (Reserved)
§ 434-18. (Reserved)
§ 434-19. (Reserved)
§ 434-20. (Reserved)
§ 434-21. (Reserved)
§ 434-11 SCRANTON CODE § 434-21
417:932
ARTICLE III
Plants, Flowers, Bushes and Shrubs
§ 434-22. Proximity of flora to certain foods.
No person shall sell, keep for sale, store or keep for decorative purposes any
plants, potted plants, cut flowers, bushes or shrubs in any store, market,
room, stand, place or in front of or adjacent to any store, market, room,
stand or place where food products to be eaten without cooking, such as
baked goods, meats, fruits or vegetables, not in sealed containers, are also
held for sale.
§ 434-23. Exceptions.
Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted to interfere with the sale of
potted plants, cut flowers, bushes or shrubs and food products to be eaten
without cooking, such as baked goods, meats, fruits or vegetables, in the
same building if the food products to be eaten without cooking are
separated and set apart effectively from such potted plants, cut flowers,
bushes or shrubs, such as in different rooms or on different floors or, if on
the same floor, at least fifty (50) feet from the food products, and if they are
handled for sale by employees who individually do not handle for sale the
food products to be eaten without cooking.
§ 434-22 STRIKEBREAKERS § 434-23
417:933

ARTICLE IV
Weeds
§ 434-24. Terms defined.
The word "weeds," as used in this Article, is defined to include all Canada
thistles, ragweed, burdocks, any senecio species and all rank vegetable
growth which exhale unpleasant and noxious odors and also high and rank
vegetable growth that may conceal filthy deposits.
§ 434-25. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or holding real estate to allow
or maintain on any lot within the corporate limits of the city, any growth
of weeds, ragweed and other noxious weeds, to a height of over eight
(8) inches, or which constitutes a traffic hazard growing on an adjacent
street up to the curbline, and such growth of weeds is hereby declared
to be a nuisance, injurious to public interests and public health. All grass,
hedges, vines, shrubs and brush should be reasonably cut or trimmed and
the trimmings or clippings removed therefrom.
§ 434-26. Notice to cut.
When the Director of Health ascertains that noxious weeds are growing on
lands within the city and are about to spread or mature seeds, he shall cause
written notice to be served upon the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having
charge of any lot or lands within the city that noxious weeds are growing
on such lands and that they must be cut, removed and destroyed within ten
(10) days after the service of such notice. If such owner or person having
charge of such lands is a nonresident whose address is known, such notice
shall be sent to his address by registered mail; if the address of such owner
is unknown, it shall be sufficient to publish such notice once in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city.
§ 434-27. Removal by city.
If the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of the lands mentioned
in § 434-26, fails or refuses to comply with such notice, the Director of
Public Safety shall thereupon notify the Director of Public Works, who shall
cause the noxious weeds to be cut out and destroyed and for such purpose,
he may employ the necessary labor to carry out the provisions of this
section.
§ 434-28. Lien for costs incurred by city.
The amount expended by the Department of Public Works for the removal of
a nuisance under § 434-27 shall be certified to the City Solicitor, who shall
cause a lien to be filed against the parcel of real estate involved to ensure
the collection of the debt until paid or he may collect the same as any other
debt is collected.
§ 434-24 STRIKEBREAKERS § 434-29
417:935
§ 434-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall fail or refuse to cut and destroy weeds after ten (10)
days' notice under this Article shall, upon conviction before the District
Justice, be subject to the penalties of § 1-16.
§ 434-29 SCRANTON CODE § 434-29
417:936
Chapter 438
VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 301.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 360.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 439.
Parking of unregistered, commercial and junk
vehicles — See § 445-56.
§ 434-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 434-29
438:937

ARTICLE I
Words Defined
§ 438-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE —
JUNK VEHICLE — A vehicle not possessing a current and valid registration
and a current official inspection sticker or a vehicle of any age that is
damaged or defective in any one or combination of any of the following ways
that either makes the vehicle immediately inoperable or would prohibit the
vehicle from being operated in a reasonably sale manner upon the public
streets and highways under its own power if self-propelled, or while being
towed or pushed, if not self-propelled:
A vehicle:
That is inoperable and left unattended on a highway or other public
property for more than 48 hours; or
(1)
That has remained illegally on a highway, street or on other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours; or
(2)
Without a valid registration plate or certificate of inspection or title
left unattended on or along a public property; or
(3)
That is left unattended or along a highway or other public property
for more than 48 hours and does not bear the following:
(a) A valid registration plate.
(b) A certificate of inspection.
(c) An ascertainable vehicle identification number; or
(4)
That has remained on private property without the consent of the
owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours.
(5)
A.
Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction or in the
operation or maintenance of highways or public utility facilities, which
are left in a manner which does not interfere with the normal movement
of traffic, shall not be considered to be abandoned.
B.
Moving a vehicle from one location on the right-of-way to another
location on the right-of-way shall not be a defense to a violation of
any provision of this chapter, nor shall moving the vehicle to another
portion of the right-of-way extend any time periods herein. [Added
10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 126-2007]
C.
Flat tires, missing tires, missing wheels or missing or partially or totally
disassembled tires and wheels.
A.
§ 438-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 438-1
438:939
JUNKYARD — A premises licensed by the City of Scranton as a junkyard.
LESSEE — Owner, for the purpose of this chapter, when the lessor holds the
lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device, propelled by a motor,
in which persons or property may be transported upon public streets or
highways and including trailers or semitrailers pulled thereby.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure or improvement which shall
constitute a threat or potential threat to the health, safety or welfare of the
citizens of the City of Scranton.
OWNER — The actual owner, agent or custodian of the property on which
motor vehicles are stored, whether individual or partnership, association or
corporation.
PERSON — Natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PRIVATE PARKING LOT — A parking lot open to the public or used for
parking without charge or a parking lot used for parking with charge.
SALVOR — A person or business authorized by the City of Scranton to tow
vehicles.
Missing or partially or totally disassembled essential part or parts of the
vehicle's drive train, including, but not limited to, engine, transmission,
transaxle, drive shaft, differential or axle.
B.
Extensive exterior body damage or missing or partially or totally
disassembled essential body parts, including, but not limited to,
fenders, doors, engine hood, bumper or bumpers, windshield or
windows.
C.
Musing or partially or totally disassembled essential interior parts,
including, but not limited to, driver's seat, steering wheel, instrument
panel, clutch, brake or gear shift lever.
D.
Missing or partially or totally disassembled parts essential to the
starting or running of the vehicle under its own power, including, but
not limited to, starter, generator or alternator, battery, distributor, gas
tank, carburetor or fuel injection system, spark plugs or radiator.
E.
Interior is a container for metal, glass, paper, rags or other cloth, wood,
auto parts, machinery, waste or discarded materials in such quantity,
quality and arrangement that a driver cannot be properly seated in the
vehicle.
F.
Lying on the ground (upside down, on its side or at other extreme
angle), sitting on block or suspended in the air by any other method.
G.
General environment in which the vehicle sits, including, but not
limited to, vegetation that has grown up around, in or through the
vehicle, the collection of pools of water in the vehicle and the
accumulation of other garbage or debris around the vehicle.
H.
§ 438-1 SCRANTON CODE § 438-1
438:940
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices
used exclusively upon rails or tracks, specifically including but not limited
to cars, buses, motorcycles and trucks.
WAREHOUSEMAN — A person engaged in the business of storing goods for
hire, as defined by the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC).
§ 438-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 438-1
438:941

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Vehicles
§ 438-2. Abandonment and stripping of vehicles; penalties.
§ 438-3. Removal of vehicle by or at the discretion of police.
Any police officer may remove or cause to be removed by a salvor or
warehouseman to his place of business or other place of safety any
abandoned vehicle, after giving notice to the owner in accordance with this
article.
§ 438-4. Notice to owner prior to removal.
A. No person shall abandon a vehicle upon any public property, highway,
street or private property without the express or implied consent of the
owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property.
B. It is unlawful for any person, except the owner or his agent or as
otherwise provided in this article, to remove any part of an abandoned
vehicle.
C. Penalties.
(1) Any person violating Subsection A is guilty of a summary offense
and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 for the first offense; $200 for a second offense; $300 for
a third offense; $400 for a fourth offense and $500 for each offense
thereafter. [Amended 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 126-2007]
(2) Any person violating Subsection B is guilty of the penalties as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code at 75 P.S. § 3712.2.
(a) For a first offense, is guilty of a summary offense punishable by
a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(b) For a subsequent offense, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree as defined by the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
A. Prior to removal of an abandoned vehicle bearing a registration plate by
which the last registered owner of the vehicle can be determined,
notice shall be sent by certified mail to the last registered owner of the
vehicle, informing the owner that, unless the vehicle is moved to a
suitable location within five days of the date notice is mailed, the
vehicle will be removed under this section and held at a suitable facility
where it may be reclaimed by the owner in accordance with the
provisions of the Towing Ordinance.125 If the abandoned vehicle does
not bear an identifiable registration plate, the notice may be secured to
the vehicle.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 439, Art. III, Towing and Storage.
§ 438-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 438-4
438:943
§ 438-5. Reports to Department of Transportation of possession of
abandoned vehicles.
Any salvor taking possession of an abandoned vehicle pursuant to this
article shall, within 48 hours after taking possession, report to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation the make, model, vehicle
identification number and registration plate number of the abandoned
vehicle and the name and address of the owner or person who abandoned
the vehicle, if known, together with any other information or documents
which the Department may, by regulation, require. The report shall include
a statement whether the vehicle is valueless except for junk. Where the
report indicates the vehicle is valueless except for junk, the salvor shall
include a photograph of the vehicle to be prepared in the manner prescribed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The report by a salvor
that a vehicle is valueless except for junk shall be verified by the Police
Department, which authorized the towing of the vehicle by the salvor.
§ 438-6. Notice to public by salvors.
The salvor shall provide to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
any and all notices required by the Vehicle Code. In addition, any and
all notices which are required to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation, or other publication, in the area where the vehicle was
abandoned shall be the responsibility of the salvor, and any and all costs of
such public notice shall be included in the cost of towing and storage. Any
and all costs associated with advertising under this article shall be the sole
and exclusive responsibility of the salvors, and the City shall not be required
to reimburse for any such costs. Any such public notice shall have the same
effect as notice sent by certified mail.
§ 438-7. Payment of costs upon reclaiming vehicle.
In the event that the owner or lienholder of an abandoned vehicle reclaims
the vehicle, the reclaiming party shall pay the costs for towing and storage
as provided for in the Towing Ordinance.126
§ 438-8. Authorization for disposal of unclaimed vehicles.
The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall, after the expiration
of 30 days from the date of notice sent by certified mail to the registered
B. If, within five days of the date notice is mailed as required by
Subsection A, the owner so requests, the owner shall be given an
opportunity to explain to the police officer or Police Department why
the owner believes the vehicle should not be moved. If the police officer
or Police Department determines that the vehicle shall, nonetheless, be
moved, the owner shall be given an additional 48 hours to move the
vehicle or have it moved.
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 439, Art. III, Towing and Storage.
§ 438-4 SCRANTON CODE § 438-8
438:944
owner and all lienholders of record or 30 days after publication of the
notice, where applicable, and upon receipt of a written statement from the
holder of the vehicle that the abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed by
the owner or lienholder within the thirty-day period, authorize the disposal
of the abandoned vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 438-9. Public sale of unclaimed vehicles with value.
§ 438-10. Junking of vehicles valueless except for junk.
If an abandoned vehicle is valueless except for junk, the salvor shall note
that fact in the report to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as
required by Section 7304 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code and shall apply
for issuance of a certificate of junk as provided for in Section 1117 of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
A. If an abandoned vehicle having value has not been reclaimed as
provided in this article, the vehicle shall be sold at a public auction.
B. The salvor shall give the purchaser a sales receipt and shall apply to the
Pennsylvania Department of Motor Vehicles for a title which shall be
free and clear of all previous liens and claims of ownership.
C. From the proceeds of the sale of the abandoned vehicle, the salvor shall
be reimbursed for the costs of towing, storage, notice and publication
and the expense of auction, and the City of Scranton shall be paid the
appropriate fine and/or penalties. The remainder of the proceeds of the
sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or record lienholder for
60 days from the date of sale and, if not properly claimed, shall then be
paid to the Police Department and transmitted to the Business
Administrator for deposit in the general fund.
§ 438-8 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 438-10
438:945

ARTICLE III
Junk Vehicle Storage
§ 438-11. Junk vehicle storage prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to:
§ 438-12. Exceptions.
§ 438-13. Investigation and notice.
A. To park and or in any other manner place and leave unattended on the
traveled portion of any public street or highway a junk vehicle for any
period of time, even if the owner or operator of the vehicle did not
intend to permanently desert or forsake the vehicle.
B. To park or in any other manner place and leave unattended on the
untraveled portion of any street or highway, or upon any other public
property, a junk vehicle for more than 48 continuous hours, even if the
owner or operator of the vehicle did not intend to permanently desert or
forsake the vehicle.
C. To park, store, keep or maintain on private property a junk vehicle for
more than 48 continuous hours.
A. It shall be permissible for a person to park, store, keep and maintain a
junk vehicle on private property under the following conditions:
(1) The junk vehicle is completely enclosed within a building where
neither the vehicle nor any part of it is visible from the street or
from any other abutting property. However, this exception shall not
exempt the owner or person in possession of the property from any
zoning, building, housing, property maintenance and other
regulations governing the building in which such vehicle is
enclosed.
(2) The junk vehicle is parked or stored on property lawfully zoned for
business engaged in wrecking, junking or repairing vehicles.
However, this exception shall not exempt the owner or operator of
any such business from any other zoning, building, fencing,
property maintenance and other regulations governing business
engaged in wrecking, junking or repairing vehicles.
B. No person shall park, store, keep and maintain on private property a
junk vehicle for any period of time if it poses an immediate threat to the
health and safety of citizens of the City of Scranton.
A. The Master Code Official, or his designee, including but not limited to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer and any Building, Housing or Health
Inspector (the Official), is authorized to inspect the property on which
motor vehicles are stored to determine compliance with this article and
§ 438-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 438-13
438:947
§ 438-14. Violations and penalties.
If the owner of the premises fails to comply with the notice:
§ 438-15. Appeals.
The owner may appeal the order of the Official to the Building Appeals
Board by filing a written statement to the Board within 10 days from the
mailing or posting of said notice outlining the reasons why they feel they are
not in violation of the ordinance. The Building Appeals Board shall convene
a hearing within 30 days of the filing of the written statement. The Building
Appeals Board may uphold or overturn the Official's order.
issue ordinance summons for violations of this article on private
property.
B. The Official shall, upon the complaint of any citizen, or acting on his
own information, investigate complaints of junked vehicles on private
property.
C. Upon a finding of noncompliance with the provisions of this article, the
Official shall issue a written notice to be served by registered or
certified mail upon the record owner of the premises or, if the owner's
whereabouts or identity is unknown, by posting the notice
conspicuously upon the offending premises.
D. The notice shall specify the condition which violates this article and
shall require the owner to commence to rectify the violation within 10
days from the mailing or posting of said notice and, thereafter, to fully
comply with the requirements of the notice within a reasonable time as
determined by the Official.
A. The City of Scranton shall have the authority to take measures to
correct the violations and collect the cost of such corrections, plus 10%
of all costs. The City of Scranton, in such event and pursuant to its
statutory or otherwise authorized police powers, shall have the right
and power to enter upon the offending premise to accomplish the
foregoing; and/or
B. Issue a summons to the offending party with a penalty of $100, plus
court costs for each separate violation of this article. Each day the
violation of this article continues shall be considered a separate
violation.
§ 438-13 SCRANTON CODE § 438-15
438:948
Chapter 439
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 175.
Engine brake retarders — See Ch. 218.
Gasoline service stations — See Ch. 269.
Parking garages and lots — See Ch. 328.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 332.
Skateboarding and rollerblading — See Ch.
394.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 412.
Abandoned or junk vehicles — See Ch. 438.
Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 441.
§ 438-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 438-15
438:949

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 439-1. Establishment of temporary regulations; conditions and
cessation.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized to
establish traffic regulations not heretofore provided by ordinance and also
to change traffic regulations that may have been previously provided for by
ordinance, for a trial period not to exceed 90 days, subject to the following
conditions:
§ 439-2. Funeral processions.
§ 439-3. Vehicle entering street or highway.
A. That, prior to the trial period, a written communication shall be sent by
the Mayor to notify Council of such proposed regulations and of the
reasons therefor.
B. That such trial period shall begin upon the posting of signs or other
appropriate notice to the public.
C. That if an ordinance embodying such regulation or any part thereof fails
to be enacted by Council, such regulation or any part thereof shall, at
the end of the trial period of 90 days, cease to be effective.
A. No operator of any vehicle shall obstruct, intercept or break through
any moving funeral procession in the streets of the City, except upon
signal of a police officer or in cases where a space of 40 feet or more
intervenes between the vehicles forming the procession at the point of
interception or breaking through. This section shall not apply to the
operators of ambulances or fire or police apparatus.
B. It shall be the duty of every undertaker, funeral director or other person
conducting or having charge of a funeral to conduct the same by the
most direct route to its place of destination while passing through the
present or future fire districts of the City in order that congestion of
traffic within the fire districts may not be unnecessarily increased.
A. The driver of a vehicle entering upon a street or highway from a private
road or drive shall come to a full stop immediately before crossing the
sidewalk or crosswalk and shall yield the right-of-way to any
approaching vehicle.
B. The driver of any motor vehicle entering a street or highway from any
alley, court, lane, place or building shall come to a full stop immediately
before crossing the sidewalk or crosswalk, shall give an audible signal
before proceeding and shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching
vehicle.
§ 439-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-4
438:951
§ 439-4. Traffic lanes or limit lines; changing lanes.
Where the traffic lanes or limit lines have been marked upon any street
or highway, the lane nearest the curb shall be used by commercial motor
vehicles and slow-moving traffic. Lanes nearest the center of the street or
highway shall be used by other vehicles, and no driver of a vehicle shall
cross from one lane to the other, except where such lane is obstructed and
then only by first giving the proper signal of intention to turn and observing
to see that the change of course may be made safely. No such change of
course shall be made where any other vehicle is approaching so closely
from the rear as to require the checking of the speed of such approaching
vehicle.
§ 439-5. Backing restrictions.
§ 439-6. Compliance with signals or warnings.
The driver of any motor vehicle shall comply with any signal or warning
given by any police officer, traffic signal, sign marker, light or device or
signal warning given by the drivers of other vehicles.
§ 439-7. Traffic signal lights.
The display of a red light upon any traffic signal means stop and a green
light means proceed. No movement or turn shall be made where a red light
is displayed except under the direction of a police officer or where signs are
posted indicating that turns or other movement may be made.
§ 439-8. Stopping at stop signs.
A. No vehicle shall be backed upon the street or highway out of any public
or private driveway, lane, court, alley or place or around a corner at an
intersection of streets or highways until it is first ascertained that it can
be done with safety to persons and property. No vehicle shall be backed
without first giving an unmistakable warning signal to pedestrians and
approaching vehicles.
B. In no case shall a vehicle be backed more than a distance of 60 feet.
A. No driver or any operator of any vehicle shall, before entering a
through highway, fail to come to a complete stop within a reasonable
distance before entering the intersection on such through highway,
when an official stop sign or signs have been erected.
B. No driver or operator of any vehicle shall, before entering a stop
intersection, fail to come to a full stop within a reasonable distance
before entering the intersection, when an official stop sign or signs
have been erected.
§ 439-4 SCRANTON CODE § 439-9
438:952
§ 439-9. Yielding in safety zones.
The driver of any vehicle passing a safety zone must proceed with caution
and yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian.
§ 439-10. Reckless driving; speeding; penalty.
§ 439-11. Obstruction of streets by railroads; three-minute limit.
§ 439-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No.
42-2016]
Whoever violates any of the non-parking related provisions of this Chapter
439 shall be fined not more than $50 and, in default of payment thereof,
may be imprisoned for not more than 10 days, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter or by state law. Fines for parking violations are contained in
§ 439-26.
§ 439-13. Use of earphones and headphones. [Added by Ord. No.
25-1985]
A. No person shall operate a vehicle of any kind on the public streets or
highways of the City recklessly or at a rate of speed greater than is
reasonable and proper, having regard to the width, traffic and use of the
street or highway, or so as to endanger property or the life and limb of
any person.
B. Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $10 nor more
than $25 and, in default of payment thereof, may be imprisoned not
more than five days.
A. Where any street or public highway crosses any railroad at-grade it
shall be unlawful to obstruct or block such street or public highway by
the stationing or operation of railroad locomotives, cars or other
equipment for a longer period than three minutes continuously at any
one time.
B. Any railroad corporation or any engineer, conductor or other person
participating in the violation of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in § 1-16.
A. The use of earphones and headphones by joggers, bicyclists and
operators of motorized or self-propelled vehicles is prohibited while
said persons are using the municipal streets, roadways and
thoroughfares in the City.
B. Joggers or other persons using earphones and headphones while
traveling or using the sidewalks in the City are required to remove said
devices prior to leaving the sidewalks to cross the street or roadways.
C. If any of the provisions of this section or the application of such
provision shall be in conflict with the Motor Vehicle Laws of the State of
§ 439-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-13
438:953
§ 439-14. Uniform System Manual of Official Traffic Devices
adopted; marking of streets in compliance; penalty. [Added by Ord.
No. 157-1991]
Pennsylvania,127 such conflict or invalidity of said provision shall not
affect other provisions of this section.
D. Any person who shall violate a provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $25 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding five days. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. The Uniform System Manual of Official Traffic Devices known as 67
Pennsylvania Code, Subchapter K (67 Pa. Code § 211.1131 to and
including § 211.1214), part of PennDot Publication 68, be in pertinent
part as specified above, and is hereby adopted for use by the City or
other authorized persons on public streets and roadways within the
City.
B. Any person or firm desiring to place any markings or paint on the public
streets or roadways within the City shall make a request, in writing, to
the Director of Public Safety stating the proposed work and why it is
necessary, the locations of said markings and whether the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation concurs if a state highway is used. The
Director of Public Safety, after consultation with the Director of Public
Works and the City Engineer, shall authorize or disapprove the request,
in writing, after investigation; no request shall be granted for state
highways without the consent of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
C. Any person, firm or corporation who, without the permission of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for a state highway or the
City for a municipal street, roadway, court or alley within the City shall
place markings on pavement or place markings on pavements which do
not conform with those prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation in Subchapter K, Title 67 Pennsylvania Code, 67 Pa.
Code § 211.1131 through § 211.1214, inclusive, is guilty of a summary
offense, punishable by a fine not to exceed $300 or imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, or both such fine or imprisonment, plus costs. Each
day that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Each location, if not at the same intersection shall constitute a separate
offense.
D. The Bureau of Traffic Maintenance is hereby authorized to mark
pavements in accordance with the aforesaid Pennsylvania Code on any
municipal streets, roadways, alleys or courts without further
permission in performance of official business. The City reserves the
right to make emergency markings as permitted by said Subchapter K,
127. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. et seq.
§ 439-13 SCRANTON CODE § 439-14
438:954
of the Pennsylvania Code or by Chapter 211 generally in the event of
emergency.
§ 439-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-14
438:955

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 439-15. Parking prohibited in specified places.
A. No person shall park, or permit to stand, any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, upon a street or highway within the City in any of the
following places:
(1) Within an intersection.
(2) On a crosswalk.
(3) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless local officials shall indicate a different length by signs or
markings.
(4) Within 25 feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, then
within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection
of streets or highways.
(5) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any official, flashing signal,
stop sign or traffic signal located at the side of the roadway.
(6) Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
(7) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(8) In front of a private driveway.
(9) On a sidewalk.
(10) Alongside any street or highway excavation or obstruction or
opposite the same, unless a clear and unobstructed width of not
fewer than 20 feet upon the main-traveled portion of the street or
highway shall be left free for passage of other vehicles thereon.
(11)On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the curb or
edge of the street or highway.
(12) At any place where official signs have been erected prohibiting
standing and parking.
(13)Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a steam or interurban railway
crossing.
B. Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs or signals or where angle parking is permitted, the operator of a
vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle on the street or
highway within a business or residence district other than parallel with
the edge of the street or highway, headed in the direction of traffic and
with the curb side of the vehicle within six inches of the edge of the
street or highway or curb. Vehicles, which because of type or
§ 439-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-15
438:957
§ 439-16. Parking in alley or court.
No person shall park a vehicle in any public court or alley. However, a
commercial motor vehicle may load or unload there but shall not obstruct
other vehicles from passing.
§ 439-17. Store front loading.
No person shall park a motor vehicle upon the street or highway in front of
any store or building for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise
if there are adequate facilities therefor in the rear of any such store or
building.
§ 439-18. "For sale" signs on parked vehicles.
No person shall park a motor vehicle upon a street or highway which
displays any "for sale" sign on such vehicle.
§ 439-19. Parking between curb and building line.
No person shall park a vehicle between the curb and the building line, and
no vehicle shall be permitted to use this space for loading or unloading
purposes.
§ 439-20. All night parking.
There shall be no all night parking of vehicles on the street or highway and
such parked vehicles shall be considered abandoned and may be tagged or
removed under the direction and in the custody of any police officer. Where
any such vehicle is removed, the owner thereof shall be required to pay the
cost of towage and storage of such vehicle, in addition to any fine that may
be imposed.
§ 439-21. Distances between parked vehicles.
No person shall park a motor vehicle upon the street or highway closer than
a distance of two feet from an other vehicle parked in front thereof.
§ 439-22. Parking at building entrances.
No person shall park a vehicle in front of the entrance of any theater, public
building, dance hall, driveway, either public or private, or building in which
a large number of people are accustomed to gather, except if the same is
designated as a parking space by appropriate signs or markers.
construction cannot load or unload parallel to the curb, shall be exempt,
while loading or unloading only, from the requirements of standing
parallel to the curb.
§ 439-15 SCRANTON CODE § 439-23
438:958
§ 439-23. Parking contrary to posted signs.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or highway for any greater
length of time or contrary to any regulations indicated by posted signs or
other markers.
§ 439-24. Parking for repairs.
No person shall park or stand a vehicle upon the street or highway for the
purpose of making repairs thereto.
§ 439-25. No parking signs and zones.
A. The Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized to erect signs
prohibiting parking during certain hours on certain streets for the
purpose of street cleaning in accordance with a schedule to be
established by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
B. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time in which parking is prohibited as provided on such
signs.
C. The following street locations are hereby designated no-parking zones:
Name Intersection/Location Side
Adams Avenue [Added
7-15-2002 by Ord. No.
49-2002]
Driveway to the Geneva House South
Adams Avenue [Added
9-23-2004 by Ord. No.
62-2004]
From Lackawanna Avenue to
Center Street
West
Ash Street [Added
4-3-1996 by Ord. No.
59-1996]
Monroe Avenue Both
Broadway Street [Added
3-4-2019 by Ord. No.
56-2019]
From the westerly limit of the
painted bicycle lane which is 29
feet west of the edge of the
stamped bituminous asphalt
pave bicycle crossing path to a
point 25 feet east of said
westerly limit of the painted
bicycle lane (275 feet)
North
§ 439-23 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-25
438:959
Name Intersection/Location Side
Broadway Street [Added
3-4-2019 by Ord. No.
56-2019]
From the westerly limit of the
painted bicycle lane which is 30
feet west of the edge of the
stamped bituminous asphalt
pave bicycle crossing path to a
point 280 feet east of said
westerly limit of the painted
bicycle lane (280 feet)
South
Cedar Avenue [Added
4-12-2012 by Ord. No.
29-2012]
From the corner of Cedar
Avenue and Willow Street in a
southerly direction for 135 feet
West
Cedar Avenue [Added
6-7-2012 by Ord. No.
36-2012]
From its intersection with the
southwest side of Ripple Street
extended traveling in a
southerly direction a distance of
250 feet
West
East Locust Street
[Added 11-10-2016 by
Ord. No. 61-2016]
At the intersection of east
Locust Street and South Irving
Avenue, along the southerly
curbline on the westerly
approach of East Locust Street
to the intersection, 30 feet back
from the existing stop sign, and
along the westerly curbline on
the northerly approach of South
Irving Avenue to the
intersection, 20 feet ahead of
the existing crosswalk
Both
Green Ridge Street
[Added 12-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 137-2017]
Along the curbline beginning
approximately 10 feet from its
intersection with Pennsylvania
Avenue, traveling in a westerly
direction for a length of 80 feet
North
Harrison Avenue [Added
4-29-2008 by Ord. No.
22-2008]
From the intersection of
Mulberry Street 265 feet south
West
Jefferson Avenue, 700
Block [Added 7-26-1999
by Ord. No. 108-1999]
From Pine Street to Gibson
Street
Both
Lackawanna Avenue
[Added 3-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 52-2019]
From SR3018 Segment 0010
Offset 0300 to Segment 0010
Offset 0630 for a distance of
300 feet along the southerly
curbline (more or less) of
Lackawanna Avenue
North
§ 439-25 SCRANTON CODE § 439-25
438:960
Name Intersection/Location Side
Larch Street [Added
3-7-2013 by Ord. No.
8-2013]
Along the curbline for a
distance of 175 feet along the
southerly curbline of the 400
block of Larch Street beginning
at its intersection with Wyoming
Avenue
South
Luzerne Street, 1100
block [Added 4-26-2007
by Ord. No. 84-2007]
South Main Avenue West
Madison Avenue [Added
2-23-2017 by Ord. No.
87-2017]
No parking restricted days; no
parking restricted hours
(Monday through Friday, 8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.) in front of
Head Start, 637-639 Madison
Avenue
—
Main Avenue [Added
9-29-2003 by Ord. No.
217-2003]
Eight spaces between the
entrance and exit of Walgreens
Pharmacy
—
Monroe Avenue Ash Street Both
Mulberry Street [Added
9-25-2007 by Ord. No.
111-2007; amended
7-1-2008 by Ord. No.
23-2008; 7-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 75-2009]
From Jefferson Avenue to North
Webster Avenue
Both
North Washington Avenue
[Added 5-31-2012 by
Ord. No. 33-2012;
amended 7-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 46-2012;
10-25-2012 by Ord. No.
63-2012]
Between Phelps Street and New
Street in a southerly direction
for 219 feet
West
§ 439-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-25
438:961
Name Intersection/Location Side
North Washington Avenue
[Added 5-2-2013 by
Ord. No. 19-2013]
Along the curbline of the 1700
block beginning at the end line
of Pin 13518-030-019,
northbound a distance of 173
feet around the arc intersecting
with the 1100 block of Electric
Street, then a distance of 200
feet along the southerly curbline
of the 1100 block of Electric
Street westbound, then a
distance of 17 feet along the
easterly curbline of the 1800
block of Wyoming Avenue
ending at the end line of Pin
13518-030-017
West
Oakford Court [Added
7-1-2015 by Ord. No.
104-2015]
In the 300 block, for a length of
30 feet along the westerly
curbline from the northerly
edge of the existing concrete
sidewalk at the rear entrance of
the Linden Street Apartments
north toward Mulberry Street
(loading zone)
West
Park Street [Added
2-9-1994 by Ord. No.
14-1994]
From the intersection of
Boulevard Avenue and Park
Street along an area 30 feet
from that intersection
North
Providence Road [Added
5-7-2001 by Ord. No.
39-2001]
From the center line of the
driveway at the main entrance
to Weston Field 80 feet north
East
Providence Road [Added
5-7-2001 by Ord. No.
39-2001]
From the center line of the
driveway at the main entrance
to Weston Field 127 feet south
East
Providence Road [Added
5-7-2001 by Ord. No.
39-2001]
From the center line of the
driveway at the main entrance
to Weston Field 96 feet south
West
Providence Road [Added
5-7-2001 by Ord. No.
39-2001]
From the center line of the
driveway at the main entrance
to Weston Field 110 feet north
West
Providence Road (SR
3029) Added 6-3-2004
by Ord. No. 46-2004]
Along the curbline 225 feet to
meet the requirements for a
driveway for the Scranton
School District at Memorial
Stadium
West
§ 439-25 SCRANTON CODE § 439-25
438:962
Name Intersection/Location Side
River Street [Added
6-11-2018 by Ord. No.
19-2018]
From a point 276 feet west of
the face of curb on the westerly
side of Mattes Avenue to a point
356 feet west of the face of curb
on the westerly side of Mattes
Avenue shall be restricted and/
or prohibited for 80 feet
North
River Street [Added
6-11-2018 by Ord. No.
19-2018]
From South Washington Avenue
to Mattes Avenue
South
Snook Street, 30-80 Block
[Added 10-21-2004 by
Ord. No. 71-2004]
From the intersection of Snook
Street with Seymour Avenue to
the dead end of Snook
Both
South Main Avenue, 400
Block [Added 4-26-2007
by Ord. No. 84-2007]
Luzerne Street North
Stafford Avenue (SR 3021)
[Added 5-14-2018 by
Ord. No. 16-2018]
Along a 170 foot section
beginning approximately 45 feet
from its intersection with Willow
Street traveling in a northerly
direction, in order to provide
acceptable sight distance for
the proposed driveway to serve
623 Stafford Avenue
East
West Market Street (SR
6011) [Added 2-7-2013
by Ord. No. 4-2013]
Along the curbline from SR
6011 Segment 0290 Offset 1486
to SR 6011 Segment 0290
Offset 1786 for a distance of
300 feet along the easterly
curbline of the 400 block of
West Market Street beginning
at its intersection with Brick
Avenue and ending at its
intersection with Rockwell
Avenue
East
Wyoming Avenue (SR
3025) [Added 3-16-2005
by Ord. No. 112-2005]
Adjacent to the Guild Studio
Wyoming Avenue (SR
3025), 1,000 block
[Added 10-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 133-2007]
East
§ 439-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-25
438:963
§ 439-26. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-12-2012 by Ord. No.
29-2012; amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
Name Intersection/Location Side
Wyoming Avenue (SR
3025) [Added 3-7-2013
by Ord. No. 8-2013]
Along the curbline SR 3025
Segment 0030 Offset 2190 to
Segment 0030 Offset 2410 for a
distance of 220 feet along the
easterly curbline of the 1200
block of Wyoming Avenue
East
Wyoming Avenue (SR
3025) [Added 4-16-2018
by Ord. No. 11-2018]
From a point 175 feet south of
the intersection with East
Gibson Street to a point 325
feet south of the intersection
with East Gibson Street to allow
for driveway sight distance
West
D. The aforesaid restricted areas should be clearly identified by the
posting of appropriate signs. [Added 4-12-2012 by Ord. No.
29-2012]
E. It shall be illegal for any person to park or to have his/her vehicle or
vehicles parked in the above areas. A separate offense under this
section shall be deemed to occur for each day for which such vehicle is
parked or remains parked in the aforesaid area. [Added 4-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 29-2012; amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
A. Whoever violates any of the parking related provisions of this Chapter
439 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined according to the following
schedule:
Violation Code Section Fine
Meter overtime § 439-48 $25
Exceed 10-minute
zone - posted
§ 439-49 $25
Exceed 20-minute
zone - posted
§ 439-49 $25
Exceed 30-minute
zone - posted
§ 439-49 $25
Exceed 2-hour zone -
posted
§ 439-49 $25
No parking in court -
posted
§ 439-16 $35
No parking loading
zone - posted
§ 439-15(A)(12) $35
Unauthorized/
improper parking
§ 439-23 $35
§ 439-25 SCRANTON CODE § 439-26
438:964
Violation Code Section Fine
Parked in wrong
direction
§ 439-15(B) $35
No double parking § 439-15(A)(11) $35
No parking within 30
feet of stop sign
§ 439-15(A)(5) $35
No meter feeding § 439-49 $35
No parking between
signs - posted
§ 439-47 $35
No parking zone -
posted
§ 439-15(A)(12) $35
No parking -
obstructing traffic
§ 439-15(A)(10) $35
Parked blocking
driveway/court
§ 439-15(A)(8) $35
No parking on
sidewalk
§ 439-15(A)(9) $35
No parking where
sign prohibits
§ 439-15(A)(12) $35
Handicapped parking
only - posted
§ 430-27.41 $55
Parked within 15 feet
of fire hydrant
§ 439-15(A)(9) $55
Any parking violation
not specifically listed
above
$35
B. In the case of nonpayment of such fine or fines, and in addition to all
other penalties, fines, fees and enforcement measures permitted by law,
the person so violating the provisions of this article may be imprisoned
for not more than 10 days.
C. The fines provided for in § 439-26A (Citation rates) shall be subject to
adjustment pursuant to the following procedure:
(1) Until December 31, 2016, the citation rates shall be as set forth
above and on the Schedule of Citation Rates described in Exhibit
A,128 which is attached hereto and incorporated herein. The
columns labeled as "calculated value" on the Schedule of Citation
Rates reflect annual increases of 3% (year-over-year) in the citation
rates (assuming base rates of $25, $35, and $55, respectively). On
January 1 of each calendar year, the Schedule of Citation Rates
shall be updated in the event that the annual percentage change in
128. Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 439-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-26
438:965
§ 439-27. Handicapped parking areas; penalties for violation.
[Added by Ord. No. 54-1986; 106-1986; 6-27-2013 by Ord. No.
30-2013; 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
the index (as defined below) exceeds 3%, as measured by a
comparison of the index from the month of June, two calendar years
prior to the calendar year in question to the index for the month
of June of the calendar year immediately prior to the calendar
year in question, by increasing the calculated value figure for the
calendar year in question by the percentage change in the index.
After updating the Schedule of Citation Rates in accordance with
this § 439-26C, if necessary, on January 1 of each calendar year,
the citation rates for that particular calendar year shall equal the
amount set forth in the columns labeled as "established rate" on
the Schedule of Citation Rates if the calculated value for that
particular year exceeds the established rate for the calendar year
immediately preceding the particular calendar year. If said
calculated value is less than said established rate, then the citation
rates for the calendar year in question shall be equal to the citation
rates for the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar
year in question. A Schedule of Citation Rates updated pursuant
to this § 439-26C shall be maintained in the City Clerk's Office.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the citation rates shall not be
increased for any given year unless the metered parking rates
set forth in Council File No. 91, 2002, as amended, have also
been increased for such year pursuant to the procedures set forth
therein.
(2) "Index" means the "Consumer Price Index - United States City
Average for all Urban Consumers, All Items Index" (not seasonally
adjusted), as published by the United States Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics; provided, however, that if the index is
changed so that the base year of the index changes, the index shall
be converted in accordance with the conversion factor published by
the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics;
provided further that if the index is discontinued or revised, such
other index or computation with which it is replaced shall be used
in order to obtain substantially the same result as would be
obtained if the index had not been discontinued or revised.
D. All violators shall pay fines to the office or mailing address designated
on the violation notice.
A. No person shall park a motor vehicle in a space upon a street, highway
or entrance, private or public, which is designated for the use of
disabled or handicapped parking either with signage or markings
showing such space is for the use of handicapped parking. Said areas
are exclusively restricted to individuals who are disabled or
handicapped and whose license plate or designated placard so indicates
§ 439-26 SCRANTON CODE § 439-27
438:966
§ 439-28. The Parking Authority of the City of Scranton,
Pennsylvania or its designee to enforce on-street regulations.
[Added by Ord. No. 18-1990; amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No.
43-2016]
or also who properly displays a temporary handicap placard on the
right front area of the dashboard.
B. In case of nonpayment of a fine assessed under this section, the person
so violating the above provisions shall be issued a citation/summons
within 45 days from the date of the identification of the violator.
[Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
C. Renewal procedure for handicapped parking sign(s).
(1) Any vehicle owner who has procured a handicapped parking sign
must file a renewal application with the Scranton Police
Department and pay a fee of $10 for a processing fee payable to the
City Treasurer;
(2) The Scranton Police Department will forward a letter to all current
vehicle owners who have a handicapped parking sign that states
that they must complete the renewal application and forward same
with a check for $10 to the Scranton Police Department within 90
days. Failure to forward the renewal application within said time
period shall constitute a forfeiture of the designation, and the City
of Scranton Department of Public Works shall remove any signage
from the designated parking space(s); and
(3) The Scranton Police Department shall create a renewal application
for handicapped parking signs and issue a copy of same to any
vehicle owner who applies for a handicapped parking sign and
receives a sign.
A. To the fullest extent permitted by law, including, without limitation, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 6109 and 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505, The Parking Authority of the
City of Scranton, Pennsylvania and its designee shall have and exercise
all powers necessary or convenient for the administration, supervision
and enforcement of an efficient system of on-street parking regulation
in the City of Scranton. The powers shall include, but not be limited to,
the following powers and rights:
(1) To conduct research and maintain data related to on-street parking
activities;
(2) To issue parking tickets for illegally parked vehicles;
(3) To collect on behalf of the City of Scranton rates and other charges,
including fines and penalties, for on-street parking violations;
§ 439-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-28
438:967
§ 439-29. Fees for the enforcement of on-street parking citations
and warrants. [Added by Ord. No. 156-1993; amended by Ord. No.
136-1994]
§ 439-29.1. Parking for City personnel. [Added 9-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 117-1999]
(4) To boot or tow a vehicle which is illegally parked or the owner of
which is delinquent in payment of the requisite number of
previously issued parking tickets, as set forth in the Code; and
(5) To own or lease personal property used in connection with the
exercise of any power provided in this paragraph; and
B. The authorization established in Subsection A shall not supersede,
diminish or restrict the exercise by the City of Scranton of its full police
powers, which include, but are not limited to, the power to establish
parking ordinances and regulations and charges for on-street parking.
A. The District Justice of Magisterial Court 45-1-02, after the issuance of a
warrant for the arrest of parking violators, is hereby authorized to
charge an initial fee of $5 for the preparation and mailing of a boot/
arrest notice. Thereafter, if the boot/arrest notice is returned after an
unsuccessful attempt to deliver, said District Justice is authorized to
charge an additional fee of $5 for identifying the current address of said
violator. Thereafter, in the event that the citation remains unpaid, said
District Justice is hereby authorized to charge an additional fee of $5
for the coordination of the placement of the boot and/or service of the
arrest warrant. Any constable fees and mileage fees which accrue shall
be in addition to the fees as authorized above and shall be payable by
the violator. The placing of a boot on any vehicle shall remain under the
control of the Scranton Police Department or The Parking Authority of
the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania and its designee. The penalties, fines
and fees described in this § 439-29 shall be in addition to all other
penalties, fines, fees and enforcement measures permitted by law.
[Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
B. All fees authorized by this § 439-29 shall be paid directly to the District
Justice Office. [Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
C. The increase in fees shall remain in effect for an indefinite period of
time. [Added by Ord. No. 7-1995]129
A. The Engineer for the City of Scranton has completed a schematic/map
designating parking for certain City personnel after having received
input from the City of Scranton Police Department, City of Scranton
Fire Department, Office of Mayor and Office of City Council. A copy of
the aforesaid schematic/map is attached hereto and marked as Exhibit
129. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 31-38, regarding permits for parking garages, as amended by
Ord. Nos. 2-1981; 60-1988 and 183-1994, was superseded by Ord. No. 7-1995. See now Ch.
328.
§ 439-28 SCRANTON CODE § 439-29.1
438:968
§ 439-29.2. Time limit parking. [Added 3-18-2019 by Ord. No.
58-2019]
A and made part hereof. Said parking designation is authorized and
approved.
B. Any violation of the parking designations/restrictions as indicated in the
attached map, which will be further designated by posting of
appropriate signage, will subject the owner/operator of the offending
vehicle to fines described in § 439-26. In addition, the owner/operator
of the offending vehicle will be responsible for any towing and storage
costs incurred in the removal of the offending vehicle. [Amended
6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
A. Two-hour parking. Parking at the following locations shall be restricted
to two hours only:
(1) Directly in front of 934 Beech Street (Zaleski's Clubhouse Cafe).
§ 439-29.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-29.2
438:969

ARTICLE III
Towing and Storage
[Added 10-24-2013 by Ord. No. 50-2013130]
§ 439-30. Qualifications.
All towers will be required to meet qualifications to be on the list. All towers
will be inspected by the Scranton Police Department and must be able to
show the following as part of that inspection:
§ 439-31. Responding order.
If a towing company is unable to respond to a call within 30 minutes after
being called, that towing company will lose its turn in the rotation; another
towing company may respond for that towing company.
§ 439-32. Prohibitions.
A. Certificate of insurance.
B. Workers' compensation policy.
C. List of drivers and license numbers for each.
D. Copy of the towing company's paid mercantile tax.
E. One rollback truck.
F. One tow truck with wheel lift.
G. The towing company name and phone number must be displayed on the
tow truck.
H. Phone service to be answered by the towing company representative.
Answering services are not permitted.
I. Towing company must produce valid and current registrations for each
vehicle to be used.
J. All identification logos and decals must be permanently affixed to the
doors of all vehicles used in performing towing services and cannot be
manipulated in any way as to identify the vehicle as owned and
operated by another entity.
A. Towing companies are prohibited from soliciting calls. Any company
which responds to a call without being dispatched by the Scranton
Police Department will receive a written letter of reprimand for that
first offense, will be suspended from the towing list for six months for
the second offense, and will be removed from the towing list
permanently for the third offense. In addition to the penalties stated
130. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Towing and Storage, added
7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 37-2011.
§ 439-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-32
438:971
§ 439-33. Release of vehicles.
There are hereby established set times between which towed vehicles may
be retrieved. Those times are from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. All authorized
towers must be available to come out and release vehicles between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. seven days a week.
§ 439-34. Storage of vehicles.
Each towing company must have the capability to store vehicles once the
vehicles are towed. A towing company may not tow a vehicle and place the
towed vehicle on a roadway. A violation of this section is subject to the same
penalties as set forth in § 439-32, Prohibitions, above.
§ 439-35. Authorized towing companies.
above, the towing companies will be fined $100 for each offense. In
addition, any towing company violating the rule regarding solicitation
of calls stated above, regardless of whether the company is on the
official towing list herein, will be subject to a fine of $100 per offense
for such violation.
B. In addition to the penalties stated above, any tower, whether on the
authorized list or not, will be subject to those penalties for a violation of
the towing rates section of the contract to be simultaneously entered
herewith. Violations of more than one section of these prohibitions and/
or towing rates will result in cumulative fines.
A. AJ'S Towing.
B. Anthracite Towing.
C. Boots and Hanks.
D. Brayers Towing.
E. D and S Towing.
F. Danny's Towing.
G. DeNaples Towing.
H. G and D Towing.
I. Keyser Valley Towing.
J. Midnight Towing.
K. Moletsky's Towing.
L. Morgan Highway Towing.
M. Morell's Towing.
§ 439-32 SCRANTON CODE § 439-35
438:972
§ 439-36. through § 439-38. (Reserved)
N. Paul's Towing.
O. Pee-Wees Towing.
§ 439-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-36
438:973

ARTICLE IV
Parking Meters
[Added 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 91-2002131]
§ 439-39. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
MULTI-SPACE PAY STATION (MSPS) — A device used for on-street parking
that will log the license plate of a parked vehicle and which can accept
payment by credit card, cellular phone, and/or coins.[Added 7-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 67-2019]
OPERATOR — Includes every individual who operates a vehicle as the
owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner or is in
actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARKING SPACE — Each individual 18 consecutive feet along the curb
of a street where parking is permissible on a street where an MSPS is
located.[Added 7-3-2019 by Ord. No. 67-2019]
PERSON — Includes every natural person, firm, partnership, copartnership,
association or corporation.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, highway, boulevard, place,
court, alley, thoroughfare or other public place located in the City and
established for the use of vehicles.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported upon a highway or street, except a device which is
operated upon rails or tracks.
§ 439-40. Initial purchase and installation; payment and contract.
A. The company with which a contract is executed for the purchase of the
meters shall furnish to the City a bond, with corporate surety subject to
the approval by the City Solicitor, to indemnify and save harmless the
City from any and all litigation involving such parking meters. The bond
shall be renewed annually for a total period of five years, premiums to
be paid therefor by the company.
B. The company to which the contract is awarded shall, in its contract with
the City, specify that it will indemnify against any and all claims by
reason of defective parts, defective operation and any and all damages
and costs that the City might suffer or be compelled to pay by reason of
patent or other litigation against the City pertaining to the operation of
the meters.
131. This ordinance also superseded former Art. IV, Parking Meters, added by Ord. No. 41-1987
as amended.
§ 439-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-41
438:975
§ 439-41. Parking meter rates, meter zones and hours of operation;
holidays.
A. From the date of adoption of this section until December 31, 2016, the
hourly rate for metered parking (the "hourly rate") shall be equal to
$1.50. Beginning on January 1, 2017, the hourly rate shall be adjusted
in accordance with the Schedule of Parking Fees (the "Rate
Schedule"),132 which is attached hereto and made a part hereof. The
column labeled as "future hourly value" on the rate schedule reflects
annual increases of 3% (year-over-year) in the hourly rate (assuming a
base hourly rate of $1.50). On January 1 of each calendar year, the rate
schedule shall be updated in the event that the annual percentage
change in the index (defined below) exceeds 3%, as measured by a
comparison of the index from the month of June, two calendar years
prior to the calendar year in question to the index for the month of June
of the calendar year immediately prior to the calendar year in question,
by increasing the future hourly value figure for the calendar year in
question by the percentage change in the index. After updating the rate
schedule in accordance with the procedures herein, if necessary, on
January 1 of each calendar year following the enactment of this section,
the hourly rate for that particular calendar year shall equal the amount
set forth in the column labeled as "posted hourly rate" on the rate
schedule if the future hourly value for that particular year exceeds the
posted hourly rate for the calendar year immediately preceding the
particular calendar year. If said future hourly value is less than said
posted hourly rate, then the hourly rate shall for the calendar year in
question be equal to the hourly rate for the calendar year immediately
preceding the calendar year in question. "Index" means the Consumer
Price Index - United States City Average for all Urban Consumers, All
Items Index (not seasonally adjusted) as published by the United States
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics; provided, however,
that if the index is changed so that the base year of the index changes,
the index shall be converted in accordance with the conversion factor
published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics; provided further that if the index is discontinued or revised,
such other index or computation with which it is replaced shall be used
in order to obtain substantially the same result as would be obtained if
the index had not been discontinued or revised. [Amended 9-25-2007
by Ord. No. 112-2007; 7-1-2008 by Ord. No. 24-2008; 7-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 73-2009; 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 75-2009; 12-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 99-2009; 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 100-2009; 2-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 10-2014; 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016]
B. The provisions of Subsection A shall not be applicable on the following
holidays:
(1) New Years' Day.
(2) Memorial Day.
132. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 439-41 SCRANTON CODE § 439-41
438:976
§ 439-42. Installation; signal of illegal parking. [Amended
6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
Parking meters and any other approved equipment or technology used to
regulate parking installed in the parking meter zone established shall be
placed upon the sidewalk or other appropriate areas. Each space regulated
by a parking meter, signage or other technologies shall be designated by
signage or other markings. The Director of the Department of Public Works
of the City of Scranton is empowered to define the streets, or portions
thereof, in the City of Scranton, which are to be controlled by parking
meters.
§ 439-43. Parking within designated lines.
§ 439-44. Front of vehicle to be nearest meter.
When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall
be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be nearest to the
parking meter. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal
to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be
parked with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to such meter.
§ 439-45. Parking in regulated parking spaces; payments and
compliance. [Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016; 7-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 67-2019]
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space on a street on which a
multi-space pay station is located, in accordance with the provisions of this
article, the operator shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately
register the vehicle at the nearest MSPS located on that side of the street
(3) Independence Day.
(4) Christmas Day.
(5) Labor Day.
(6) Thanksgiving Day.
A. Where lines or markings are painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk
and/or upon the streets adjacent to each parking space for which such
meter is to be used, each vehicle parked adjacent or next to any parking
meter shall park within the lines or markings to be placed. No person
shall park any vehicle in a position that it shall not be entirely within the
area as designated by such lines or markings.
B. More than one motorcycle may occupy a parking space or angle park so
long as one of the motorcycles does not extend over the designated
space line. At a metered parking space, each driver shall be responsible
for the insertion of coins into the meter. If the meter is expired, all
vehicles parked in the space shall receive an overtime citation.
§ 439-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-45
438:977
by entering their license plate number and paying the required amount by
either credit card or coin, or through their cell phone. Upon payment, the
parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period
of parking time which has been prescribed. Failure to pay or register the
applicable license plate number shall constitute a violation of this article
and shall subject such person to the penalty set forth in § 439-54.1. In the
event that an MSPS is out of order or malfunctioning, this does not preclude
the vehicle from complying with the provisions of this section by utilizing
the next closest MSPS and may result in the assessment of a penalty as
described in § 439-54.1. If such vehicle remains parked in any space beyond
the parking time limit fixed for such parking space, such vehicle shall be
considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time.
The parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period of legal parking
time in any such part of a street where any such multi-space pay station is
located, disabled or removed for repair shall be a violation of this article
and punishable as hereinafter set forth.
§ 439-46. Overtime parking.
No person or operator shall cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime
or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter
zone as herein described.
§ 439-47. Parking beyond legal parking period.
§ 439-48. Use of slugs or substitutes.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any
slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin or token.
§ 439-49. Tampering with meters.
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy
or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions
of this article.
A. No person shall park a vehicle in any such parking meter space for a
consecutive period of time longer than the limited period of time for
which such meter is located, irrespective of the number or amounts of
coins deposited in such meter. Each period of overtime parking beyond
the duration of time specified by the parking meter shall be considered
a separate offense.
B. A violation will be deemed to have occurred if a vehicle bearing a
specific registration plate number or vehicle identification number is
found to be parked within six spaces in either direction of the space in
which the vehicle was parked at the time the registration number or
vehicle identification number was recorded.
§ 439-45 SCRANTON CODE § 439-50
438:978
§ 439-50. Handicapped parking areas; penalties for violation.
[Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
§ 439-50.1. Removal, impounding and immobilization of vehicles
bearing outstanding citations. [Added 6-30-2016 by Ord. No.
42-2016]
A. No person shall park a motor vehicle in a space upon a street, highway
or entrance, private or public, which is designated for the use of
disabled or handicapped parking either with signage or markings
showing such space is for the use of handicapped parking. Said areas
are exclusively restricted to individuals who are disabled or
handicapped and whose license plate or designated placard so indicates
or also who properly displays a temporary handicap placard on right
front rear of dashboard.
B. Penalties for violation.
(1) Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined
$100 for each offense. [Amended 6-27-2013 by Ord. No.
31-2013]
(2) In case of nonpayment of a fine assessed under this § 439-41, the
person so violating the above provisions shall be issued a citation/
summons within 45 days from the date of the identification of the
violator. In addition, any vehicle that has one or more unpaid
tickets for parking in a space designated for disabled parking that
has not otherwise been contested shall be immobilized with an
approved device designated by The Parking Authority of the City of
Scranton, Pennsylvania or its designee. The violator will be
responsible to pay all fines, penalties and immobilization fees prior
to the vehicle being released. If a vehicle immobilized under this
section has not moved within 24 hours, the vehicle shall be towed
away to a designated storage facility. The owner of the vehicle shall
be responsible for any and all towing and storage fees, as well as
the fines and fees for the immobilization of the vehicle.
A. An immobilization device shall be warranted and may be affixed to a
vehicle when any of the following occur:
(1) One or more handicapped violations.
(2) Three or more parking tickets or parking violation notices for any
type of violation of parking regulations.
(3) Unattended vehicle having no registration or license number or
valid inspection.
B. Any motor vehicle found parked at any time on any street or upon or in
any off-street parking facility in the City of Scranton against which
there is one outstanding parking violation notice or one ticket for
parking in a space designated for parking for persons who have
§ 439-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-50.1
438:979
disabilities or three or more outstanding parking violation notices or
tickets for other violations of parking regulations, for which no hearing
has been requested within the requisite time period, and for which a
notice of summons has been mailed, may, by or under the direction
of the City of Scranton Police Department or the Parking Authority of
the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania or its designee, be immobilized in
such a manner as to prevent its operation. No such vehicle shall be
immobilized by any means other than by the use of a device or other
mechanism which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is
moved while such device or mechanism is in place.
C. If after contacting the appropriate state agency which acts as custodian
of vehicle registration and license tag records for the state from which
the license tag attached to the motor vehicle was issued the City is
unable to determine the motor vehicle owner's address, the motor
vehicle may be immobilized in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection B, except it shall not be necessary for the City to mail a
notice of summons before the motor vehicle may be immobilized.
D. It shall be the duty of parking enforcement personnel immobilizing such
motor vehicle, or under whose direction such vehicle is immobilized, to
post on such vehicle, in a conspicuous place, notice sufficient to inform
the owner or operator of the vehicle that:
(1) Such vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to and by the
authority of the Scranton City Code; and
(2) The owner of such immobilized vehicle, or other duly authorized
person, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of
the vehicle upon compliance with either of the following alternative
procedures:
(a) Payment to the Parking Authority of the City of Scranton of the
City of Scranton, Pennsylvania or its designee of the applicable
fee for removal of the immobilization device listed in this code
and all penalties, fines and costs for outstanding parking
violation notices; or
(b) Posting with the Parking Authority of the City of Scranton,
Pennsylvania or its designee of a cash or surety bond or other
adequate security equal to the amount of the applicable fee
listed in this code, if, during the hearing on the outstanding
parking violation notices which necessitated the
immobilization of the vehicle the Parking Authority of the City
of Scranton, Pennsylvania or its designee prevails on any or all
of the outstanding violations, the cash or surety bond shall be
forfeited to the City of Scranton.
E. It shall be unlawful for anyone, except those persons authorized by the
City of Scranton, to remove or attempt to remove, tamper with, or in
any way damage or alter the immobilization device. Any person who is
§ 439-50.1 SCRANTON CODE § 439-50.1
438:980
§ 439-51. Notice of violation; waiver payment. [Amended 12-8-2009
by Ord. No. 100-2009]
§ 439-52. Temporary suspension; prescribing other regulations.
[Amended 6-27-2013 by Ord. No. 31-2013; 6-30-2016 by Ord. No.
42-2016; 7-3-2019 by Ord. No. 67-2019]
convicted of institutional vandalism pursuant to Pa.C.S.A. Title 18,
§ 3307, shall pay said fines as described in that statute.
F. Any vehicle immobilized pursuant to this code shall be subject to
impoundment as authorized by the City Code.
G. The cost to remove an immobilization device shall be $50. No
immobilization device shall be removed until all outstanding penalties,
fines and costs are paid in full.
A. The reporting of any violation shall include the following:
(1) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any provisions of this article;
[Amended 6-27-2013 by Ord. No. 31-2013]
(2) The state license number of such vehicle;
(3) The length of time which such vehicle is parked in violation of any
provisions of this article at the time of his or her inspections;
(4) Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
B. The violation notice shall be placed on such vehicle as notice to the
owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the
provisions of this article or other applicable law and instructing such
owner to report at the office designated on the violation notice in
regard to such violation. Each such owner may, pay in accordance with
the requirements on the violation notice at the office designated on the
violation notice in full satisfaction of, such violation the sum required by
the Code and set forth on the violation notice. The failure of such owner
to make such payment to the office designated on the violation notice in
accordance with the requirements on the violation notice within 24
hours shall render such owner subject to all other fines, penalties, costs
and enforcement measures that are permitted by law. [Amended
6-27-2013 by Ord. No. 31-2013; 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
A. The provisions of this article may be temporarily suspended by the City
of Scranton, and it may prescribe temporarily such other rules and
regulations as traffic conditions may require.
B. A parking space located in an area subject to a multi-space pay station
may be temporarily suspended by the City, its lessors and/or agents for
§ 439-50.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-52
438:981
§ 439-53. Exceptions.
§ 439-54. Use of meter and fines. [Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No.
42-2016]
purposes of managing and controlling its on-street parking system, for
the purpose of street construction, traffic conditions, public events, or
public safety, at the sole discretion of the City. The City, its lessors and/
or agents is authorized to issue a permit to any person, company, firm,
or corporation for the temporary suspension of a parking space so that
the vehicle of said person, company, firm, or corporation may be parked
in said parking space. The fee for such permit shall be as outlined in the
concession agreement.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the City from
providing for free parking for loading and unloading purposes, for bus
stops, for public safety concerns and other matters of a similar nature.
[Amended 6-27-2013 by Ord. No. 31-2013; 6-30-2016 by Ord. No.
42-2016; 7-3-2019 by Ord. No. 67-2019]
B. Those individuals residing in residential complexes on the 300 block of
Madison Avenue where meters presently exist and where multi-space
pay stations will be located may apply to the City for a parking permit.
The resident must show proof of residency in the form of state-issued
photo identification. The resident shall also show proof of vehicle
ownership by providing a valid title or registration. If a resident
establishes proof of residency and vehicle ownership to the satisfaction
of the City, then a parking permit shall be issued. There will be a
maximum of two permits per rental unit allowed. The parking permit
shall authorize the holder to park in any parking space located only on
the block of the person's residence. The permit shall be displayed on
the vehicle in a prominent place readily identifiable by enforcement
personnel. The permit fee shall be for $10 per month. Permits will
expire on the last day of each calendar year and shall require annual
renewal. Permits may be revoked due to nonpayment. [Amended
6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016; 7-3-2019 by Ord. No. 67-2019]
C. The parking permit shall authorize the holder to park in any parking
space located only on the Block of the person's residence. The permit
shall be displayed on the vehicle in a prominent place readily
identifiable by enforcement personnel.
D. The Parking Authority of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania or its
designee shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits on a form
prescribed by the Parking Authority of the City of Scranton,
Pennsylvania or its designee and after a payment of a permit fee of $25.
[Amended 6-27-2013 by Ord. No. 31-2013; 6-30-2016 by Ord. No.
42-2016]
A. The fines, penalties and fees described herein are hereby levied and
assessed to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon
§ 439-52 SCRANTON CODE § 439-54
438:982
§ 439-54.1. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be fined not more than $50 and, in default of the payment thereof, be
imprisoned for not more than five days.
§ 439-54.2. Multi-space pay stations. [Added 7-3-2019 by Ord. No.
67-2019]
The City hereby adopts designated areas in which multi-space pay stations
are permitted, as outlined in the map attached hereto as Exhibit A.133
§ 439-54.3. Time zone and patron parking spaces. [Added 7-3-2019
by Ord. No. 67-2019]
the public streets, the cost of the supervision, protection, inspection,
operation, maintenance, control and use of the on-street parking meter
system to provide adequate-on-street parking, to reduce congestion of
parking and traffic, and to promote the public welfare by administering
an efficient system of on-street parking regulations.
B. The monies received through parking meters and fines, penalties and
fees described herein and other technologies shall, unless required by
law to be collected by a district judge, be collected by the Parking
Authority of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania or its designee.
A. The City hereby abolishes, repeals, and no longer authorizes time zone
or patron parking spaces. Time zone or patron parking spaces,
including, inter alia, "15 Minute Only" and "30 Minute Only," as well as
spaces designated for patrons of specific businesses. Any such signs
shall be removed by the City, its lessors or agents for purposes of
management of its on-street parking system.
B. Designated time zone or patron parking spaces shall be permissible for
government and medical facilities, to include City Hall, Lackawanna
County, and/or the federal government at the sole discretion of the City.
C. The unauthorized installation of such signs shall result in a fine equal to
the amount of lost revenue from the date of installation until it is
removed, assessed against the person or entity responsible for
installing such sign.
D. The City shall designate up to one "Loading/Unloading Zone - 30 Minute
Only Parking" per block at its sole discretion for use by businesses
located thereon.
133. Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the City offices.
§ 439-54 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-54.3
438:983

ARTICLE V
Central Business District
[Added by Ord. No. 4-1983]
§ 439-55. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Central Business
District Parking Ordinance of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania."
§ 439-56. Definitions.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future. Words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — Includes the downtown centralized
commercial district of the City of Scranton bounded on the north and
south by Vine Street and Lackawanna Avenue, and on the east and west
by Jefferson Avenue and Mifflin Avenue.
CITY — The City of Scranton, Pennsylvania.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Safety.
OPERATOR — Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as
the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner
or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle whether occupied or
not, upon a street other than temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaging in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or
signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes
beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle.
PARKING METER — Includes any mechanical device or meter placed or
erected for the regulation of parking.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, highway or other public
place located in the City of Scranton and established for the use of
vehicles.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported upon the street or highway, except a device
which is operated upon rails or tracks.
§ 439-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-57
438:985
§ 439-57. Removal of parking meters authorized.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety and other appropriate
City officials are hereby authorized to cause the removal of parking meters
within the limits of the Central Business District as herein defined.
§ 439-58. Time limit.
Parking or standing a vehicle within a designated space within the central
business district shall be lawful for a period of time not to exceed two
hours. Parking or standing a vehicle outside the central business district in
a posted area shall be lawful for a period of time not to exceed two hours.
§ 439-59. Parking beyond time limit declared unlawful.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name
of or operated by any such person to be parked beyond the period of legal
parking time established for the Central Business District.
§ 439-60. Unattended vehicle on private property; penalty. [Added
by Ord. No. 62-1989]
§ 439-61. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. Nos. 29-1986; 29-1988;
86-1989]
A. No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property
without the consent of the owner or other person in control or
possession of the property except in the case of emergency or
disablement of the vehicle, in which case the operator shall arrange for
the removal of the vehicle as soon as possible.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to private parking lots,
unless such lots are posted to notify the public of any parking
restrictions and the operator of the vehicle violates such posted
restrictions. For the purpose of this section, "private parking lot" means
a parking lot open to the public or used for parking without charge; or a
parking lot used for parking with charge.
C. Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a
summary offense. [Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
A. Parking enforcement for all parking violations shall be conducted
Monday through Friday of each week between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. [Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
B. A violation of the two-hour parking limit will be deemed to have
occurred if a motor vehicle bearing a specific registration plate number
is found to be parked in excess of two hours, in the same space or a
space within six spaces in either direction of the space in which the
vehicle was parked at the time the registration number was recorded.
§ 439-57 SCRANTON CODE § 439-61
438:986
C. Enforcement shall not be conducted on the following holidays: New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Day. [Amended 6-30-2016 by Ord. No. 42-2016]
D. The Parking Authority of the City of Scranton, Pennsylvania or its
designee shall be deemed the agent to administer parking permits.
Permits shall not be issued for prohibited zones without written
approval from the Director of Public Safety. Payments for permits shall
be made directly to the Parking Authority of the City of Scranton,
Pennsylvania or its designee.
E. Parking permit program will be as follows:
(1) Construction parking permits. Special all-day parking permits
issued to general contractors for their construction vehicles will be
$20 per day, per parking space. No vehicle citations will be issued
to these vehicles displaying this permit on their dashboard. This
permit will be invalid in prohibited zones without the written
consent of the Director of Public Safety. [Amended 6-30-2016 by
Ord. No. 42-2016]
(2) Service vehicle parking permits. Special permits will be issued to
companies such as heating and electrical contractors with service
vehicles. The cost of this permit will be $150 per year, per vehicle.
This permit will be invalid in prohibited zones without the written
consent of the Director of Public Safety. This permit is
nontransferable as the license number of each vehicle will be
stated on each permit. This permit shall not be issued to any
company, establishment or corporation within the metered areas of
the Central Business District. [Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No.
15-2008]
(3) Parking permits for volunteer workers. Special permits will be
issued to volunteers of nonprofit organizations such as Meals on
Wheels, the Blind Association, etc. The cost of such permit will be
$10 per year, per vehicle, and will be nontransferable as the license
number of each vehicle will be stated on each permit. This permit
will be invalid in prohibited zones.
(4) Parking permit system for dumpsters. There is hereby established a
parking permit system for dumpsters in the City which system shall
be administered by the Department of Public Safety.
(a) "Dumpster" shall be defined as a container which holds
garbage, refuse or ashes, which is designed to be emptied by
being raised into the air and turned so that the contents
therein are placed in a garbage truck for disposal, and includes
any container which must be lifted onto the back of a truck to
be removed from the roadway. [Amended 2-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 8-2001]
§ 439-61 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-61
438:987
(b) Any person wishing to park a dumpster on any street or
highway in the City shall secure a permit from the Department
of Public Safety. The permit application shall state: the name
and address of the person(s) or corporation applying for the
permit, stating with specificity the location desired, describing
the precise area where the proposed dumpster will be located,
the purpose of placing the dumpster at that location and the
anticipated time that such dumpster will be parked. The
application shall include a provision that the applicant(s) by
his/her(s) signature(s) accepts full responsibility to completely
indemnify and hold harmless the City from all damages or
injuries of any kind that may occur while the dumpster(s) is
parked on a City street or highway; and that the applicant will
comply with this Subsection E(4) and all other rules and
regulations concerning the parking of dumpsters. The Director
of the Department of Public Safety shall, within a reasonable
period of time, verify the location of the dumpster, determine
that the proposed placement will not impede traffic and
confirm evidence of adequate insurance. A permit fee of $5 per
day, per dumpster, must be tendered at the time the permit is
issued.
(c) All dumpsters parked on a City street or highway must have a
flashing light and proper reflectors to provide warning to
approaching traffic, which light and reflective devices shall be
in proper working condition.
(d) A dumpster may be parked in a right-of-way area on a public
street or highway for only one day. Pursuant to a permit issued
under this Subsection E(4), unless the permit holder shall
engage an off-duty police officer to ensure the safe movement
of traffic around such dumpster.
(e) The Director of the Department of Public Safety is hereby
authorized to promulgate necessary and reasonable rules and
regulations concerning the parking of dumpsters by permit,
provided that such rules or regulations do not conflict with this
section, the home rule charter or state statutes, and such rules
and regulations have been approved in accordance with
§ 6-11C of Chapter 6, Administrative Code.
(f) Any person who violates any provision of this Subsection E(4)
shall, upon conviction, pay a fine of not less than $100 and a
maximum of not more than $300. In default of payment, a
person shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
§ 439-61 SCRANTON CODE § 439-62
438:988
§ 439-62. Violations and penalties; failure to comply.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine of $10 for violations within the central
Business District and $5 for violations in any posted areas.
§ 439-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-62
438:989

ARTICLE VI
Residential Parking Permit Program
[Added by Ord. No. 114-1992]
§ 439-63. Purpose.
The governing body of the City deems it to be in the interests of the City
to provide for the establishment of a residential parking permit program
to ensure primary access to available parking spaces by neighborhood
residents as well as to provide for a cleaner ambient air level. The powers
and duties as contained in this article shall be performed by an
Administrator who shall be designated as the Bureau of Police (hereinafter
"Administrator") and is enacted for the maintenance of the public health
and welfare of the citizens of the City. The Administrator, as provided for
above, may be a person, bureau or other legal entity.
§ 439-64. Residential permit parking. [Amended by Ord. Nos.
106-1993; 160-1993; 42-1994; 92-1994]
A. The Administrator is hereby authorized to designate, subject to
approval by the governing body as hereinafter provided, the following
streets within the City on which the parking of vehicles may be
restricted on weekdays, excepting holidays, in whole or part to vehicles
having a valid parking permit issued pursuant to this article.
Name of Street Side Location
Adams Avenue Odd From Richmont Street to
Grandview Street
Adams Avenue Odd From Grandview Street to
Woodlawn Street
Adams Avenue Odd From University Street to
Seminary Street
Adams Avenue Both From College Street to Woodlawn
Street
Arthur Avenue Both From Olive Street to Pine Street
Clay Avenue Both From Gibson Street to Myrtle
Street
Dimmick Avenue Both From Seminary Street to
University Street
Jefferson Avenue
[Added 10-28-2019
by Ord. No.
75-2019]
Even 900 block
North Washington
Avenue [Added
7-27-2006 by Ord.
No. 43-2006]
Both From Grandview Street to Park
Street
§ 439-63 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-64
438:991
Name of Street Side Location
North Washington
Avenue
Both From Seminary Street to
University Street
North Washington
Avenue
Odd From Seminary Street to Park
Street
North Washington
Avenue
Odd From University Street to Hignett
Place
Olive Street Both from Wheeler Avenue to Arthur
Avenue
Quincy Avenue Both From Gibson Street to Myrtle
Street
Seminary Street Odd From North Washington Avenue to
Adams Avenue
University Street Even From North Washington Avenue to
Adams Avenue
Vine Street Both From Wheeler Avenue to Colfax
Avenue
Wheeler Avenue, 400
Block [Repealed
4-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 33-1997]
Woodlawn Street Both From Adams Avenue to
Washington Avenue
B. The streets within the City of Scranton on which the parking of vehicles
shall be restricted to permit parking only (seven days a week/24 hours a
day) are as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Adams Avenue [Added
11-1-1999 by Ord.
No. 131-1999;
amended 12-3-2001
by Ord. No. 83-2001]
800 block, except for 257 feet
from the corner of Myrtle Avenue
on the even side of the street in
front of 824 Adams Avenue
Arthur Avenue From Mulberry Street to Olive
Street
Arthur Avenue From Roselyn Avenue to Linden
Street
Ash Street, 1100 Block
[Added 4-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 52-1995]
§ 439-64 SCRANTON CODE § 439-64
438:992
Name of Street Side Location
Clay Avenue, 500
Block [Added
5-17-1995 by Ord.
No. 60-1995;
repealed 5-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 42-1997]
Clay Avenue, 500
Block [Added
3-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-2016]
Odd From 523 to 543 Vlay Avenue
Clay Avenue, 600
Block
[Added 4-3-1996 by
Ord. No. 60-1996]
Colfax Avenue Both From Mulberry Street to Olive
Street
Colfax Avenue Both From Roselyn Avenue to Linden
Street
East Gibson Street,
600 Block [Added
11-1-1999 by Ord.
No. 131-1999]
Odd
East Gibson Street,
700 Block [Added
9-25-2007 by Ord.
No. 110-2007]
North From Moir Court east 97 feet
East Gibson Street,
800 Block [Added
12-3-2015 by Ord.
No. 125-2015]
North
(odd)
From 811 to 819 East Gibson
Street
East Gibson Street,
900 and 1000 Blocks
East Olive Street, 700
block [Added
9-22-2009 by Ord.
No. 81-2009]
From Madison Avenue to Moir
Court
Linden Street, 1300
Block [Added
1-29-1997 by Ord.
No. 11-1997]
Linden Street, 1700
Block
§ 439-64 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-64
438:993
Name of Street Side Location
Linden Street, 1800
Block [Added
5-6-2004 by Ord. No.
35-2004]
South From Arthur Avenue to Okell
Court
Monroe Avenue, 500
Block [Added
10-6-1005 by Ord.
No. 146-2005]
East From 514 Monroe to Vine Street
Monroe Avenue, 500
Block [Added
10-6-1005 by Ord.
No. 146-2005]
West From Vine Street to Olive Street
Monroe Avenue, 600
Block [Added
10-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 69-2004]
East From Pine Street to 620 Monroe
Avenue
Monroe Avenue, 600
Block [Added
10-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 69-2004]
West From Pine Street to 611 Monroe
Avenue
Monroe Avenue, 700
Block [Repealed
10-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 124-2015]
Mulberry Street, 1600
and 1700 Blocks
Myrtle Street, 1000
Block [Repealed
7-31-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-1996]
North Washington
Street, 1300 Block
[Added 10-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 65-2004]
East From Larch Street to 1340 North
Washington Avenue and from
1376 North Washington Avenue to
1386 North Washington Avenue
North Washington
Street, 1300 Block
[Added 10-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 65-2004]
West From Larch Street to 1325 North
Washington Avenue
Olive Street, 900 Block
[Added 3-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 6-2018]
Both On the even side, from 912 Olive
Street east to Quincy Avenue, and
on the odd side, from 915 Olive
Street east to Quincy Avenue
§ 439-64 SCRANTON CODE § 439-64
438:994
Name of Street Side Location
Prescott Avenue, 200
Block [Added
9-27-1995 by Ord.
No. 140-1995]
Prescott Avenue, 400
Block [Added
9-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 202-2003]
Westerly/
Odd
Prescott Avenue, 900
Block [Added
7-17-2014 by Ord.
No. 34-2014]
Both From 901 to 949 and 902 to 956,
which includes all the residences
with the exception of apartments
located above commercial
properties
Quincy Avenue, 500
Block [Added
7-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 58-2001]
Quincy Avenue, 600
Block [Added
4-17-1996 by Ord.
No. 65-1996]
Roselynn Avenue, 1800
Block [Amended
6-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 92-1996;
9-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 55-2000]
Taylor Avenue, 300
Block [Added
3-5-2018 by Ord. No.
3-2018]
East From 316 to 330 Taylor Avenue
(316-322, 324-326, 328-330)
Taylor Avenue, 500
Block [Added
12-2-2004 by Ord.
No. 79-2004]
Both
Vine Street Both From Colfax Avenue to Arthur
Avenue
Vine Street, 800 Block
[Added 9-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 202-2003]
§ 439-64 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-64
438:995
§ 439-65. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings designated for each:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area by a
person not a resident thereof.
PROPRIETOR — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area of which he is not a resident, but owns or manages a
business enterprise or professional office maintained at that address. For
purposes of this article, a proprietor shall be entitled to one parking permit
for said business or professional office address.
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence or a bona fide
occupancy, or both, at that address.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A contiguous area containing public highways or
parts thereof primarily abutted by residential properties or residential or
nonbusiness property (such as schools, parks, churches, hospitals and
nursing homes).
§ 439-66. Residential area eligibility.
Name of Street Side Location
Vine Street, 1200
Block (from Kellum
Court to Taylor
Avenue) [Added
9-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 202-2003]
Wheeler Avenue, 200
Block
C. The authority shall be in addition to and may be exercised in
conjunction with any other authority to regulate the times and
conditions of motor vehicles parking.
A. A residential area shall be deemed impacted and thereby eligible for
residential permit parking if:
(1) During any period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m.
weekdays, except holidays, the number of vehicles parked (or
standing) legally or illegally, on the streets in the area equal to 70%
or more of the legal on-street parking capacity of the area. For
purposes of this criteria, a legal parking space shall be 20 linear
feet.
(2) During the same period as in Subsection A(1) above, 10% or more
of the vehicles parked (or standing) on the streets in the area are
not registered in the name of a person residing in this area. For
§ 439-64 SCRANTON CODE § 439-66
438:996
purposes of this criteria, the latest available information from the
Department of Motor Vehicles regarding registration of motor
vehicles shall be used.
B. In determining whether an area identified as impacted and eligible for
residential permit parking shall be designated as a residential permit
parking area, the Administrator shall take into consideration the
following factors:
(1) The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and
environment.
(2) The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in the
City.
(3) The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking and
related health and safety hazards.
(4) The proximity of public transportation to the residential areas.
(5) The desire and need for the residents for residential permit parking
and their willingness to bear administrative costs in connection
therewith.
(6) The need for parking in excess of the residential permit parking
program in proximity to establishments located therein and used by
the general public for religious, health or educational purposes.
C. In order to determine whether a particular street, avenue or other
location should be designated as a residential permit parking area, or to
determine whether to remove such designation, the Administrator may
conduct, upon its own initiative or upon a petition of two-thirds majority
of the households in such area, addressed to the Administrator or the
Council, a public forum, prior to the designation of a parking permit
area, or prior to the withdrawal of such designation once it is
established. Such forum shall be held only after due notice has been
published in a newspaper of general circulation. The notice shall clearly
state the purpose of the forum, the exact location and boundaries of the
residential permit parking area under consideration and the reasons
why such area is being proposed for the designation or removal as a
residential parking permit area. During said forum, any interested
person shall be entitled to appear and be heard. No forum shall be held
and no area designated if it is not bound to be an impacted area under
this section.
D. Within 30 days following the close of the public forum, the
Administrator shall recommend by report to the Council, based on the
record of such forum, whether to designate the area under
consideration as a residential permit parking area or to remove the
designation in the case of an established residential permit parking
area.
§ 439-66 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-66
438:997
§ 439-67. Issuance of parking permits.
Following governing body approval of the designation of a
residential.permit parking area, the Administrator shall issue appropriate
permits and shall cause parking signs to be erected in the area indicating
the times, location and conditions under which parking shall be by permit
only. A permit shall be issued upon application and payment of the
applicable fee, only to the owner or the operator of a motor vehicle who
resides on or is a proprietor of property immediately adjacent to a street,
avenue or other location within the residential permit parking area. A
separate permit shall be required for each motor vehicle.
§ 439-68. Permit application.
E. The Administrator's report to Council shall include, inter alia, a
recommendation of specific hours and streets as they pertain to the
particular needs of each designated residential area.
A. The application for a permit shall contain the name of the owner or
operator of the motor vehicle, resident's or proprietor's address, the
motor vehicle's make, model, license plate number, number of the
applicant's operator permit, phone number and e-mail address (where
applicable). All residential parking permits must be obtained from the
Scranton Police Department at 100 South Washington Avenue,
Scranton, PA, 18503, Monday through Friday (excluding holidays)
between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. [Amended 6-29-2017 by Ord. No.
105-2017]
B. The motor vehicle's registration and operator's license may, at the
discretion of the Administrator, be required to be presented at the time
of making said application in order to verify the contents thereof. The
permit shall be valid January 1 through December 31 of each respective
calendar year. Regular residential parking permits shall only be
displayed on the driver's side rear window. [Amended 6-29-2017 by
Ord. No. 105-2017]
C. In the event that a resident who is a valid parking permit holder
transfers his or her vehicle, or the vehicle is destroyed and the resident
obtains a replacement vehicle, the resident may obtain another permit
with the same expiration date as the previous permit without the
payment of any additional charge.
D. Types of permits. [Added 6-29-2017 by Ord. No. 105-2017]
(1) Guest permits. Guest permits provide temporary parking for
individuals visiting the permit holder's address. [Note: There are
three types of guest permits (temporary special permits, residential
guest permit, and contractor permits).] A guest permit may not be
used by the registered owner or any car owned or using, nor may it
be used by anyone living at the registered address or by anyone in
another permit area at another residence.
§ 439-66 SCRANTON CODE § 439-68
438:998
(a) Temporary special permits. Temporary special permits are
issued to permit holders to accommodate temporary parking
needs such as a planned gathering, holiday visitors, special
events, or other special situations. There is no fee for
temporary permits, but requests should be made with
reasonable advance notice. Guest permits are only valid for a
maximum of 48 hours and can be obtained a maximum of four
times per year unless a specific special circumstance exists.
This temporary permit shall be displayed clearly behind the
driver's side front windshield of the vehicle.
(b) Residential guest permit.
[1] Residential guest permit usage is restricted up to a oneweek
period at a time and within one block (per vehicle) of
the registered address.
[2] A guest permit must be hung from the rearview mirror
facing out at all times while vehicle is parked in a permit
area. Only one residential guest permit can be issued to
each residence per calendar year.
[3] Guest permits are limited to one per year per residence
and are valid from January 1 through December 31 of each
respective calendar year. This permit shall cost $5 per
year. Fines may not be withdrawn due to improper use or
display of guest permits.
(c) Contractor permits.
[1] Contractor permits can be issued to a contractor doing
business with a resident living in a permit parking area for
a period not to exceed 30 days and can be reissued for a
maximum of three times for the same residence per
calendar year. No more than three contractor parking
permits will be issued for a single property at any one
time. Contractors parking vehicles on any metered street
within a parking permit area should, in addition to the
contractor parking permit, secure meter hoods from the
City's parking meter vendor.
[2] A contractor parking permit is a cardboard placard that is
displayed clearly behind the driver's side front windshield
of the vehicle, used for short term projects in residential
permit parking areas within the City of Scranton. Short
term projects are defined as parking 30 days or less at the
same location. The fee for a thirty-day contractor parking
permit is $5 per thirty-day cycle, and the permit is only
authorized for the residential block in which the
contractor applied for and is currently performing work
on. Lost or stolen permits will be reissued at original cost.
§ 439-68 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-68
438:999
§ 439-69. Responsibility of permit holder.
E. Replacing permits due to new vehicle information (Applies only to
active permits). [Added 6-29-2017 by Ord. No. 105-2017]
(1) You must return your old permit along with the new car
registration. Temporary registrations are acceptable (pink slip).
(a) If you scrape off the permit and return it to the Scranton Police
Department, your replacement permit will be free.
(b) If you do not scrape off your permit, and your license plate
number is the same, there is a replacement fee of $5.
(c) If you do not scrape off your permit and your license plate
number is different, you need a notarized letter stating that
you did not scrape off your permit and there is a replacement
fee of $5.
(2) In all instances you must present your new car registration.
(3) Any improper use, including counterfeiting, duplicating, or altering
of any type of residential parking permit could result in fines,
revocation of all permits, including residential, and the registered
owner being charged under the appropriate criminal statutes.
A. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary, the
holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or
park a motor vehicle operated by him in any designated parking area
during such times as the parking of the motor vehicle therein is
permitted. While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has
been issued is still parked, said permit shall be displayed so as to be
clearly visible on the driver's side rear window of the vehicle. A
residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder a
parking space within a designated residential permit parking area.
[Amended 6-29-2017 by Ord. No. 105-2017]
B. A residential parking permit shall not authorize the holder thereof to
stand or park a motor vehicle in such places or during such times as the
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicle is prohibited or set aside
for specified types of vehicles; nor exempt the holder from the
observance of any traffic regulations other than residential parking
permit restrictions.
C. No person other than the permittee names thereon shall use a
residential parking permit or display it on their vehicle operated or
parked and any such use or display by any person other than the
permittee shall constitute a violation of this regulation by the permittee
and by the person who so used and displayed such parking permit.
D. It shall constitute a violation of this regulation for any person to falsely
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
§ 439-68 SCRANTON CODE § 439-69
438:1000
§ 439-70. Duties of the Administrator; fee.
§ 439-71. Violations and penalties.
furnish any false information in an application to the Administrator in
order to obtain a residential parking permit.
A. The Administrator is authorized to revoke the residential parking
permit of any permittee found to be in violation of this article and, upon
written notification thereof, the permittee shall surrender to the
Administrator. Failure, when so required, to surrender a residential
parking permit so revoked shall constitute a violation of this article.
B. The Administrator is authorized to establish an annual residential
permit parking fee of $5 per registered vehicle, a temporary residential
guest permit parking fee of $5 for one vehicle and contractor permits
for $5 to cover the administrative costs of permits issued pursuant to
this article. Each household will be allowed to obtain three regular
residential parking permits and one temporary residential guests
parking permit. To obtain these permits, the requestor must provide
two current proofs of residence and vehicle registration information.
Any permit obtained is only valid for the permit parking area granted
near the requestor's residence and cannot be used in any other
residential permit parking areas of the City. [Amended 6-29-2017 by
Ord. No. 105-2017]
C. The Administrator is authorized to make provisions for the issuance of
temporary parking permits to bona fide visitors of residents of a
designated residential parking area upon payment of the fee set forth in
Subsection B and for the issuance of exemption parking permits to
handicapped persons.
D. The Administrator shall adopt rules and regulations necessary for the
administration of this residential parking permit program. Said rules
and regulations shall be subject to approval by City Council prior to
being effective.
A. Whoever violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay to the City of Scranton a fine in the amount of $25 for the
first offense, plus costs. For each subsequent offense, the fine shall be
$25, plus costs.
B. Any duly authorized employee of the City, under the direction of the
Mayor, shall notify such person of the unlawful parking charge by
placing a written notice or ticket under the windshield wiper or in some
conspicuous place on such vehicle, indicating the time of the violation,
the amount of the unlawful parking charge and that such charge shall
be paid to the City and the place where such charge shall be made and
the manner of payment. The unlawful parking charge shall be paid in
person at Scranton Police Headquarters, via mail, or online no later
than three days after the date of the violation, and the notice of ticket
§ 439-69 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-71
438:1001
§ 439-71.1. Downtown Scranton Resident Parking Program. [Added
7-3-2019 by Ord. No. 68-2019]
placed on the vehicle at the time of the violation shall advise the owner
or operator of such vehicle that, unless the unlawful parking charge
is paid within the time limits herein specified, the fine payable under
conviction of such unlawful parking and failure to pay such charges will
be $5, and costs, and, in default of payment thereof, imprisonment of
not more than 10 days. [Amended 6-29-2017 by Ord. No. 105-2017]
A. Eligibility. To be eligible, a parker must reside in a residential unit
within the boundaries of the attached map.134 Proof of residency shall
be required.
B. Parking is confined to the following garages only: Linden, Casey and
Electric City, and only in underutilized areas and designated spaces on
the levels above the ground floor and below the uncovered roof of each
of these garages.
C. The cost of a monthly space is 80% of the regular monthly parking rate.
Choosing the Downtown Resident Program does not preclude a parker
from being able to switch at any time to the regular monthly parking
rate or premium monthly rate programs.
134. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City offices.
§ 439-71 SCRANTON CODE § 439-71.1
438:1002
ARTICLE VII
Pedestrians
§ 439-72. Right-of-way in crosswalk.
§ 439-73. Crossing at intersections and crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall not cross streets or highway between intersections unless
controlled crosswalks are provided. Pedestrians shall, whenever
practicable, move upon the right half of crosswalks provided and shall at
no time cross intersections diagonally. In residential districts, pedestrians
shall not cross streets or highways between intersections when any vehicle
is traveling toward them from any direction within a distance of 400 feet,
and such pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to such vehicles.
§ 439-74. Prohibited on limited access highways.
Pedestrian traffic is hereby prohibited on, over or across any limited access
highway within the City.
§ 439-75. Traffic-control and pedestrian signals.
§ 439-76. Blind pedestrians.
A. The driver of any vehicle upon a street or highway within a business
district shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such street
or highway within the crosswalks, except at intersections where the
movement of traffic is being regulated by a police officer or traffic
signal.
B. Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the street or highway, no
operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall overtake
and pass such stopped vehicle.
A. Pedestrians shall be subject at all times to traffic-control signals and
shall not leave the curbstone to cross the street or highway at
controlled intersections unless:
(1) Directed by a police officer.
(2) On the green or go traffic signal at intersections not having
pedestrian signals.
(3) On the walk signal at intersections having pedestrian signals.
B. At such controlled intersections, pedestrians shall not cross the street
or highway against a don't walk, red or stop signal or against the
directions of a police officer and shall not cross such street or highway
at any place except in a marked crosswalk.
§ 439-72 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-76
438:1003
§ 439-77. Violations and penalties.
A. No person except one wholly or partially blind shall carry or use in the
City any cane or walking stick which is white with red color.
B. Any operator of a vehicle or motor vehicle who approaches or comes in
close proximity with a person who is wholly or partially blind, carrying a
cane or walking stick which is white with red color or guided by a
seeing eye dog or guide dog, shall immediately come to a full stop and
take such precautions before proceeding as may be necessary to avoid
accidents to the person so carrying a cane or walking stick white with
red color or guided by a seeing eye dog or guide dog.
A. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article, except § 439-76
shall, upon conviction, be fined $1. If summons issued for such violation
is ignored such fine shall be $2. If it is necessary to issue a warrant for
the arrest of the violator, the fine shall be increased to $5. In default of
the payment of such fine, the violator may be imprisoned for one, two or
five days, in accordance with the foregoing.
B. Whoever violates any of the provisions of § 439-76 shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than $50, and, in default of payment of
such fine, may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
§ 439-76 SCRANTON CODE § 439-77
438:1004
ARTICLE VIII
Private Property Used by the Public
§ 439-78. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Scranton.
OWNER — One who holds property in fee simple.
ROADWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel. This includes access roads or lanes on real property open
to the public for vehicular travel by permission of the owner. For the
purposes of this article, roadway includes access roads or lanes on which
the owner has authorized enforcement by the Scranton Police Department.
SHALL — Used in the mandatory sense.
VEHICLE CODE — The Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101, et
seq., as amended.
§ 439-79. Procedure for requesting enforcement.
A. Any person or persons who owns real property and who permits the
public to use the same for vehicular travel, not as a matter of right,
desiring to avail himself of the right to regulate his property pursuant to
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6113(a) by requesting the assistance of the Scranton
Police Department to regulate traffic thereon, shall request the Director
of Public Safety to enforce the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code and
Municipal Traffic Ordinances on his property.
B. Contents of request. The request shall be in writing and shall contain
the name and address of the owner, the address and description of the
real property in question, a statement that the owner requests the
assistance of the Scranton Police Department to enforce traffic
regulations on his property and that he meets and/or will comply with
the standards of this article, that public notice of rules will be done in
accordance with this article.
C. Upon receipt of a request, the Director of Public Safety shall notify the
Mayor, City Council and the Law Department of said request and shall
inspect the property, either personally or by his designee, to verify that
property prior to any enforcement action complies with this article. The
Director of Public Safety or his designee shall conduct such further
investigation as may be necessary and may request additional
information from the owners of the property.
D. If the procedures and standards of this article are met, the Director of
Public Safety shall so certify, in writing, to the Mayor and Council and
may direct that the Scranton Police Department may enforce traffic
§ 439-78 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-79
438:1005
§ 439-80. Standards.
§ 439-81. Posting of property and public notice.
regulations on said real property, such certification to be a public
record and supplied to the officials listed above in Subsection C.
E. If the provisions of this article are not met the Director of Public Safety
shall so advise the owner.
F. The size and placement of any speed limit signs and traffic control
devices shall be in accordance with applicable regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, including but not limited
to 67 Pa. Code Chapter 211, Official Traffic Control Devices, and
Chapter 217, Posting of Private Parking Lots. This shall not be
construed as requiring such signs or devices, which may be placed on
the property. The cost of installation or maintenance of any signs, traffic
control devices or markings shall remain the responsibility of the
owner, who shall also bear the expense of any necessary engineering
study.
G. The property is properly posted in accordance with this article, Chapter
217 of the Pennsylvania Code (PennDot Regulations and other
applicable statutes, including 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353) and public notice
given.
H. If signs are posted warning of time limits for parking or other traffic
restrictions, the owner either with security personnel or other agents
shall monitor potential violators and may report them to police.
A. The owner must consent to the enforcement of the entire Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, as amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., on the property as
though the access roads or lanes on said property constituted a public
road or roadway as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The owner must consent to the enforcement of all municipal traffic and
parking ordinances on the property as though the access roads or lanes
and parking adjacent thereto constituted a public road, street or
roadway as defined in the vehicle code.
C. The owner shall execute a hold harmless agreement approved by the
City Solicitor, a copy to be on file with the Director of Public Safety.
D. The owner must acknowledge, in writing, his understanding that the
Scranton Police Department cannot and does not serve as a guarantor
of the safety of any person or property on said property, nor are they to
act as private security personnel, but they may act on this property to
regulate traffic.
A. Each owner shall post the property and provide public notice of
enforcement, in addition to such placing of speed limit signs, markings
or official traffic devices which he may deem necessary:
§ 439-79 SCRANTON CODE § 439-81
438:1006
§ 439-82. Violations and penalties.
§ 439-83. Evidence and public records.
(1) Each vehicular entrance shall be posted so that signs face traffic
entering so as to be visible at all times to an ordinarily observant
driver. Signs to be read in darkness are to be reflectorized or
illuminated by lights.
(2) Each pedestrian entrance shall be posted so as to be visible to an
ordinarily observant pedestrian.
(3) The signs at the entrances shall state "Vehicle Code/Ordinances
Enforced On Property," and may give the owner's name and
address. They shall be at least 12 inches wide.
(4) If there are other rules prescribed by the owner, (e.g. Restricted
Parking/Parking-Customers Only) they shall be posted along the
access road or lanes so as to be visible to an ordinarily observant
driver, as well as being posted in the respective location.
B. Public notice. The owner of the property shall advertise twice in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City of Scranton that he
(name and address) is requesting the City of Scranton to enforce the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code and Municipal Traffic Ordinances on his
property, identified by address or other description of its location, and
that he has posted the said property, specifying any other rules (i.e.
Restricted Parking/Parking-Customers Only), whether such property is
posted as a private parking lot in part, pursuant to 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353,
and indicating the speed limit, if any, duly posted. The notice shall
further state that violations are punishable by fine or imprisonment
pursuant to said code or ordinances. The notice shall state that this
request is made pursuant to 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6113(a). The owner shall
deliver a copy of said notice, with proof of the publication, to the
Director of Public Safety. The expense of such notice shall be the
owner's responsibility. The Director shall provide copies to the Mayor,
City Council, Law Department and Police Department.
A. Where the conduct prohibited is a violation of the Vehicle Code, as
amended, the penalty shall be the same, both as to fine or imprisonment
and costs of prosecution, as specified for such conduct in the Vehicle
Code.
B. Where the conduct prohibited is a violation of an ordinance of the City
of Scranton, which is not superseded by the Vehicle Code, the penalty
prescribed in said ordinance shall be the penalty for such conduct on
real property used by person with the consent of the owner.
C. If no penalty is expressly stated in a municipal ordinance, then the
penalty shall not exceed $300 fine, or not more than 90 days
imprisonment, plus the costs of prosecution or both.
§ 439-81 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-83
438:1007
§ 439-84. Termination.
Any owner who has authorized the Scranton Police Department to enforce
the Vehicle Code and traffic ordinances on his property may terminate
such authorization by informing the Director of Public Safety, in writing,
with copies to the Mayor, City Council and the Law Department; giving at
least 30 days' prior notice and advertising such intent in a newspaper of
general circulation twice. A copy of such notice and proof of publication
shall be forwarded to the Director of Public Safety, who shall notify other
City officials. Nothing herein shall be construed to impair the prosecution of
citations issued prior to the date of termination. At the time of termination,
all speed limit signs and official traffic control devices, if any, and the posted
signs required by § 439-80A, shall be removed.
§ 439-85. Disposition of fines.
Fines for Vehicle Code violations shall be handled in the same manner as
Vehicle Code fines on publicly maintained roadways. Fines for violations of
Scranton traffic ordinances shall be paid into the City treasury. Any costs
shall be handled in the same manner as was done prior to this article.
A. The requests for assistance, the certifications of the Director of Public
Safety, the proof of publication and public notices duly advertised in
accordance with this article shall be public records, open to public
inspection during business hours which may be copied at the charges
prescribed by the City.
B. In any prosecutions under this article, under the Vehicle Code in
accordance with the provisions of this article or any traffic ordinances
pursuant to this article, the documents specified in Subsection A upon
execution of a certification by the Director of Public Safety, or a
designated custodian, that this copy is a fair and accurate copy of the
originals on file with this office shall be received as evidence in any
court of competent jurisdiction without other evidence of their truth,
accuracy or authenticity.
C. The successful completion of the procedures prescribed by this article
shall enable the access roads or lanes to be roadways within the
definition of this article. It shall be no defense to prosecution that the
roadway is not publicly maintained if the procedures prescribed by this
article for authorization have been complied with.
§ 439-83 SCRANTON CODE § 439-85
438:1008
ARTICLE IX
Truck Weights
[Added 9-13-1995 by Ord. No. 29-1995]
§ 439-86. Maximum weight limits.
A. Ten-ton limit in Bellevue section.
(1) Truck traffic having a registered gross weight of 10 tons or more on
the following streets in the Bellevue section of the City of Scranton
is hereby prohibited, said area to be posted:
Street Location
Broadway Street From its intersection with Railroad Avenue
to the west end of the bridge over the
Lackawanna River
Railroad Avenue From its intersection with Seventh Avenue
to its intersection with Fourth Avenue
Seventh Avenue From its intersection with Lackawanna
Avenue to its intersection with Railroad
Avenue
(2) Exemptions. Subsection A(1) shall not apply to the following
vehicles:
(a) Emergency vehicles (police, fire, ambulance).
(b) City of Scranton vehicles, including but not limited to
Department of Public Works trucks or garbage trucks serving
the said Seventh Avenue, Railroad Avenue and Broadway
Street.
(c) Trucks of the United States government, including but not
limited to military vehicles and trucks of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(d) Trucks scheduled to make deliveries or pickups to homes or
businesses on the sections of Seventh Avenue, Railroad Avenue
and Broadway Street above described, i.e., local deliveries.
B. Five-ton limit. [Added 11-6-2000 by Ord. No. 71-2000]
(1) Truck traffic having a registered gross vehicle weight in excess of
five tons on the following streets in the City of Scranton is hereby
prohibited, said area to be posted:
Street Location
South Cameron Avenue 100 Block
Washburn Street 2300 and 2400 Blocks
§ 439-86 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-86
438:1009
§ 439-87. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a summary offense and shall pay a
fine of not less than $25 nor more than $250, with costs of prosecution, and/
or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days. Each day the violation occurs shall
be a separate offense. Each time a violator passes through the prohibited
area shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Exemptions. Subsection B(1) shall not apply to the following
vehicles:
(a) Emergency vehicles (police, fire, ambulance).
(b) City of Scranton vehicles, including but not limited to
Department of Public Works trucks or garbage trucks serving
said 100 Block of South Cameron Avenue and the 2300 and
2400 Blocks of Washburn Street.
(c) Trucks of the United States government, including but not
limited to military vehicles, and trucks of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(d) Trucks scheduled to make deliveries to or pickups from homes
or businesses in the 100 Block of South Cameron Avenue and
the 2300 and 2400 Blocks of Washburn Street, i.e., local
deliveries.
C. Parking is hereby restricted at the intersection of Railroad Avenue and
Broadway Street as depicted on Exhibit C, attached hereto,135 said area
to be posted.
D. It is the intent of Council not to prohibit the use of school buses or
COLTS buses serving the area.
135. Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the City offices.
§ 439-86 SCRANTON CODE § 439-87
438:1010
ARTICLE X
One-Way Streets
[Added 5-3-1995 by Ord. No. 55-1995]
§ 439-88. Listing of streets.
The following streets are hereby designated as one-way streets:
Street Direction Location
Acker Avenue [Added
7-28-2016 by Ord.
No. 44-2016]
Southbound Along the 900 and 1000 Blocks of
Acker Avenue
Bogart Place, 500 Block
[Added 9-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 43-2014]
Westbound From Cedar Avenue to South
Washington Avenue
Corey Street, 500 Block
[Added 12-1-2005 by
Ord. No. 160-2005]
Southeast From Birney Avenue to Pittston
Avenue only
Graham Street Eastbound From its intersection with Hudson
Avenue to its intersection with
Keyser Avenue, said area to be
posted
Linden Street [Added
3-25-2004 by Ord.
No. 16-2004;
repealed 9-15-2016
by Ord. No. 49-2016]
Ridge Avenue
[9-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 119-2015]
Southwest From Ash Street to Myrtle Avenue
Spruce Street [Added
3-25-2004 by Ord.
No. 16-2004]
Northwest From Franklin Avenue to Mifflin
Avenue
Wolf Court [Added 7-23-1997 by Ord. No. 69-1997; repealed
10-1-1997 by Ord. No. 108-1997]
§ 439-88 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-88
438:1011

ARTICLE XI
Truck and Bus Traffic
[Added 12-3-2001 by Ord. No. 82-2001]
§ 439-89. Truck and bus traffic restricted locations; signs.
§ 439-89.1. Truck traffic prohibited. [Added 11-8-2012 by Ord. No.
70-2012]
A. Truck traffic (except local deliveries) and bus traffic (except school
dropoff/pickup) shall be prohibited in the following locations:
Street Location
Campbell Street 500 Block
Duncan Street 500 Block
Pear Street [Added
7-27-2006 by Ord. No.
42-2006]
Between Cedar Avenue and Pittston Avenue
Sanders Street 500 Block
Winfield Avenue 2300 to 2500 Blocks, between Duncan
Street and Herbert Street
B. The Mayor and other appropriate City officials are hereby authorized to
post signs warning of such prohibition.
A. Truck traffic on the following streets or portions of streets is hereby
prohibited, said area to be posted by the Department of Public Works:
Street Location
Lake Scranton Road From Route 307 northeasterly to Elmhurst
Boulevard
B. Exemptions. Subsection A shall not apply to the following vehicles:
(1) Emergency vehicles (police, fire, ambulance).
(2) City of Scranton vehicles, including but not limited to Department
of Public Works trucks or garbage trucks serving said streets or
parts of streets.
(3) Trucks of the United States government, including but not limited
to military vehicles, and trucks of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(4) Trucks scheduled to make deliveries or pickups to homes or
businesses on said streets or parts of streets above described, i.e.,
local deliveries; trucks scheduled to make deliveries or pickups to
homes or businesses within the truck ban areas or deliveries which
would be considered "local deliveries." For purposes of this section,
§ 439-89 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-89.1
438:1013
§ 439-90. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-8-2012 by Ord. No.
70-2012]
Except as otherwise provided, any person, corporation or other entity
violating the prohibitions stated in this article, shall, upon conviction, pay
a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $300, plus costs. In the
event of a third or subsequent offense, the fine shall be a minimum of $150
and a maximum of $300, plus costs. Each day a violation occurs shall be a
separate violation.
§ 439-91. Exception for transit route.
This article shall not be construed to prohibit a transit route by the County
of Lackawanna Transit System (COLTS) if the county decides to operate
such a route in the area covered by this article.
"local deliveries" includes the area banned above and a two-block
radius around said area.
C. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300,
with costs and prosecution, and/or be subject to imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days. Each day the violation occurs shall be a separate
offense. Each time a violator passes through the prohibited area shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 439-89.1 SCRANTON CODE § 439-91
438:1014
ARTICLE XII
Parking or Standing of Trucks in Residence Districts
[Added 9-29-2003 by Ord. No. 216-2003]
§ 439-92. Parking or standing prohibited; exceptions.
§ 439-93. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or operator of a vehicle violating any provision of this article
shall, upon judgment, be ordered to pay a fine of not more than $100,
together with costs. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any truck, tractor,
tractor-trailer combination, bus or trailer, as such terms are defined in
the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or
vehicle other than a passenger car, van, sport utility vehicle, station
wagon or pickup truck (see restrictions below) to cause or permit any
such vehicle to stand upon any portion of any public highway, roadway
or right-of-way within a residence district (as defined in the Motor
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania) in the City of
Scranton except at such locations where signs permitting such parking
have been erected by the City of Scranton.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
(1) Vehicles of the City of Scranton, fire apparatus, ambulances or
vehicles engaged in the work of a public utility.
(2) Vehicles actually engaged in the course of construction or repair of
streets or while actually engaged in making deliveries or rendering
services in or upon any property adjacent to the highway or
roadway where said vehicles are parked.
(3) Truck vehicles, as defined by the Motor Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as a motor vehicle designed, used
or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, with a
registered gross weight of 5,000 pounds or less.
§ 439-92 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-93
438:1015

ARTICLE XIII
Turns
[Added 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 74-2009]
§ 439-94. Right turn only.
Traffic on the following streets is limited to right turn only movement:
Name of Street Direction of Travel At Intersection
Costello Court Southwest Mulberry Street
Hitchcock Court Southwest Mulberry Street
Mahon Court Southwest Mulberry Street
§ 439-94 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-94
438:1017

ARTICLE XIV
On-Street Parking
[Added 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 10-2013]
§ 439-95. Regional Hospital of Scranton.
Regional Hospital of Scranton, at its cost and expense, shall create nine
on-street parking spaces consistent with the Signing and Striping Plan,
attached hereto as Exhibit B, on the south side of the 700 block of Jefferson
Avenue, and Regional Hospital of Scranton, at its cost and expense, shall
make the necessary construction alterations along the 700 block of
Jefferson Avenue consistent with the Report and Plan, submitted herein and
attached as Exhibits A and B.136
136. Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are on file in the City offices.
§ 439-95 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK § 439-95
438:1019
Chapter 441
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Police — See Ch. 105. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 439.
§ 439-95 SCRANTON CODE § 439-95
441:1020
Part 1
[Adopted 9-26-1979 As ChB. u3s5e, sArt. II, Of The 1979 Code]
ARTICLE I
Licensing
§ 441-1. License required.
No motorbus or motor omnibus for public use in the transportation of
passengers for compensation within the limits of the city or from points in
the city to points beyond the city limits shall be run or operated unless a
license is first obtained by the owner, lessee or bailee of such vehicle from
the Department of Public Safety, Bureau of Police.
§ 441-2. Application.
A separate application shall be filed for each motor vehicle, motorbus or
omnibus to be licensed upon a form provided by the Bureau and containing
the same information as is required for the obtaining of a certificate of title
under Section 201 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, Act of April 29, 1959
(P.L. 58), as amended.137 However, the Director of the Department of Public
Safety may in any case dispense with so much of the information prescribed
as in his judgment is unnecessary.
§ 441-3. Fee.
For any license issued under this Part 1, the applicant therefor shall pay an
annual fee of $50 for each vehicle licensed.
§ 441-4. Fee payment date; rebate of fee.
The annual license fee under this Part 1 shall be paid on or before January
15 in each and every year. For any license taken out later than June 1 in any
year the license required to be paid shall be one-half of the yearly fee. No
rebate of any license fee will be made by reason of the discontinuance of
the operation for any cause of any motorbus or motor omnibus so licensed.
§ 441-5. Temporary license for substitute vehicle.
When a vehicle is temporarily withdrawn from operation for repairs, the
licensee may, by application to the Director of the Department of Public
Safety and the payment of an additional fee of $5, obtain a special license
for the operation of a substitute vehicle for a period not exceeding 10 days.
If any such licensed vehicle is wrecked or injured so as to wholly prevent
its future operation, a like special permit for the operation of the substitute
vehicle for the licensed period may be obtained upon the payment of an
additional license fee of $20.
137. Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 201.
§ 441-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 441-5
441:1021

Part 2
[Adopted 9-26-1979 As CTha. x3i5ca, bAsrt. III, Of The 1979 Code]
ARTICLE II
Business License
§ 441-6. License required.
No taxicab for public use in the transportation of passengers for
compensation within the limits of the city, or from points within the city to
points beyond the city limits, shall be operated unless a license therefor has
been obtained from the Department of Public Safety by the owner, lessee or
bailee of such taxicab.
§ 441-7. Application.
Application for a license under this Part 2 shall be made upon a form
prescribed and furnished by the Department of Public Safety shall be
accompanied by the fee prescribed herein. The application shall contain a
full description of the taxicab, the actual or bona fide address and name of
the owner, together with a statement of the applicant's title and whether
possession is held under a lease, contract or conditional sale or other
like agreement. The application shall be signed and verified by oath or
affirmation by the applicant, if a natural person, in the case of an
association, by a member or partner thereof and, in the case of a
corporation, by an executive officer thereof, or some person specifically
authorized by such corporation to sign the application, to which shall be
attached written evidence of his authority.
§ 441-8. Fee. [Amended by Ord. No. 178-1994]
For any such license so issued the applicants shall pay annual license fee of
$100 for each taxicab so licensed.
§ 441-9. Fee payment; rebate.
The license fee under this Part 2 shall be paid on or before January 15 in
each year. For any license issued subsequent to May 31 in each year, the fee
therefor shall be one-half the annual fee. No rebate of any license fee will
be made by reason of the discontinuance of the operation for any cause of
any taxicab so licensed.
§ 441-10. Temporary license for substitute vehicle.
When any licensed taxicab is temporarily withdrawn from operation for
repairs or other impelling reason, the licensee may, by application to the
Department of Public Safety, and the payment of an additional fee of $5,
obtain a special license for the operation of a substitute vehicle for a period
not exceeding 10 days.
§ 441-6 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 441-11
441:1023
§ 441-11. Emergency permits.
During such times as the regular service of buses shall be suspended,
whether by reason of strikes, lockouts or otherwise, the Director of the
Department of Public Safety is authorized to grant revocable emergency
permits or certificates for periods not to exceed one week at a time to
owners, lessees or bailees of passenger motor vehicles for the operation of
such vehicles for hire, subject to such safeguards as to the character of such
persons and of the operators thereof, measures for the public protection
and fees therefor as may, in the opinion of the Director, appear practicable,
necessary or proper during the period of the emergency. Such permits
or certificates shall be revocable at the instance of the public service
commission.
§ 441-12. Violations and penalties.
A. Any owner, lessee, bailee or operator of any taxicab who violates any of
the provisions of this Part 2 shall, upon conviction, be punished as
provided in § 1-16.
B. Any owner, lessee, bailee or operator of a motor vehicle for hire within
the limits of the city, or from points within the city to points beyond the
city limits, who operates such vehicle without securing an emergency
permit or certificate as provided for in § 441-11, and complying with the
terms thereof, or without having a certificate of public convenience
issued to him by the Public Service Commission of the commonwealth,
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in § 1-16.
§ 441-11 SCRANTON CODE § 441-12
441:1024
ARTICLE III
Driver's License
§ 441-13. Required.
No person shall drive or operate a taxicab within the city without first
obtaining a license, in writing, to do so from the Superintendent of the
Bureau of Police.
§ 441-14. Application.
All persons applying for licenses under this Part 2 shall file applications
therefor with the Bureau of Police, upon blanks to be furnished by the
Bureau.
§ 441-15. Exceptions.
No license shall be issued under this Part 2 to any of the following persons:
§ 441-16. Issuance of card; fees; renewal. [Amended by Ord. No.
196-1990]
Upon obtaining a license as required under this Part 2, the holder of such
license shall receive a card of such design as the Superintendent of Police
may prescribe upon payment of $25. Renewal of such license, as prescribed
herein, shall cost $15. Such card containing the license to operate as a
taxicab driver shall be continually carried by the person to whom it has
been issued, at all times while such person is operating any taxicab within
the city. No license issued by the city may be renewed if such license had
not been previously renewed within three years from the initial issuance. In
such cases, the holder shall apply for a new license.
§ 441-17. Term.
Licenses issued under this Part 2 shall be valid for a period of one year from
January 1 of each year.
§ 441-18. Revocation or renewal.
The Superintendent of Police may revoke or refuse to renew any license
under this Part 2 if the applicant has, since the issuance of the license:
A. Any person under the age of 18 years.
B. Any person who is not a citizen of the United States.
C. Any person who has been convicted of a felony or who has been
convicted of either driving a vehicle upon the highway while under the
influence of narcotics or intoxicating liquors, or reckless driving, unless
two years have elapsed since his discharge from any penal institution or
since his being placed upon probation, during which period of time his
record has been good.
§ 441-13 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 441-18
441:1025
§ 441-19. Mandatory revocation.
Upon the third conviction for any offense by a licensee under this Part 2,
it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Police issuing a license, upon
investigation thereof coming to his attention, immediately to revoke such
license and to require the surrender of the same and the identification card
in connection therewith for cancellation.
A. Been convicted of a felony.
B. Shall have had his state driver's license revoked or suspended.
C. Been convicted of driving while under the influence of intoxicating
liquors.
D. Been convicted of driving while under the influence of narcotics.
E. During any continuous six-month period he shall have had three or
more convictions of any offenses under the city traffic code138 or the
vehicle code of the state139 or any amendments thereto, or any
combination of either or any of such offenses.
F. When for any reason, including or other than the above, in the opinion
of the Superintendent of Police, the applicant is unfit to drive a taxicab.
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 439, Vehicles and Traffic.
139. Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 101 et seq.
§ 441-18 SCRANTON CODE § 441-19
441:1026
ARTICLE IV
Lift-Equipped or Portable-Ramped Vehicles
[Added 10-22-2001 by Ord. No. 68-2001]
§ 441-20. Requirements.
Each taxicab company operating within the City of Scranton shall, after
90 days from the effective date of this article, be required to operate and
maintain at least one lift-equipped or portable-ramped vehicle in their fleet,
provided that such equipment meets federal standards under the American
Disabilities Act or regulations issued pursuant thereto.
§ 441-21. Waiver.
Any taxicab company which is unable to comply with the requirement stated
in § 441-20 due to a financial hardship may file a written request for a oneyear
waiver with the City Department of Community Development, which
will review and grant or deny the request for a one-year waiver in writing
within 45 days from the date of receipt of the request. (If unstamped, the
request shall be deemed to have been received three days after mailing).
The company may waive the forty-five-day response time in writing. If
the Director, or the Deputy Director, deem it necessary, they may request
additional information and/or hold a hearing in order to determine if the
company would suffer a financial hardship if the waiver is not granted. The
company may thereafter appeal a determination within 30 days to the Court
of Common Pleas.
§ 441-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, or other entity who violates this article shall, upon
conviction, in addition to court costs, pay a fine of not less than $100
or more than $300. Each day a violation continues shall be a separate
violation.
§ 441-23. Enforcement.
This article may be enforced by any police officer of the City and by
the Bureau of Licenses and Inspections of the Department of Community
Development or by the Director or Deputy Director for Management, as may
be appropriate.
§ 441-20 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 441-23
441:1027
Chapter 445
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 18.
Building construction — See Ch. 187.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 243.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 250.
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 301.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 405.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
423.
§ 441-23 SCRANTON CODE § 441-23
441:1028
ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 445-1. Purposes and objectives.
This chapter is hereby adopted:
§ 445-2. Applicability.
A. In accordance with the requirements and purposes (including Section
604140 or its successor section, which is included by reference) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
B. In accordance with the community development goals and objectives
(which are included by reference) of the City of Scranton
Comprehensive Master Plan of 1992 (as may be amended), which
constitutes an overall program.141
C. In consideration of the character of the City, its various parts and the
suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures.
D. To assist in carrying out the purposes and provisions of the Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (especially Article I, Section 27),
the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, Pennsylvania Storm
Water Management Act,142 Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) regulations on erosion and sedimentation control,
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations on highway
access control and other relevant federal and state laws, regulations,
official policies and relevant court decisions.
E. To protect property values and protect existing desirable residential
neighborhoods from incompatible intrusions.
A. Any activity regulated by this chapter shall only occur in such a way
that conforms with the regulations of this chapter.
B. This chapter regulates matters authorized by Section 603, Ordinance
provisions, of the State Planning Code143 or such successor section.
C. Any of the following activities or any other activity regulated by this
chapter shall only be carried out after receipt of any required approval
or permit and in compliance with this chapter:
(1) Erection, construction, movement, placement or extension of a
structure, building or sign, except for signs that Article VII, Signs,
specifically states do not require a permit;
140. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10604.
141. Editor's Note:The goals and objectives and the Comprehensive Master Plan are on file in
the City offices.
142. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq. and 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., respectively.
143. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603.
§ 445-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-2
441:1029
§ 445-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(2) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure or
area of land; and/or
(3) Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines.
D. Repairs and maintenance.
(1) Ordinary repairs, structural strengthening, facade improvements
and maintenance to existing structures that do not infringe upon a
required setback may be made without a zoning permit, if such
work does not involve:
(a) A change in use;
(b) An expansion, construction or placement of a structure;
(c) An increase in the number of dwelling units or boardinghouse
units; and/or
(d) Any other activity regulated by this chapter.
(2) However, such work may require other City permits.
E. All readers maintain the responsibility to procure the latest
amendments to this chapter.
A. See 53 P.S. §§ 10616144 and 10617 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
B. Previous enforcement actions. The passage of this chapter shall not
suspend or inhibit the enforcement of sections of the preexisting City of
Scranton Zoning Ordinance upon actions regulated under that chapter,
except that such applicant may apply for approval under this chapter. If
the Zoning Officer determines that the action of the applicant that was
alleged to be unlawful under the previous zoning ordinance would now
be lawful under this chapter, then such enforcement action may be
withdrawn by the City.
C. Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall be upon an applicant to
prove that:
(1) A proposed zoning amendment would be in the public interest;
(2) That a proposed zoning variance would be justified under the
conditions stated in § 445-11E; or
(3) That a proposed conditional or special exception use would meet
the specific standards of this chapter.
144. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10616 was repealed December 21, 1988, by P.L. 1329, No. 170,
§ 59. See now 53 P.S. § 10617.2.
§ 445-2 SCRANTON CODE § 445-4
441:1030
§ 445-4. Filing fees and costs.
§ 445-5. Interpretation; similar uses.
A. Fee schedule. Unless and until revised by resolution of City Council, the
following fee schedule shall apply to actions under this chapter, in
addition to fees provided for in the City's building codes.145 All such fees
shall be paid in advance:
(1) Certificates of nonconformance: $5.
(2) Occupancy permit: $20, unless another fee is provided for in the
City building codes.
(3) Request for amendment of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map,
including a curative amendment: $300 for each proposed
amendment, plus the applicant shall reimburse the City for
expenses for all required legal advertisements.
(4) Written statement of zoning compliance (when requested): $2 for a
written statement of the zoning district or floodplain district a
property is within; $5 for any other written statement of
compliance. If such statement is intended to state compliance of an
existing use with specific requirements, then the applicant must, in
advance, provide a signed written statement describing the use,
the setbacks and such additional information as needed to
determine compliance.
(5) Fees for submittal to the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance or
special exception or to the City Council as a conditional use shall be
as follows:
Construction/Alteration Cost Permit Charge
$0.00 to $5,000.00 $100.00
$5,001.00 to $50,000.00 $175.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $250.00
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $325.00
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $400.00
$1,000,001.00 and over $400.00 per million dollars of
construction cost or fraction
thereof up to a maximum fee of
$3,000.00
B. Consideration of application or appeal. No application or appeal shall
be considered filed until all fees are paid.
A. Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be
interpreted as the minimum requirements to promote public health,
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Building Construction.
§ 445-4 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-5
441:1031
§ 445-6. General procedure for permits.
safety and general welfare. Where a provision of this chapter differs
or conflicts with any other provision of this chapter or any other
ordinance, regulation or law, the provision that is more restrictive upon
uses and structures shall apply.
B. Uses not specifically regulated. If a use clearly is not permitted by right,
by condition or by special exception by this chapter within any zoning
district in the City, the use is prohibited in the City, except the applicant
may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board. After a review by the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Hearing Board may permit such use if the
applicant proves all of the following to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board:
(1) That the use would clearly be less offensive in impacts and
nuisances than uses permitted in that district;
(2) That the use would be compatible with permitted uses in that
district;
(3) That the proposed use would be compatible with the purposes of
the district;
(4) That the use can meet the general criteria listed in § 445-18C,
entitled "Approval of conditional uses"; and
(5) That the use is not specifically prohibited in the district.
C. Sketches. Sketches in this chapter are for illustrative purposes only and
are not regulatory, unless otherwise stated.
D. Interpretation of chapter text and boundaries. The Zoning Officer shall
apply the wording of this chapter and the location of all district
boundaries in particular applications. The Zoning Officer may request
an advisory opinion from the City Solicitor. See § 445-11 and the City
fee schedule concerning appeals.
E. Definitions. An applicant may appeal the Zoning Officer's determination
of meaning of a term that is not defined by this chapter to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
A. Generally.
(1) See provisions regarding applications in § 445-7C. After receiving a
proper and complete application for a permitted by right use, the
Zoning Officer shall either:
(a) Issue the permit under this chapter; or
(b) Refuse the permit, indicating at least one applicable reason
verbally or in writing to the applicant or his/her representative.
§ 445-5 SCRANTON CODE § 445-6
441:1032
§ 445-7. Permits and certificates.
(2) If specifically requested in writing by an applicant, the reason(s) for
a refusal shall then be stated in writing.
B. Reviews. Certain activities require review and/or approval of the
Zoning Hearing Board and/or of the City Council and/or the
recommendations of the Planning Commission. In such case, the Zoning
Officer shall not issue a zoning permit until such required review or
approval occurs.
C. Appeal. See § 445-11E, which describes processes to appeal actions of
the Zoning Officer to the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Timing. After a zoning permit has been received by the applicant, the
applicant may undertake the action permitted by the permit under this
chapter, as long as the work complies with other City ordinances.
However, it is recommended that applicants wait 30 days to begin
construction if there is a possibility of an appeal by another party to
have the permit revoked. Any commencement of construction or a use
within the thirty-day appeal period shall be at the risk of the applicant.
See the occupancy permit process in § 445-7H.
A. Applicability. See § 445-2.
B. Types of uses.
(1) Permitted by right uses. If a use is listed as permitted by right by
this chapter and meets the requirements of this chapter, the Zoning
Officer shall issue a permit in response to a complete application.
See additional requirements for specific uses listed in §§ 445-34
and 445-35.
(2) Special exception use or application requiring a variance. A permit
under this chapter for a use requiring a special exception or
variance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only upon the written
order of the Zoning Hearing Board after a hearing. See provisions
for Planning Commission review in § 445-19B(4).
(3) Conditional use. A permit under this chapter for a conditional use
shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only upon the written order of
the City Council, after the Planning Commission has been given an
opportunity to review the application.
C. Applications.
(1) Any request for a decision, interpretation or variance by the Zoning
Hearing Board or for a permit under this chapter shall be made, in
writing, on a form provided by the City. Such completed
application, with any required fees and with any required site plans
or other required information, shall be submitted to a City
employee responsible for processing such application. The
§ 445-6 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-7
441:1033
applicant is responsible to ensure that a responsible City official
notes the date of the official receipt on the application.
(2) Unless waived by the Zoning Officer, seven copies of a site plan
shall be submitted if an application requires action by the Zoning
Hearing Board and two copies shall be submitted if action by the
Board is not required. Such site plan shall be drawn to scale.
(3) Any application to the Zoning Officer or Zoning Hearing Board
shall include the following information, unless the Zoning Officer
determines that a site plan or such information is unnecessary to
determine compliance with this chapter:
(a) The location and dimensions of the lot;
(b) Locations, dimensions, heights and uses of existing and
proposed structures, signs, parking and loading areas and
locations of existing and proposed uses of areas of land, with
differentiation between existing and proposed features;
(c) Existing and proposed numbers of parking spaces;
(d) The name and address of the applicant or appellant;
(e) The name and address of the owner of the affected property;
(f) A description of the existing and proposed use(s) of the
property, including numbers of dwelling units, minimum
square feet of proposed dwelling units and numbers of
proposed business establishments, if any;
(g) Plans for any required buffer plantings (see § 445-74);
(h) Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may
determine is reasonably necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter; and
(i) All other applicable information listed on the official City
application form.
(4) Submittals to the Board. In addition to the information listed in
Subsection C(3) above, an application requiring a site plan and
action by the Zoning Hearing Board shall also include the following
information, unless the Zoning Officer determines that such
information is unnecessary for determination of whether the
proposal complies with this chapter:
(a) The present zoning district and major applicable lot
requirements;
(b) A description of the proposed nonresidential operations and
storage in sufficient detail to indicate potential nuisances and
hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic, glare, odors, dust,
§ 445-7 SCRANTON CODE § 445-7
441:1034
fire or toxic or explosive hazards or other significant public
health and safety hazards;
(c) If a principal nonresidential use is proposed within close
proximity to dwellings, a description of hours of operation and
proposed methods of storing garbage outdoors on-site;
(d) A listing of any specific sections of this chapter being appealed,
with the reasons for any appeal; and
(e) For a mineral extraction use, such additional information as
listed in § 445-34 for such use.
(5) Other laws. The Zoning Officer may withhold issuance of a permit
under this chapter if there is clear knowledge by him/her that such
a use would violate another City, state or federal law or regulation.
(6) Ownership. No person other than a landowner or his/her
specifically authorized agent or a tenant or lessee with written
permission of the landowner shall submit a zoning application (see
definition of "landowner" in Article II).
(7) Advisory reviews. The Zoning Officer may submit a copy of any plan
and application to any appropriate agencies and/or individuals
(such as the Planning Commission, the Lackawanna County
Regional Planning Commission, the County Conservation District
or the City Engineer) for review and comment.
D. Issuance of permit.
(1) At least two copies of any permit required under this chapter shall
be made.
(2) One copy of any such permit shall be retained in City files, and one
copy shall be retained by the applicant. A copy of any such permit
shall be shown by the applicant to the Zoning Officer upon the
Zoning Officer's request. One copy of a submitted site plan should
be returned to the applicant after approval/disapproval, with such
action certified on the plan with the signature of the Zoning Officer.
(3) The Zoning Officer should issue or deny a permit for a permitted by
right use that meets the requirements of this chapter within a
maximum of 90 days after a complete, duly filed application and
fees are submitted.
(4) No owner, contractor, worker or other person shall perform
building or construction activity of any kind regulated by this
chapter unless a valid zoning permit has been issued for such work,
nor shall such persons conduct such work after notice that a zoning
permit has been revoked.
E. Revocation of permits.
§ 445-7 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-7
441:1035
(1) The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit or approval issued under
the provisions of this chapter in case of:
(a) Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application or on the plans on which the permit or approval
was based (the Pennsylvania Crimes Code146 provides for
penalties for providing false information to a municipal
employee in the carrying out of his/her duties);
(b) Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed upon a special
exception or conditional use;
(c) Any work being accomplished or land or structures being used
in such a way that does not comply with this chapter or an
approved site plan or approved permit application; or
(d) For any other just cause set forth in this chapter.
(2) If a zoning permit is revoked, the person holding the permit shall
immediately surrender such permit and all copies to the Zoning
Officer.
F. Temporary permit. See § 445-78.
G. Changes to approved plans.
(1) After the issuance of a permit and/or approval of a site plan under
this chapter by the City, such approved application and/or site plan
shall not be changed without the written consent of the City, as
stated in Subsection G(2) below.
(2) Changes to a site plan approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception use or by the City Council as a conditional use
shall require reapproval of the changes by such bodies if the
Zoning Officer determines that such changes affect matters that
were within the scope of approval of such Board. Such approval by
the Zoning Hearing Board or the Council is not required for clearly
minor technical adjustments or matters that are solely corrections
of information that do not affect any of the significant features of
the site plan or the intensity of the use, as determined by the
Zoning Officer.
(3) A copy of such adjustment or correction should be provided, in
writing, to the Chairperson of the Planning Commission, the
President of City Council or the Chairperson of the Zoning Hearing
Board if the change concerns a plan approved by such bodies.
H. Certificate of use and occupancy (or occupancy permit).
(1) A certificate of use and occupancy shall be required by the City
upon a change of use or completion of work authorized by a permit
146. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 445-7 SCRANTON CODE § 445-7
441:1036
§ 445-8. Amendments to this chapter.
or approval under this chapter. It shall be unlawful to use and/
or occupy a structure, building and/or land or portions thereof
until such certificate has been issued. A new certificate of use
and occupancy shall be required if the use of the property should
change.
(2) An application for such certificate shall be made on an official City
form. If such use is in conformance with City ordinances and
approvals, such certificate should be issued in duplicate within 10
days of a properly submitted and duly filed application. A minimum
of one copy shall be retained in City records.
(3) The designated City staff person(s) shall inspect such structure or
land related to an application for such certificate. If he/she
determines, to the best of his/her current knowledge, that such
work conforms with this chapter and applicable City codes,
approvals and permits, then he/she shall issue the certificate of use
and occupancy.
(4) The applicant shall show a valid certificate of use and occupancy to
the Zoning Officer upon request.
A. The City Council may amend, challenge or repeal any or all portions of
this chapter on:
(1) Its own motion; or
(2) Upon agreeing to hear a written request of any person, entity or the
Planning Commission.
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the City Council shall
hold a public hearing thereon, following the procedural requirements of
the State Planning Code, including public notice.
C. Review of amendments.
(1) In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by or under
the direction of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall
submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission at least
30 days prior to its hearing on such proposed amendment; the
Planning Commission shall be permitted an opportunity to provide
recommendations.
(2) County review. The City shall submit the proposed amendment to
the County Regional Planning Commission (LCRPC) for
recommendations at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such
proposed amendment.
(3) No action shall be taken by the City Council until any LCRPC or
City Planning Commission comments are received, unless 30 days
pass without such comments being received.
§ 445-7 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-8
441:1037
D. Changes after a hearing. If, after any public hearing held upon an
amendment, the proposed amendment is revised or further revised to
include or exclude land previously not affected by it, the City Council
shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
E. Application for amendment. Any request for amendment of this chapter
(including supplement, change or repeal) by any person or entity (other
than the City staff, Planning Commission, City Council or committee
appointed by the City Council or under the direct oversight of such
entity) shall include the following:
(1) A statement of why the change would be in the best interests of the
City. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to prove that a
zoning amendment would be in the public interest.
(2) A statement of how the proposal will relate to the City
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) A statement addressing any adverse affects on adjacent residences.
(4) A statement addressing any major traffic access or congestion
concerns.
(5) A map showing the proposed boundaries of any proposed map
changes, the existing zoning of the land and of adjacent lands and
the current uses of adjacent lots.
(6) A statement explaining proposed extensions and major
improvements, if needed, of public water, sanitary sewer or
stormwater management systems to serve the land area.
(7) A list of abutting and adjacent property owners.
F. Traffic impacts of zoning amendments. The Planning Commission or the
City Council may require an applicant for a zoning amendment to fund a
traffic impact study following standard methods and completed by a
qualified traffic engineer. Such a study shall take into account the entire
land area proposed for a change, with an emphasis on the net projected
traffic increases from the proposed amendment compared to the
existing zoning, based upon reasonable assumptions about the intensity
and type of development.
G. Notification of proposed Zoning Map amendment. If a Zoning Map
amendment is requested by a private entity and is not considered at the
same public hearing as Zoning Map amendments proposed by City
officials, then at least 10 days prior to the hearing on the proposed
change, the applicant shall send by return receipt mail, with the receipt
provided to the Zoning Officer, written notice of the proposed change.
The applicant shall provide a signed letter to the Zoning Officer stating
that such notice has been sent. Such notice shall include the hearing
date and time and a City official to contact for more information. Such
§ 445-8 SCRANTON CODE § 445-8
441:1038
§ 445-9. Curative amendments.
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of
this chapter, which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in
which he/she has an interest, may submit a curative amendment to the City
Council with a written request that this challenge and proposed amendment
be heard and decided as provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 445-10. Zoning Officer.
notice shall be provided to all owners of record of all property proposed
to be rezoned (other than the applicant) and all property directly
abutting or directly across the street from the land to be rezoned.
H. Time guideline on reviewing amendment. If a zoning amendment is
properly requested, in writing, and submitted, together with any
required fees, to the Zoning Officer outside of the curative amendment
process, the Planning Commission should hold an initial public meeting
on such proposed amendment within 60 days of receiving such request,
unless the Commission determines at a regular meeting that such
request is not worthy of further consideration.
A. Appointment. The Zoning Officer(s) shall be appointed by the Mayor.
Any full-time Zoning Officer appointed after the adoption of this chapter
shall require confirmation by the City Council. The Zoning Officer(s)
shall not hold any elective office within the City, but may hold other
appointed offices.
B. Duties and powers. The Zoning Officer shall:
(1) Administer this chapter.
(2) Provide information to applicants regarding required procedures.
(3) Receive and examine all applications required under the terms of
this chapter and issue or refuse permits within this chapter.
(4) Receive complaints of violations of this chapter and issue a written
notice of violation to any person violating any provision of this
chapter.
(5) Keep records of applications, permits, certificates, written
decisions and interpretations issued, of variances granted by the
Board, of complaints received, of inspections made, of reports
rendered and of notices or orders issued.
(6) Make all required inspections and perform all other duties as called
for in this chapter.
(7) Not have the power to permit any activity which does not conform
to this chapter or all other ordinances of the City known to the
Zoning Officer.
§ 445-8 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-10
441:1039
§ 445-11. Zoning Hearing Board actions and variances.
C. Qualifications. Pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10614 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, the following minimum qualifications
shall apply to any full-time Zoning Officer(s) appointed to serve the City
after the adoption of this chapter, unless such mandatory qualifications
are waived by motion of the City Council.
(1) The person shall demonstrate a working knowledge of zoning.
(2) The person shall have one of the following combinations of
education and experience:
(a) A high school diploma or equivalent and a minimum of four
years' responsible experience in administering and enforcing
municipal zoning and/or subdivision and land development
ordinances;
(b) A high school diploma or equivalent and two additional years of
continuing education, such as an associate degree (such
continuing education preferably should be in a field such as
law enforcement, community planning and/or public
administration) and a minimum of two years' responsible
experience in administering and enforcing municipal zoning
and/or subdivision and land development ordinances; or
(c) A college or university bachelor's degree in a field related to
zoning (such as law enforcement, community planning and/or
government administration) and a minimum of eight months'
responsible experience in administering and enforcing
municipal zoning and/or subdivision and land development
ordinances.
(3) The person shall be familiar with constitutional issues concerning
search and seizure and with the process of filing actions with the
District Justice.
(4) The person shall exhibit an ability to thoroughly evaluate site plans
and building plans.
(5) The person shall demonstrate excellent oral and written
communication skills.
(6) The person shall be familiar with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
D. Other City officials. Police officers, firefighters, construction inspectors,
other City staff and City officials and the general public may report
possible zoning violations to the Zoning Officer for his/her
determination.
A. Appointment, terms and qualifications.
§ 445-10 SCRANTON CODE § 445-11
441:1040
(1) The existing Board of Zoning Appeals is continued and, in
conformance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
is hereby renamed the "Zoning Hearing Board." The Zoning
Hearing Board shall consist of residents of the City. Five regular
members shall be appointed by the City Council. Alternate
members may be appointed in the same manner within the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Members of the Board shall hold no elected office in the City.
(2) Terms. The existing terms of office of the Zoning Hearing Board
members shall continue as previously authorized. Members shall
be appointed to three-year terms. The terms of office shall be so
established so that a minimum of one position and a maximum of
two positions expire each year.
(3) Recommended qualifications. Each Board member should:
(a) Demonstrate a working knowledge of zoning prior to
appointment.
(b) Become familiar with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
(c) Attend at least one seminar and/or workshop pertaining to
municipal planning and/or zoning within each calendar year.
B. Vacancies. The Board shall promptly notify the Mayor and City Council
of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be
only for the unexpired portion of a term.
C. Removal of members. See § 905 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.147
D. Organization.
(1) Officers. The Board shall elect officers from its own membership.
Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
(2) Quorum. For the conduct of any hearing and taking of any action, a
quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the
Board, except that the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its
own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the
parties may waive further action by the Board, as provided by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The quorum may be
met by alternate members, serving as permitted by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(3) Rules. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for
its procedure, consistent with all applicable City ordinances and
state law.
147. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10905.
§ 445-11 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-11
441:1041
E. Zoning Hearing Board functions. The Zoning Hearing Board shall be
responsible for the following:
(1) Appeal of a decision by the Zoning Officer.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by
the appellant (a person affected or any agency of the City) that
the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures
or has misinterpreted or misapplied any valid provision of this
chapter.
(b) See time limitations for appeals in § 445-11F.
(2) Challenge to the validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map.
(a) The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of this chapter
filed with the Board, in writing, by the landowner affected, any
officer or agency of the City or any person aggrieved.
(b) After the conclusion of the hearing(s), the Board shall decide
all questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of
fact, within the time limits of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
(3) Variance.
(a) The Board shall hear requests for variances filed with the
Board, in writing, by any landowner (or any tenant with the
permission of such landowner).
(b) Standards. The Board may grant a variance only within the
limitations of state law. The applicant shall have the burden of
proof to show compliance with such standards. (As of 1993, the
Municipalities Planning Code provided that all of the following
findings must be made, where relevant:
[1] There are unique physical circumstances or conditions
(including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot
size or shape or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property)
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
[2] Because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed
in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and
a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable
use of the property.
[3] Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
§ 445-11 SCRANTON CODE § 445-11
441:1042
[4] The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
[5] The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.)
(c) Additional standards.
[1] Mere showing of economic hardship shall not by itself
justify a zoning variance.
[2] A variance may be granted where the applicant proves
that the property can only be used for a permitted use at
prohibitive expense.
[3] A variance may be granted where clearly necessary to
comply with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act.
(d) The Zoning Officer shall refuse to accept a proposed appeal
that is not materially or significantly different from an appeal
on the same property that was denied by the Board within the
previous year.
(e) Variance conditions. In granting any variance, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and
to protect the public health and safety. The Board may in
variance cases prohibit certain otherwise permitted uses on a
lot where the Board finds that such uses would be contrary to
the public interest considering the facts and circumstances of
the case and the variance.
(f) Side yard exceptions for accessory structures.
[1] The following provision shall only apply to the placement
of a one-story customarily accessory structure of less than
2,000 square feet of building floor area or a household
swimming pool serving a dwelling unit if such structure or
pool is proposed within the required setback area for such
use along abutting lot lines of another lot(s).
[2] If all abutting property owner(s) of record along such lot
line sign a notarized statement clearly stating that he/she
does not object to such reduction of the required setback
for the placement of such structure or pool and the Zoning
Officer determines that no other City requirement would
prevent such placement of such structure or pool, then the
§ 445-11 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-11
441:1043
Zoning Officer shall permit such reduction or waiver of
such required accessory setback.
[3] In such case, future owners of such abutting lots shall not
have the right to require movement of such structure or
pool.
[4] If the abutting lot owner(s) does not agree to such
exception, such refusal shall not by itself prevent the
granting of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board.
[5] Subsection E(3)(f)[3] shall not permit a reduction in
setback abutting an existing public street or public alley.
(4) Special exception uses.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide requests for all special
exceptions filed with the Board, in writing, by any landowner
(or any tenant with the permission of such landowner), as
provided in this chapter and in accordance with such standards
and criteria contained in this chapter and the procedures in
§ 445-19.
(b) Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the chapter, as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter
and to protect the public health and safety.
(c) See special exception use process in § 445-19.
(5) Hearings. See § 445-12.
(6) Records and reports. The staff to the Board shall keep full public
records of its business.
(7) Court appeals. In the case of an appeal from the Board to the Court
of Common Pleas, the appellant shall make the return required by
law and should promptly notify the City Zoning Hearing Board
Solicitor of such appeal.
(8) Appeal by the Zoning Officer. See § 445-6C.
(9) Standing. (NOTE: "Standing" generally means a party being
sufficiently affected or threatened by effects by a controversy to
obtain judicial resolution of that controversy.)
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the authority, if it
chooses to exercise it, to determine who has standing on each
case before the Board. The City Council, Scranton City
Planning Commission, an abutting municipality whose
boundaries are within 200 feet of the subject lot, a property
owner whose lot lines are within 200 feet of the subject lot and
§ 445-11 SCRANTON CODE § 445-11
441:1044
the affected City-recognized neighborhood organization shall,
at an absolute minimum, have standing in a case.
(b) The Board shall determine that a person or business does not
have standing if the Board determines that such person or
business is apparently motivated primarily by an attempt to
inhibit reasonable competition in an area of business, and that
such person or business would not otherwise be threatened
with substantive harm from the application.
F. Time limits for appeals. The time limitations for appeals shall be as
follows:
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any appeal with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after the decision by the Zoning
Officer that is being appealed has been officially issued or appeal
with the County Court of Common Pleas later than 30 days after a
decision of the Zoning Hearing Board has been officially issued,
except as may be provided under § 914.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.148
(2) The failure of an aggrieved person, other than the landowner, to
appeal an adverse decision directly related to a preliminary
subdivision or land development plan shall preclude an appeal from
a final plan approval except in the case where the final submission
substantially deviates from the approved preliminary plan.
(3) This thirty-day time limit for appeals shall not apply to the
revocation of a permit under § 445-7E.
G. Stay of proceedings. See § 916 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.149
H. Time limits on permits and variances.
(1) After a variance is approved or a conditional or special exception
approval is officially authorized under this chapter, then a zoning
permit shall be secured by the applicant within 12 months after the
date of such approval or authorization. Such action under such
permit shall then substantially begin within 12 months of the
issuance of the permit.
(2) If the applicant submits complete plans for a required site plan
review or subdivision or land development approval or special
exception or conditional use approval that is related to the variance
or issuance of a permit under this chapter within the above time
limits, then such time limits shall begin after such plan review is
completed or such plan approval is granted.
148. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1
149. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10916 was repealed December 21, 1988, by P.L. 1329, No. 170,
§ 98. See now 53 P.S. § 10915.1.
§ 445-11 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-11
441:1045
§ 445-12. Board hearings and decisions.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following:
(3) For good cause, the Zoning Officer may, upon application, in
writing, stating the reasons therefor, extend, in writing, the sixmonth
application period to up to 18 months.
(4) If an applicant fails to obtain the necessary permits within the
above time period or after obtaining the permit fails to diligently
commence substantial construction within 12 months or allows
interruptions in substantial construction of longer than six months,
it shall be conclusively presumed that the applicant has waived,
withdrawn or abandoned the approval, and all such approvals,
variances and permits shall be deemed automatically rescinded.
(5) Any building construction shall be completed within 36 months of
issuance of an applicable permit, unless a written extension is
granted by the Zoning Officer for good cause. Otherwise, a permit
shall be considered to have automatically expired at the end of such
thirty-six-month period.
A. Notice of hearings. Notice of all hearings of the Board shall be given as
follows:
(1) Ad. Public notice shall be published, as defined by § 107 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.150 The notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature
and property address of the matter to be considered.
(2) Posting. Notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that such notice is
posted and remains posted until the hearing. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and a general description of
the request.
(3) Persons given notice.
(a) Written notice shall be mailed or personally delivered to the
applicant or his/her representative listed on an official
application form.
(b) Notice should be delivered or mailed to the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission, the Mayor, the Clerk of the City Council,
the president of the appropriate official City-recognized
neighborhood association and the last known address of
owners of record of property abutting or directly across the
street from the boundaries of the subject property. The
150. Editor's Note: See the definition of "public notice" in 53 P.S. § 10107.
§ 445-11 SCRANTON CODE § 445-12
441:1046
applicant shall provide the City with a list of such property
owners. Failure of the City to notify all such persons shall not
invalidate any action by the Board.
(c) Also, such notice shall be mailed or delivered to the address of
any other person or group (including civic or community
organizations) who has made a written timely request
(including an address) for such notice.
(d) All notices under this subsection should be intended to be
received or posted at least five days prior to the hearing date.
(4) Adjacent municipalities. In any matter which relates to a lot which
lies within 250 feet of the boundary of another municipality, except
boundaries separated by a perennial river, and where the Zoning
Officer determines the proposed activity may have significant
impact on that municipality, the City staff should transmit to the
offices of the adjacent municipality a copy of the official notice of
the public hearing on such matter prior to the hearing date.
Representatives of such adjacent municipality shall have the right
to appear and be heard at the public hearing.
(5) Fees. The City Council may, by resolution, establish a reasonable
fee schedule, based on cost, to be paid by:
(a) The applicant for any notice required by this chapter; and
(b) Those persons requesting any notice not required by this
chapter.
B. Parties in hearings.
(1) The parties to a hearing shall be the City, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before
the Board, representatives of any legitimate civic or community
organization and any other person permitted to appear before the
Board.
(2) The Board shall have the power to require that all persons who
wish to be considered parties enter appearances, in writing, on
forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
C. Oaths and subpoenas. The Chair of the Board or hearing officer shall
have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents reasonably needed by and
requested by the parties.
D. Representation by counsel. The parties shall have the right to be
represented by legal counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to
respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine
adverse witnesses on relevant issues.
§ 445-12 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-12
441:1047
E. Evidence and record. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
The Board or the hearing officer, as applicable, shall keep a record of
the proceedings as required by state law.
F. Communications outside of hearings.
(1) The Board shall not meet with, visit the site with or directly
communicate specifically on the matter with the applicant or any
officially protesting party or their representatives in connection
with any issue involved, except if opportunity is provided for the
applicant and any officially protesting party to participate.
(2) The Board shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials directly affecting a proposed
application unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to
examine and contest the material so noticed or unless such
materials are already a matter of public record. This restriction
shall not apply to advice from the Board's Solicitor.
G. Advisory reviews. The Zoning Hearing Board may request that the
Planning Commission, County Conservation District or City Engineer
provide an advisory review on any matter before the Board.
H. Initiation of hearings. A hearing required under this chapter shall be
initiated within 60 days of the date of an applicant's request for a
hearing, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of
time. A request for a hearing by an applicant shall not be accepted prior
to submission of a duly filed application.
I. Decision/findings.
(1) The Board shall render a written decision or make written findings
(when no decision is called for) on each application within 45 days
after the last hearing on that application before the Board, unless
the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.
(2) Where the application is contested or denied, the decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons for such conclusions.
(3) Any conclusion based on any provision of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code or of this chapter should contain a
reference to the provision relied on.
J. Notice of decision. A copy of the final decision or a copy of the findings
(when no decision is called for) shall be personally delivered or mailed
to the applicant or his/her representative at their last known address
not later than the time limit established by § 907 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.151
151. Editor's Note:See 53 P.S. § 10907.
§ 445-12 SCRANTON CODE § 445-12
441:1048
§ 445-13. Appeals.
§ 445-14. Public utility exemptions.
See § 619 of the State Planning Code.152
§ 445-15. Limited City exemption.
The minimum lot area requirements of this chapter shall not apply to uses
or structures owned by the City of Scranton for uses and structures that
are intended for a legitimate governmental, recycling, public recreation,
stormwater control or public health and safety purpose.
§ 445-16. Site plan review procedures for certain uses.
K. Solicitor conflict.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor shall not represent private
clients in cases before the Zoning Hearing Board or the Planning
Commission.
(2) If a conflict of interest exists for the Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor
on a particular application before such Board, the Zoning Hearing
Board Solicitor shall notify the Chairperson of the Board at least
seven days before the scheduled hearing date.
(3) The City Council may appoint an alternate solicitor to the Zoning
Hearing Board to serve as needed for a specific application or for a
term of office.
A. In general. All appeals of activities and approvals within the jurisdiction
of this chapter shall conform with Article X-A, Appeals to Court, of the
State Planning Code.
B. Procedural defects in enactment. Allegations that this chapter or any
amendment was enacted in a procedural defective manner shall be
appealed directly to the court and be filed not later than 30 days from
the intended effective date of this chapter or an amendment.
C. To the Zoning Hearing Board. Appeals to the Board shall comply with
§ 445-12, Board hearings and decisions.
A. When site plan required. A separate site plan review by the Planning
Commission is required for any of the following uses unless the physical
layout of the use will be approved as a conditional use, a subdivision or
a land development.
(1) Any new construction, reconstruction or expansion of more than
2,500 square feet in the floor area of one of the following types:
(a) Industrial, apartment, office or commercial building.
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10619.
§ 445-12 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-16
441:1049
§ 445-17. Submission requirements for site plan review.
The following information, as applicable, shall be submitted by the applicant
for any conditional use or any use required to submit a site plan under
§ 445-16 or 445-18, except for information waived by the Zoning Officer as
not applicable or necessary:
(b) School, place of worship or institutional building.
(c) Raising of livestock as a principal use.
(2) Any new or expanded impervious area of greater than 10,000
square feet, such as a parking lot.
(3) Conversion of a principal residential building to a principal
nonresidential use.
(4) Any change from one principal nonresidential use to a different
type of principal nonresidential use that would require the addition
of 10 or more off-street parking spaces beyond what would have
been previously required.
B. Site plan procedures. The following procedures shall be followed for
any use required to be reviewed under this section:
(1) Submission. Ten complete copies of any required site plan shall be
submitted to the City. The Zoning Officer shall refuse to accept an
application if it does not contain sufficient information to determine
compliance with this chapter. A minimum of one copy shall be
retained in City files. The site plan shall include the information
listed in § 445-17.
(2) Timing. The applicant shall submit a complete site plan within a
minimum of 15 days prior to the first Planning Commission meeting
at which the site plan is intended to be reviewed. The Planning
Commission shall be given an opportunity to review the site plan
and provide any comments, in writing, to the Zoning Officer within
the time guideline stated in Subsection B(3) below.
(3) Zoning Officer action. The Zoning Officer shall review the site plan
and determine its compliance or noncompliance with this chapter,
based upon his/her review and comments of the Planning
Commission. The Zoning Officer should make such determination
within 60 days after the first scheduled Planning Commission
regular meeting that occurs a minimum of 15 days after the receipt
of a complete site plan submission.
(4) Notice. The City should mail or personally deliver a copy of the
decision to the applicant or his/her representative within 15 days
after such decision. If a proper application is denied, the Zoning
Officer should state the reason(s) for such denial.
C. Compliance with approved plan. See § 445-7H.
§ 445-16 SCRANTON CODE § 445-17
441:1050
A. A statement describing the proposed use.
B. Layout. A site layout drawn to scale (one inch equals 20 feet; one inch
equals 30 feet; one inch equals 40 feet; one inch equals 50 feet; or
another scale preapproved by the Zoning Officer or City Engineer)
showing the location, dimensions and area of each lot; the location,
dimensions and height of proposed and any existing structures; the
required setback areas; the proposed density of residential uses; the
location and width of proposed or abutting streets; and the proposed
areas to be used for different purposes within the development,
including outdoor storage or display areas. If the plan involves one
phase of what eventually may be a larger development, then the
interrelationships of those phases shall be shown.
C. Landscaping. The width of any buffer yard and the heights, spacing and
general species of plants to be used for screening; general numbers,
locations and types of landscaping to be provided in off-street parking
lots, along streets and in other areas.
D. Parking. The locations and numbers of parking spaces; the location and
widths of aisles; the location and sizes of off-street loading areas; and
the method of calculating the off-street parking requirement, based
upon Article VI.
E. Lighting and signs. The height, location and approximate intensity of
exterior lighting; the sign area, height, location and general method of
lighting of signs.
F. Sidewalks. The location of any proposed sidewalks (with width) and
curbing.
G. Utilities. The proposed method of providing wastewater treatment and
water supply (such as public water and public sewage services
extended 100 feet from existing mains).
H. Nuisances and safety. A description of any proposed industrial or
commercial operations or storage in sufficient detail to indicate
potential nuisances and hazards regarding noise, large trucks, glare,
air pollution, odors, dust, fire or toxic or explosive hazards or other
significant hazards to the public health and safety, together with
proposed methods to control such hazards and nuisances.
I. Grading and stormwater. Proposed and existing contours if earth
disturbance is proposed (at two-foot contours or other contours
preapproved by the City Engineer or Zoning Officer); identification of
any slopes between 15% and 25% and greater than 25% that are
proposed to be impacted; the proposed method of managing
stormwater runoff; the delineation of any floodplains from the official
floodplain maps and any wetlands in areas proposed to be disturbed.
§ 445-17 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-17
441:1051
§ 445-18. Conditional use process.
J. Map. A location map showing the relation of the project to surrounding
streets; approximate lot lines of abutting lots within 50 feet of the
project, with identification of abutting land uses.
K. Zoning district and major applicable requirements.
L. Preparer. The name and address of the person who prepared the site
plan (which shall be a registered engineer, architect, landscape
architect or surveyor, who shall certify such plan), the applicant and the
owner of record of the land.
M. Tax map parcel number.
N. Certification of ownership and acknowledgment of plan, signed by the
owner or developer.
O. Applicable signature blocks.
P. Such other data or information as the Zoning Officer deems is
reasonably necessary to determine compliance with City ordinances.
(*NOTE: This information is not required on a zoning site plan if such
information will be submitted on a subdivision or land development
plan for the use or for information that would be approved under a City
stormwater management ordinance adopted pursuant to State Act 167
of 1978.153)
A. Applicability. Certain uses that are permitted by this chapter as
conditional uses shall be required to follow the review and zoning
approval procedures described in this section.
B. Procedure.
(1) Submission.
(a) Twelve complete copies of any required site plan meeting the
requirements of § 445-17 shall be submitted to the City.
(b) The Zoning Officer shall refuse to accept an incomplete
application which does not provide sufficient information to
determine compliance with this chapter.
(2) Distribution. The City shall distribute copies of the site plan to the
Planning Commission and the City Council. A minimum of one copy
shall be retained in the City files. The City Fire Bureau should be
given an opportunity for a review, if deemed appropriate by the
Zoning Officer.
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Stormwater Management, and 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., the
Storm Water Management Act.
§ 445-17 SCRANTON CODE § 445-18
441:1052
(3) Zoning Officer review. The Zoning Officer shall report, in writing or
in person, to the Planning Commission or the City Council stating
whether the proposal complies with this chapter. The Zoning
Officer may request a review by the City Engineer.
(4) Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall be given an
opportunity to review the conditional use application and submit a
recommendation to the City Council.
(5) Council action.
(a) The City Council shall not act to approve or deny a conditional
use application unless:
[1] The Council has received the reports of the Zoning Officer
and the Planning Commission; or
[2] Unless a period of at least 45 days has passed from the
date of the application.
(b) The City Council shall approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the conditional use submission within a maximum
of 45 days after the conclusion of the last hearing, unless the
applicant has agreed to a written time extension.
(c) In granting a conditional use, the City Council may require
such reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to
those expressed in this chapter) as it determines are necessary
to implement the purposes of this chapter.
(d) The decision of the City Council shall be in writing and shall be
directly communicated to, delivered to or mailed to the last
known address of the applicant or his/her representative.
C. Approval of conditional uses. The City Council shall approve any
proposed conditional use if it finds adequate evidence that the proposed
use will:
(1) Meet any specific standards for the proposed use listed in § 445-34
or 445-35.
(2) Meet other applicable sections of this chapter.
(3) Generally be capable of meeting applicable sections of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.154
(4) Comply with all of the following standards:
(a) Other laws. Will not clearly be in conflict with other City
ordinances or state or federal laws or regulations known to the
City. The City may require an applicant to prove compliance or
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 423, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 445-18 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-18
441:1053
§ 445-19. Special exception use process.
to prove that appropriate applications have been submitted to
obtain such compliance.
(b) Traffic. Will not result in or significantly add to a significant
traffic hazard or significant net increase in traffic congestion,
after taking into any improvements proposed to be funded or
completed by the applicant.
(c) Safety. Will not create a significant public safety hazard,
including fire, toxic or explosive hazards.
(d) Stormwater management. Will follow adequate, professionally
accepted engineering methods to manage stormwater.
Stormwater shall not be a criteria of a decision under this
chapter if the application clearly would be subject to a
separate engineering review and an approval of stormwater
management under the City Stormwater Management
Ordinance.155
(e) Neighborhood. Will not significantly negatively affect the
desirable character of an existing residential neighborhood.
(f) Site planning. Will involve adequate site design methods,
including plant screening and setbacks as needed to avoid
significant negative impacts on adjacent uses.
(g) Performance standards. Will not have a serious threat of
inability to comply with the performance standards of this
chapter, as stated in Article V.
A. Purpose. The special exception process is designed to allow careful
review of uses that have some potential of conflicts with adjacent uses
or areas.
B. Special exception procedure.
(1) All applicants for a special exception use shall submit seven sets of
site plans for the proposed use to the Secretary to the Zoning
Hearing Board, together with a written application. The Zoning
Officer may waive the site plan requirement for home occupations
that are not intense and other uses not involving new buildings nor
additional off-street parking. Photographs of the existing site or
buildings may also be requested to be presented by the applicant.
(2) All site plans shall contain the information required in § 445-7C.
(3) City procedures.
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Stormwater Management.
§ 445-18 SCRANTON CODE § 445-19
441:1054
(a) The City shall forward the application to the Zoning Hearing
Board, the Planning Commission (except for a home
occupation) and the Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor. A
minimum of one copy shall be retained in the City files.
(b) The Zoning Officer should, prior to the next Zoning Hearing
Board meeting where the application will be discussed, review
the plan to determine compliance with this chapter and report
these findings to the Zoning Hearing Board.
(4) Planning Commission review of special exception uses.
(a) The Planning Commission shall be provided with an
opportunity to review any proposed special exception use,
other than a home occupation, at a regular meeting prior to a
decision by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Commission, at its
option, may provide a written advisory review at its next
regular meeting.
(b) At the option of the Commission, this advisory review may take
the place of any site plan review that may be required under
§ 445-16.
(c) Timing. If such report is not received within the time limit
within which the Board must issue a decision or within 30 days
of such application being sent to the Planning Commission,
then the Board may make a decision without having received
comments from the Planning Commission.
(5) Zoning Hearing Board action on special exception uses.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide such request for a special
exception use under the procedures of Article I and of the State
Planning Code.
(b) The Board shall schedule the first hearing within 60 days of
submittal of a proper application, unless granted a written
extension by the applicant. The Board shall issue a decision
within 45 days after the conclusion of the final hearing on the
matter.
(c) The decision of the Board shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant or his/her representative in
accordance with Article I.
C. Approval of special exception uses. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
approve any proposed special exception use if it finds adequate
evidence that any proposed use will meet:
(1) All of the standards listed in § 445-18C(4).
(2) Specific standards for the proposed use listed in §§ 445-34 and
445-35.
§ 445-19 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-19
441:1055
§ 445-20. Site planning guidelines.
The following advisory guidelines are intended to assist applicants and the
City in developing well-planned developments:
§ 445-21. Liability.
(3) All other applicable requirements of this chapter.
D. Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Board may require such
reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to those expressed in
this chapter) as it determines is necessary to implement the purposes of
this chapter. Conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
automatically become conditions of the construction permit issued
pursuant thereto, and any failure to comply with said conditions shall
be a violation of this chapter.
A. Natural features. Seek to minimize grading changes and removal of
mature trees; seek to preserve the natural beauty of highly visible
areas; seek to preserve land along creeks and steep hillsides.
B. Circulation. Seek to separate pedestrian circulation from major routes
of vehicle traffic; minimize the number of access points along major
roads; avoid parking spaces backing into through traffic routes; ensure
adequate capacity of driveways and drive-through lanes to avoid traffic
backing onto streets.
C. Utilities. Seek to place as many utility lines as possible underground.
D. Signs. Seek to minimize the lighting intensity of signs; seek to avoid
signs with overly bright, less attractive colors; consider use of groundmounted
or wooden signs.
E. Compatibility. Seek to locate noisier and less compatible uses (such as
loading docks) as far away from homes as possible; seek to screen out
views of less attractive activities from streets and homes.
A. Neither the approval nor the granting of any review, issuance of a
permit or approval related to construction, activity within the
floodplain, site plan review, subdivision or land development approval,
erosion control, stormwater runoff, activity on steep slopes or any other
review or permit of this chapter, by an officer, employee, consultant or
agency of the City, shall constitute a representation, guaranty or
warranty of any kind by the City or its employees, officials, consultants
or agencies of the practicality or safety of any structure, use or
subdivision and shall create no liability upon nor a cause of action
against such public body, official, consultant nor employee for any
damage that may result pursuant thereto.
B. If the Zoning Officer mistakenly issues a permit under this chapter, the
City shall not be liable for any later lawful withdrawal of such permit for
valid cause shown.
§ 445-19 SCRANTON CODE § 445-21
441:1056
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 445-22. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
§ 445-23. Terms defined.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABUSED PERSON SHELTER — A nonprofit residential use in which rooms
are provided to serve as a temporary safe and supportive environment for
persons who, because of actual or threatened physical or mental abuse, are
forced to leave their previous living arrangement. Such facilities shall be
designed to provide in-house living for persons only until a safe, permanent
living arrangement can be obtained.
ABUT — Areas of contiguous lots that share a common lot line, except not
including lots entirely separated by a street or a perennial waterway. See
definition of "adjacent."
A. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. "Used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building include the
words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
C. "Should" means that it is strongly encouraged but is not mandatory.
D. "Sale" shall also include rental.
E. The singular shall include the plural, and vice versa. The masculine
gender shall include the feminine and neuter, and vice versa.
F. If a word is not defined in this chapter, but is defined in the City
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,156 as amended, the
definition in that ordinance shall apply. If a word is defined in both this
chapter and another City ordinance, each definition shall apply to the
provisions of each applicable ordinance.
G. Any word or term not defined in this chapter or in the City Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, as amended, shall be used with the
meaning of standard usage within the context of the section.
H. The words "such as," "includes," "including" and "specifically" shall
provide examples. These examples shall not, by themselves, limit a
provision to the examples specifically mentioned if other examples
would otherwise comply with the provision.
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 423, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 445-22 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1057
ACCESS DRIVE OR ACCESSWAY — A privately owned, constructed and
maintained vehicular access roadway accessing more than one dwelling
unit or more than one commercial, institutional or industrial principal use.
See also "driveway."
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building (such as a private garage, private
toolshed, children's playhouse or noncommercial greenhouse) which is
subordinate and accessory to a principal building on the same lot and which
is used for purposes that are clearly customarily incidental to the use of the
principal building. A portion of a principal building used for an accessory
use shall not be considered an accessory building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, such as a private garage or
private swimming pool, serving a purpose customarily incidental to the
use of the principal building and located on the same lot as the principal
building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use
or building. See lists of permitted by right accessory uses in § 445-29. See
also definition of "residential accessory structure."
ACCESS POINT — One combined entrance/exit point or one clearly defined
entrance point separated from another clearly defined exit point. This term
shall not include accessways or driveways that are strictly and clearly
limited to use by only emergency vehicles; such accesses are permitted by
right as needed.
ACRE — Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet.
ADJACENT — Contiguous lots that share a common lot line or that are
separated only by a street or waterway.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or token-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors or
other image-production devices are maintained to show images of five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE —
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one
or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict
or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1058
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — A use providing supervised care and
assistance primarily to persons who are over age 60 and not in good
physical health or suffering from Alzheimer's disease or are
developmentally handicapped and/or are physically handicapped and who
need such daily assistance because of such condition. This use shall not
include persons who need oversight because of behavior that is criminal
or violent. This use may involve occasional overnight stays, but shall not
primarily be a residential use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than
a total of 60 hours per week per person.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT USE OR FACILITY — A commercial use
(including but not limited to a use selling food or beverages) including live
entertainment involving:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as "adult bookstore" or "adult
video store." Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt
such commercial establishment from being categorized as an "adult
bookstore" or "adult video store" so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
B.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "adult bookstore" shall
include but not be limited to an adult video store.
C.
Persons (which may include, but is not limited to, waiters, waitresses,
dancers, clerks, bartenders, contractors or others) appearing in a state
of nudity;
A.
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or simulated or actual specified sexual activities; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult-type of photographic reproductions; or
A.
Offers sleeping rooms for rent four or more times in one calendar day
during five or more calendar days in any continuous thirty-day period.
B.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1059
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
ADULT USE — The same meaning as a "sexually oriented business."
AFTER-HOURS CLUB — A commercial use or membership club that permits
the consumption of alcohol and is routinely open between the hours of 2:00
a.m. to 4:00 a.m., in addition to any other hours. See State Act 219 of 1990
which generally prohibits this use.
AGRICULTURE — Crop farming, plant nursery and raising of livestock; see
definition of each. This use shall not include fertilizer manufacturing or
tanneries.
ALLEY OR COURT — A public thoroughfare having a right-of-way width of
20 feet or less.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in
the existing facilities of a building or structure or any enlargement thereof,
whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height or the moving
of such structure from one location to another. See § 445-7B regarding
types of alterations not regulated by this chapter.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — An indoor commercial use with four or more
electronic machines for amusement or entertainment, with such machines
activated by the use of tokens or coins. The use of three or fewer of
such devices shall be a permitted accessory use to any lawful principal
commercial use. This shall not include an adult video store, which is a
distinct use.
ANTENNA, HOUSEHOLD — A device, partially or wholly exterior to a
building, that is used for receiving and/or transmitting electronic signals or
shortwave or citizens band radio frequencies. This includes any accessory
supporting structures. See also "commercial communications antenna,"
which is a distinct separate use.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling" types.
APPLICANT — The person(s), company, partnership, profit or nonprofit
corporation or trust responsible for a particular application for an approval
or permit under this chapter and his/her heirs, successors and assigns.
AUDITORIUM, COMMERCIAL — A commercial area or structure involving
indoor or outdoor space for exhibits, meetings, live performances or sports
events, but not a use that meets the definition of a "movie theater," "adult
live entertainment use" or "standard or fast-food restaurant."
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1060
AUTO, BOAT AND/OR MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SALES — A
building or area, other than a street, used for the outdoor or indoor display,
sale or rental of a total of two or more of the following in operable condition:
motor vehicles, recreation vehicles, boat trailers, farm machinery,
motorcycles, trucks, utility trailers, construction vehicles or boats or
transportable mobile/manufactured homes in a livable condition. This use
may include an auto repair garage as an accessory use, provided that all
requirements of such use are complied with. This use shall not include a
mobile/manufactured home park or a junkyard.
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE — A building and/or land where repairs,
improvements and installation of parts and accessories for motor vehicles
and/or boats are conducted that involves work that is more intense in
character than work permitted under the definition of "auto service station."
An auto repair garage shall include, but not be limited to, any use that
involves any of the following work: major mechanical or body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding or rebuilding of
transmissions. In addition, any use permitted as part of an auto service
station is also permitted as part of an auto repair garage. This use shall not
include a use meeting the definition of a "truck stop."
AUTO SERVICE STATION — A building and/or land where gasoline is sold
and where no repairs are conducted, except work that may be conducted
that is closely similar in character to the following: sale and installation
of oil, lubricants, windshield wipers, batteries and belts and similar
accessories; safety and emission inspections; tuning up engines and
radiator flushing. This use may include the sale of ready-to-eat food for
consumption off the lot and of common household products as a clearly
accessory use. An accessory use providing only motor fuel to vehicles
operated by that business shall not be considered to be an auto service
station. This use shall not include a use meeting the definition of a "truck
stop." See storage limits in § 445-34.
AUTO WRECKING — See "junkyard."
AVERAGE LOT AREA — See "lot area, average."
BASEMENT — An enclosed floor area partly or wholly underground, other
than a building which is completely underground.
Except as provided for in Subsection B below, a basement shall be
considered a story if:
The majority of the basement has a clearance from floor to ceiling
of 6.5 feet or greater; and
(1)
The roof of the basement is an average of four or more feet above
the finished grade of the front side of the building (which shall be
considered a side that faces onto a street).
(2)
A.
If a basement forms the primary portion of a dwelling unit, then such
basement shall be considered to be a story.
B.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1061
BASILICA — One of the seven main churches of Rome, or another Roman
Catholic church that has been accorded the same religious privileges. In
addition to a civic hall for Christian worship, a basilica may include a
monastery in the form of a two-story home, a plaza at the front entrance of
the basilica, off-street parking, a rear entrance to the basilica, a dining room
where visitors may gather, a shrine center, offices and a small television
studio to permit services to be broadcast to a national congregation of
elderly and infirmed parishioners.[Added 1-4-1999 by Ord. No.
115-1998]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST USE — The use of a single-family detached dwelling
and/or accessory structure which includes the rental of overnight sleeping
accommodations and bathroom access for a maximum of 10 temporary
guests at any one time (except as otherwise provided for in this chapter)
and which does not provide any cooking facilities or provision of meals
for guests other than breakfast. This use shall only include a use renting
facilities for a maximum of 14 consecutive days to any person(s) and shall
be restricted to transient visitors of the area.
BETTING USE — A use where lawful gambling activities are conducted,
including but not limited to offtrack parimutuel betting. This term shall not
include betting under the state lottery programs or betting under the small
games of chance provisions of state law, which shall instead be regulated
under the regulations applicable to the principal use of the property (such
as a membership club).
BILLBOARD — See "sign, off-premises."
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the City of Scranton.
BOARDINGHOUSE OR ROOMING HOUSE —
A residential use in which any or all of the following applies:
Individual room(s) that do not meet the definition of a lawful
dwelling unit are rented for habitation by a total of two or more
persons who are not related to the owner of record of the property;
(1)
A dwelling unit that includes a greater than the permitted
maximum number of unrelated persons (see the definition of
"family"); or
(2)
If individual units of living space not meeting the definition of a
lawful dwelling unit are separately rented to person(s) who are not
related to the owner of record of the property.
(3)
A.
A boardinghouse shall not include a use that meets the definition
of the following uses: treatment center, abused person shelter, hotel,
dormitory, motel, life care center, personal care center, bed-andbreakfast
use, group home or nursing home. A college fraternity or
sorority house used as a residence shall be considered a type of
boardinghouse. A boardinghouse may either involve or not involve the
providing of meals to residents.
B.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1062
BOTTLE CLUB — An establishment operated for profit or pecuniary gain
which has a capacity for the assemblage of 20 or more persons and in
which alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed beverages are not legally
sold but where alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed beverages are
either provided by the operator or agents or employees of the operator
for consumption on the premises or are brought into or kept at the
establishment by the patrons or persons assembling there for use and
consumption. The term shall not include a license under the Act of April 12,
1951 (P.L. 90, No. 21) known as the "Liquor Code" or any organization as
set forth in Section 6 of the Act of December 19, 1990 (P.L. 1200, No. 202)
known as the "Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act."[Added
12-29-2003 by Ord. No. 145-2003]
BUFFER YARD —
BUILDING — Any structure having a permanent roof and intended for
the shelter, work area, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, vehicles,
equipment or materials and that has a total area under roof of greater than
50 cubic feet. "Building" is interpreted as including "or part thereof." See
the separate definition of "structure." Any structure involving a permanent
roof (such as a covered porch or a carport) that is attached to a principal
building shall be considered to be part of that principal building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage obtained by dividing the
maximum horizontal area in square feet of all principal and accessory
buildings and attached structures covered by a permanent roof on a lot by
the total lot area of the lot upon which the buildings are located.
BUILDING LENGTH — The horizontal measurement between the two most
distant portions, other than portions measured diagonally, of any one
building or of attached buildings.
BUILDING LINE OR BUILDING SETBACK LINE — See "setback line."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building used for the conduct of the principal
use of a lot and which is not an accessory building.
BUILDING WIDTH — The horizontal measurement between two structural
walls of one building that are generally parallel, measured in one general
direction that is most closely parallel to the required lot width. For a
townhouse, this width shall be the width of each dwelling unit.
This use shall only involve renting living accommodations for minimum
periods of five consecutive days. See "hotel or motel."
C.
A strip of land that:
(1) Separates one use from another use or feature; and
Is not occupied by any building, parking, outdoor storage or any
use other than open space or approved pedestrian pathways.
(2)
A.
A buffer yard may be a part of the minimum setback distance, but land
within an existing street right-of-way shall not be used to meet a buffer
yard requirement.
B.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1063
BULK RECYCLING CENTER — A use involving the bulk commercial
collection, separation and/or processing of types of waste materials found in
the typical household for some productive reuse, but which does not involve
the actual processing or recycling of hazardous or toxic substances and
which does not primarily involve the processing of nonrecycled solid waste,
unless the use also meets the applicable requirements for a solid waste
transfer facility. This definition shall not include a junkyard.
BULK STORAGE — Storage beyond what is reasonably needed for
customary use on-site. This includes storage of substances intended to be
sold or resold for use off-site.
CAMPGROUND — A use other than a treatment center or a mobile home
park that is primarily recreational in nature and that involves the use of:
CARE AND TREATMENT CENTER FOR CHILDREN — A use involving
residential and/or outpatient counseling and support facilities for persons
under the age of 18 who primarily need such special services because of
emotional or behavior concerns or because of inadequate care provided by
their families. Such facilities may also include counseling facilities for the
families of the youth. Such facilities may also include the following types
of facilities for persons under age 18: group homes, recreation facilities,
child day-care centers, educational facilities and support facilities for offsite
programs.
CARPORT — A roofed building intended for the storage of one or more
motor vehicles, but which is not enclosed on all sides by walls or doors.
If any portion of a carport is attached to a principal building, it shall be
considered to be part of that building.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street designed for vehicular traffic and
on-street parking, but not including the shoulder of the street.
CELLAR — See "basement."
CEMETERY — Land or buildings used for the burial of deceased humans,
but not animals. The internment or scattering of remains of properly
cremated humans is not regulated by this chapter.
CHAIRPERSON — Includes Chairman, Chairwoman, Chair and Acting
Chairperson (when applicable).
CHRISTMAS TREE FARM OR TREE FARM — A type of crop farming
involving the raising and harvesting of evergreen trees for commercial
purposes. This may include the retail sale of trees from November 10 to
December 30 that were produced on the premises.
CITY — City of Scranton, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Scranton.
Tents or sites leased for occupied recreational vehicles for transient
and seasonal occupancy by persons recreating or traveling; or
A.
Tents or cabins for seasonal occupancy by organized groups of persons
under age 18 and their counselors.
B.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1064
CLEAR CUTTING — A logging method that removes all trees or the vast
majority of all trees from a tract of land or a portion thereof.
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY — An institution of higher learning authorized
to grant associate, bachelor's, master's and/or doctorate degrees. For
nondegree institutions, see "trade school."
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE — A structure, partially
or wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or retransmitting
electronic signals. Commercial communications towers include, but are not
limited to, antenna used for transmitting commercial radio or television
signals or cellular telephone communications, but shall be distinct from the
use entitled "antenna."
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — The C-G, C-N and C-D Zoning Districts.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — See § 445-56.
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION — A use that:
COMMERCIAL USE — Retail sales, offices, personal services, car washes,
auto sales, auto repair garages, amusement arcade, adult use and other
uses of a closely similar nature. The sale of goods or services from a vehicle
on a lot shall also be considered to be a commercial use.
COMMISSION OR PLANNING COMMISSION — The City Planning
Commission of the City of Scranton.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A noncommercial use that exists solely to provide
leisure and educational activities and programs to the general public or
certain age groups. The use also may include the noncommercial
preparation and/or provision of meals to low-income elderly persons. This
shall not include residential uses or a treatment center.
COMPOSTING — The collection and processing of vegetative material to
allow it to biologically decompose under controlled anaerobic or aerobic
conditions to yield a humus-like product.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The document entitled the "Scranton City
Comprehensive Plan," also known as the "Master Plan," or any part thereof,
adopted by the City Council, as amended.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is allowed or denied by the City Council
within the provisions of Article I, after review by the Planning Commission.
CONDOMINIUM — A set of individual dwelling units or other areas of
buildings, each owned by an individual person(s) in fee simple, with such
owners assigned a proportionate interest in the remainder of the real estate
which is designated for common ownership, and which was created under
the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of 1963 (at the time such law was in
A. Has a total building coverage of less than 15%;
Is used principally for active or passive recreation (such as a driving
range); and
B.
C. Is used for a profit-making purpose.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1065
effect) or is/was created under the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act
of 1980, as amended.157
CONSTRUCTION — Includes the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastening in a temporary or permanent position
and/or the demolition of a preexisting building.
CONVENIENCE STORE, MAJOR — A use that primarily sells routine
household goods, groceries and prepared ready-to-eat foods to the general
public, but that is not primarily a restaurant, and that includes a building
with a floor area of more than 2,000 square feet but less than 5,000 square
feet and which also includes the on-site sale of gasoline. Other types of
convenience stores shall be regulated as a retail store.
CONVERSION — To change or adapt land or structures to a different use.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY — A facility operated by the County of
Lackawanna, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States
government to incarcerate persons who have been sentenced by a court of
law or a parole board to involuntarily spend time in such facility or who are
being incarcerated while awaiting trial or sentencing. See also "treatment
center."
COUNTY — The County of Lackawanna, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CROP FARMING — The cultivating, raising and harvesting of products of
the soil and the storage of these products produced on the premises. The
definition of "crop farming" shall also include orchards and Christmas tree
farms, but shall not include animal husbandry, commercial forestry, riding
academies or kennels. If a crop farming lot includes more than 15 acres, it
may also include the keeping of up to 10 additional animals as a permitted
accessory use, in addition to what is permitted under the keeping of pets in
§ 445-35.
CULTURAL CENTER OR LIBRARY — A building and/or land open to the
public which primarily contains exhibits of clearly artistic or cultural
interest, such as a museum, library, art gallery or indoor nature study area.
This shall not include uses that are primarily commercial in nature.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — A proposed zoning amendment made to the
City Council by any landowner who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of an ordinance which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which they have an interest.
DANCE HALL — An establishment operated for profit or pecuniary gain
which has the capacity for the assemblage of 20 or more persons for
dancing, regardless of whether dancing is the primary or intended purpose
of the building, establishment or place of assembly, and alcoholic liquors,
alcohol or malt or brewed beverages are either provided by the operator
or agents or employees of the operator for consumption on the premises
or are brought into or kept at the establishment by the patrons or persons
assembling there for use and consumption. The term shall not include an
157. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1066
establishment that has a valid license for the sale of alcohol pursuant to
the Liquor Code, 47, P.S. § 1-101 et seq.[Added 12-29-2003 by Ord. No.
145-2003]
DAY CARE, CHILD — A use involving the supervised care of children under
age 16 outside of the children's own home primarily for periods of less than
18 hours during the average day. This use may also include educational
programs that are supplementary to state-required education, including a
nursery school. The following three types of day care are permitted without
regulation by this chapter: care of children by their own relatives, care
of children within a place of worship during regularly scheduled weekly
religious services and care of one to three children within any dwelling
unit, in addition to children who are relatives of the care giver. See also the
definition of "adult day-care center."
DAYS — Calendar days.
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units proposed on a lot divided by
the lot area, unless otherwise stated.
D.E.P — (or DEP) -- The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, or its successor, and its relevant subparts.
DETACHED BUILDING — A building that is surrounded on all sides by open
yards and that is not attached to any other building.
DEVELOPMENT — Construction, erection or expansion of a structure or
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
The term also includes, but is not limited to, any activities defined as land
development under the Scranton City Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
DISTRIBUTION — The processing of materials so as to sort out which
finished goods are to be transported to different locations and the loading
and unloading of such goods. This use usually involves inventory control,
material handling, order administration and packaging. This term shall not
include a trucking company terminal.
DISTRICT (OR “ZONING DISTRICT”) — A land area within the City within
which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DORMITORY — Residential facilities that are only inhabited by teaching
faculty and/or full-time students of an accredited college, university or
medical training facility or state-licensed teaching hospital, or an approved
care and treatment center for children (as an accessory use to such use)
CHILD) DAY CARE, AS AN ACCESSORY USE — A type of day care use
that provides care for six or fewer children at one time who are not
relatives of the care giver. See § 445-35.
A.
CHILD) DAY CARE CENTER, AS A PRINCIPAL USE — A type of day
care use that provides care for seven or more children at any one time
who are not relatives of the primary operator. See § 445-35. See also
day care as an accessory use of a business under § 445-29D.
B.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1067
or to an accredited public or private primary or secondary school, and
which are owned and operated by such principal use to which the dormitory
serves. Lawful dwelling units shall not be regulated as dormitories.
DRIVEWAY — A privately owned, constructed and maintained vehicular
access from a street or access drive to only one dwelling unit, commercial
unit, institutional or industrial principal use. See also "access drive."
DUMP — A use involving the unlawful deposit of solid waste or junk onto or
into the ground or waters, which is prohibited in all districts.
DWELLING — A building used as nontransient living quarters, but not
including a boardinghouse, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, shelter
or dormitory. A dwelling may include a use that meets the definition of
a "sectional home." This chapter categorizes dwellings into the following
types:[Amended 5-20-1998 by Ord. No. 46-1998]
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A new dwelling unit created within an
existing building within the standards of Article IV and where permitted
by Article III and meeting the floor area requirements of Article VIII.
A.
LOW-RISE APARTMENTS — Three or more dwelling units within a
building that are separated by only horizontal floors or by a
combination of horizontal floors and vertical walls (see definition of
"townhouses"). This shall include buildings with a maximum height of
3 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lesser. The individual dwelling
units may be leased or sold for condominium ownership.
B.
MID-RISE APARTMENTS — Three or more dwelling units within a
building with a height greater than 35 feet or 3 1/2 stories and less than
the maximum height permitted in the district.
C.
SECTIONAL HOME (also commonly called a "modular home") — - A
type of dwelling that:
Meets a definition of "single-family detached dwelling," "singlefamily
semidetached dwelling," "townhouse" or "low-rise
apartment";
(1)
Is substantially but not wholly produced in two or more major
sections off the site and then is assembled and completed on the
site;
(2)
(3) Does not meet the definition of a "mobile/manufactured home";
(4) Is supported structurally by its exterior walls; and
(5) That rests on a permanent foundation.
D.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — One dwelling unit in one
building accommodating only one family and having open areas on all
sides.
E.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1068
DWELLING UNIT — A single habitable living unit occupied by only one
family. See the definition of "family." Each dwelling unit shall have its own
toilet, bath or shower, sink, sleeping and cooking facilities and separate
access to the outside or to a common hallway or balcony that connects to
outside access at ground level. No dwelling unit shall include a separate
living area that is completely separated by interior walls so as to prevent
interior access from the remainder of the living area. No dwelling unit may
include more than one kitchen, except:
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — A type of single-family
detached dwelling that meets all of the following requirements: is
transportable, is designed for permanent occupancy, is contained
in a single piece or two substantial pieces designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated
towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, is constructed so that it may be used with or without
a permanent foundation, is not a recreation vehicle, and includes
a minimum of 300 square feet of interior floor space. The terms
"mobile home" and manufactured home" have the same meaning.
See the definition of "sectional home."
(1)
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING OR HALF OF A TWIN
DWELLING — One dwelling unit accommodating one family that is
attached to and completely separated by a vertical unpierced fireresistant
wall to only one additional dwelling unit. One side yard shall
be adjacent to each dwelling unit. This use is commonly known as 1/
2 of a duplex. Each unit may or may not be on a separate lot, unless
otherwise specified.
F.
TOWNHOUSE — One dwelling unit that is attached to two or more
dwelling units and with each dwelling unit being completely separated
from and attached to each other by unpierced vertical fire-resistant
walls. Each dwelling unit shall have its own outside access. Side yards
shall be adjacent to each end unit. Townhouses are also commonly
referred to as "row houses" or "single-family attached dwellings."
G.
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — Two dwelling units
accommodating one family each, with both dwelling units within a
single building on a single lot, and without the dwelling units being
completely separated by a vertical wall. The building shall have two
side yards.
H.
Cooking facilities may be located in two abutting rooms that open onto
each other;
A.
If a kitchen was installed prior to the adoption of this chapter under a
valid City building permit;
B.
C. As permitted as a unit for care of relative; or
D. As may be permitted under the home occupation provisions.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1069
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another
and for a specified purpose of any designated part of the owner's property.
EMERGENCY SERVICES STATION — A building for the housing of fire,
emergency medical or police equipment and for related activities. A
membership club may be included if it is a permitted use in that district.
This may include housing for emergency personnel while on-call.
EMPLOYEES — The highest number of workers (including both part-time
and full-time, both compensated and volunteer and both employees and
contractors) at work on a lot at any one time, other than clearly temporary
and occasional persons working on physical improvements to the site.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Utility or municipal uses that are necessary
for the preservation of the public health and safety and that are routine,
customary and appropriate to the character of the area in which they are to
be located. See standards in § 445-29. Essential services shall not include
a central sewage treatment plant, a solid waste disposal area or facility,
commercial communications towers, a power-generating station, sludge
disposal, utility company offices, storage of trucks or equipment or bulk
storage of materials.
EXERCISE CLUB — A facility that offers indoor or outdoor recreational
facilities, such as the following: weight rooms, exercise equipment,
nonhousehold pool and racquetball courts.
FAMILY — One or more persons living in a single dwelling unit and
functioning as a common household unit sharing household expenses and
sharing joint use of the entire dwelling unit. If a dwelling unit is rented, in
order to qualify as a family, there shall not be more than one lease among
all of the occupants. A family shall not include more than four persons who
are not related to each other (see definition in Article II). See provisions in
§ 445-34 regarding maximum number of unrelated persons within a group
home. A treatment center shall not be considered a family or a group home.
See also the definition of a "dwelling unit."
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation,
an enclosure or a visual barrier and which is constructed of wood, chain
link metal, fiberglass, vinyl or aluminum and/or plastic inserts. Man-made
barriers constructed principally of masonry, concrete, cinder block or
similar mostly solid materials shall be considered a wall. The term "wall"
does not include engineering retaining walls, which are permitted uses as
needed in all districts. The terms "fence" and "wall" do not include hedges,
trees or shrubs.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1070
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — An establishment primarily involved with
loans and monetary, not material, transactions and that has routine
interactions with the public.
FLOODPLAIN (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR) — See definitions in Article V,
§ 445-51, of this chapter entitled "Flood-prone areas."
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The portion of the floor area (as defined
above) that is heated and that includes a minimum of one door or window
open to the outside within each room so included.
FLOOR AREA OR GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total floor space within
a building(s) measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from
the center lines of walls separating buildings. Floor area shall specifically
include, but not be limited to, fully enclosed porches and basement or
cellar or attic space that is potentially habitable and has a minimum head
clearance of at least six feet eight inches. Floor area specifically shall
not include the following: elevator shafts, common stairwells within an
apartment building or unenclosed porches, decks or breezeways.
FORESTRY, COMMERCIAL — The harvesting of more than 25 live trees
with a trunk width of six inches or more at a height four feet above the
average ground level on any tract or lot within a calendar year. This term
shall not apply to the following, which are permitted by right uses in all
districts:
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY — A type of boardinghouse used and occupied
by a formal, legally incorporated cooperative organization (with each full
member having a vote in the operations of the organization) of full-time
college or university students. Such use may contain residential, social and
eating facilities for members and their occasional guests.
GARAGE, PRIVATE OR HOUSEHOLD — An enclosed building for the
storage of one or more motor vehicles. No business, occupation or service
shall be conducted in a private garage that is accessory to a dwelling,
except as may be allowed as a home occupation. The rental to a person(s)
who does not reside on the property of storage space that would
accommodate more than three cars or for commercial purposes shall be
regulated as a business use.
GARAGE SALE — The accessory use of a noncommercial lot for the
occasional sale or auction of only common household goods and furniture
and items of a closely similar character. See § 445-34.
Cutting of trees that involve less than 20% of all trees on one or more
abutting lots with a trunk width of greater than six inches;
A.
B. Cutting of trees with a trunk width less than six inches;
C. Cutting of fewer than 25 such trees in a calendar year;
D. Christmas tree farms; or
Clearing of portions of a lot that is clearly the minimum necessary for
construction.
E.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1071
GATED COMMUNITY OR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY — A
coordinated residential development on a tract of land having a minimum of
50 acres (prior to postdevelopment sales), the majority acreage of which is
located in a residential-cluster zone (R-1C), which tract is to be developed
and maintained by a single developer or its successor property owner
association, having one or more controlled access points as its only access,
whereby said single developer or its successor property owner association
would be responsible for road maintenance, garbage collection, snow
removal and utility installation within said community. Said community may
consist of single family detached dwellings, single family semidetached
dwellings, townhouses, condominiums and shared ownership facilities, or
any combination thereof.[Added 1-29-1997 by Ord. No. 148-1996]
GLARE — A sensation of brightness within the visual field which causes
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance, visibility and/or ability
to focus.
GROUP HOME — The use of any lawful dwelling unit which meets all of the
following criteria:
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Those wastes where significant potential exists
for causing adverse public health or environmental impacts if the waste
is handled, stored, transported, treated or disposed of in a manner
customarily accepted for ordinary solid wastes. This also includes wastes
subject to special state or federal licensing or regulation, including but
Involves the care of the maximum number of persons permitted by the
group home standards of § 445-34 and meets all other standards of
such section.
A.
B. Involves persons functioning as a common household.
Involves providing nonroutine support services and oversight to
persons who need such assistance to avoid being placed within an
institution, because of physical disability, old age, mental retardation
or other handicap* as defined by applicable federal law. (*NOTE: As
of 1992, the Federal Fair Housing Act defined "handicap" as follows:
"1) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of such person's major life activities, 2) a record of having such
an impairment, or 3) being regarded as having such an impairment,
but such terms does not include current, illegal use of or addiction
to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21." A
use that would otherwise meet the definition of "group home" but
which includes more than the permitted number of residents shall be
considered an "institutional group home," which is a distinct use.)
C.
D. Does not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
Does not involve the housing or treatment of persons who could
reasonably be considered a threat to the physical safety of others.
E.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1072
not limited through the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act,158 as
amended.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the average proposed ground level along the front of the building to the
highest point of a structure, including any roof. For a building with a pitched
roof, such height shall be measured to midpoint of the eave and the ridge,
provided that such area above the maximum height is not habitable. See
exemptions for certain types of structures in § 445-73. For height of signs,
see Article VII, entitled "Signs."
HELIPORT — An area used for the takeoff and landing of helicopters,
together with any related support facilities such as for maintenance,
refueling and storage. This chapter is not intended to regulate the
nonroutine emergency landing and takeoff of aircraft to pick up seriously
injured or ill persons.
HOME OCCUPATION — A routine, accessory and customary nonresidential
use conducted within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or
its permitted accessory building that:[Amended 5-20-1998 by Ord. No.
46-1998]
HOME OCCUPATION, GENERAL —
PUBLIC HELIPORT — A heliport that does not meet the definition of a
"private heliport."
A.
PRIVATE HELIPORT — A heliport limited to a maximum total of 15
flights or takeoffs in any seven-day period (in addition to flights
necessary for emergency medical purposes) and that is not available for
use by the general public. This is also known as a "helistop."
B.
A. Is conducted primarily by a permanent resident of the dwelling.
Meets the definition, standards and limitations of a "general home
occupation" or a "light home occupation" within the following
definitions and § 445-35.
B.
Only includes uses that are clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal residential use.
C.
Does not include any retail or wholesale sales on the premises (other
than over the phone and through the mail) nor any industrial use (other
than custom crafts and sewing) nor a treatment center.
D.
Specifically does not include the following: hotel, motel, nursing home,
homeless shelter, boardinghouse, restaurant, stable, kennel, auto
repair, retail sales, painting of vehicles, tractor repair, lawn mower
and engine repair, manufacturing (other than custom crafts) or bulk
welding.
E.
A. A type of home occupation that:
158. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1073
HOME OCCUPATION, LIGHT —
HOSPITAL — A use involving the diagnosis, treatment or other medical or
hospice care of humans that includes, but is not limited to, care requiring
stays overnight. See "medical office or clinic" for a medical care use that
does not involve any stays overnight. A hospital may involve care and
rehabilitation for medical, dental or mental health, but shall not primarily
include housing or treatment of the criminally insane or persons actively
Only involves persons working on the premises who are permanent
residents of the dwelling, plus a maximum of two nonresidents
working on the premises at any one point in time;
(1)
Does not meet the definition and standards of a light home
occupation; and
(2)
(3) Meets the standards of § 445-35.
This use typically requires approval by the Zoning Hearing Board under
Article III.
B.
A type of home occupation that:
Only involves persons working on the premises or routinely
operating from the premises who are permanent residents of the
dwelling;
(1)
Does not involve more persons regularly visiting the premises for
business purposes than specified in § 445-35, but instead primarily
involves the operator(s) of the use visiting clients at their home or
business;
(2)
Is limited to only the following types of activities:
Office-type work (such as writing, editing, drafting, tax
preparation, computer programming and computer data
inputting);
(a)
Clerical work (such as typing, stenography, addressing and
sending mail);
(b)
(c) Costume sewing and fabric crafts;
Creation of visual arts that does not involve an industrial scale
(such as custom painting, sculpture or wood carving);
(d)
(e) Sales and surveys over a telephone; or
A use that only involves receiving mail and telephone calls onsite;
(f)
(3)
(4) Meets the standards of § 445-35.
A.
This use typically does not require Zoning Hearing Board approval
under Article III.
B.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1074
serving an official sentence after being convicted of a felony. A hospital may
also involve medical research and training for health care professions. See
standards in § 445-29.
HOTEL OR MOTEL — A building or buildings including rooms rented out
to persons as clearly transient and temporary living quarters. Any such
use that customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time
longer than 30 days shall be considered a boardinghouse and shall meet the
requirements of that use. See also "bed-and-breakfast use." A hotel or motel
may include a restaurant, banquet rooms, conference rooms, nightclub,
newsstand or tavern, provided that such uses are clearly accessory to the
principal use of overnight accommodations. A hotel or motel may also be
developed in combination with other commercial uses that are permitted in
that district, provided that the regulations of those uses are also complied
with.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The total area of all impervious surfaces on a
lot (including building coverage) divided by the total lot area.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Area covered by roofs, concrete, asphalt or
other manmade cover which has a coefficient of runoff of seven-tenths (0.7)
or higher. The City Engineer shall decide any dispute over whether an area
is impervious. Areas of land paved for the sole purpose of noncommercial
tennis courts, trails or basketball courts or closely similar active outdoor
recreation may be deleted from impervious surfaces for the purposes of
determining permitted impervious coverage, unless those areas would also
be used for nonrecreational uses (such as parking).
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS — The I-L and I-G Districts.
INDUSTRIAL USE — Includes manufacturing, distribution, warehousing
and other operations of an industrial and not primarily of a commercial,
institutional or residential nature.
INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS — The INS-L and INS-G Districts.
JUICE BAR — A commercial establishment which does not routinely
primarily serve full meals but which serves juices, soft drinks or other
beverages to patrons or which rents to patrons tables or other spaces
for the patrons, who bring alcoholic beverages of any kind for their own
consumption.
Areas being voluntarily dedicated as common open space may be
included in the acreage for determining impervious coverage of an
adjoining lot.
A.
The nonimpervious coverage may be partially or wholly met by land
that abuts the use, even if such land is in a different zoning district, an
adjoining municipality and/or an abutting lot, if such land will be deed
restricted as permanent open space and be so clearly stated on official
recorded plans. In such case, such land shall be properly maintained by
the abutting use.
B.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1075
JUNK — Any discarded, unusable, scrap or abandoned man-made or manprocessed
material or articles, such as the following types: metal, furniture,
rags, pipes, appliances, motor vehicle parts, aircraft, glass, plastics,
machinery, equipment, crates, containers and building materials (except
building materials actively being used for construction). Junk shall not
include:
JUNK VEHICLE — Includes any motor vehicle or trailer that meets any of
the following conditions:
JUNKYARD —
KENNEL — The keeping of a greater number of dogs or cats on a lot or
within a dwelling unit beyond that number permitted under the keeping
Solid waste that is temporarily stored as is customary in an appropriate
container that is routinely awaiting collection and disposed of in a
manner consistent with state regulations;
A.
B. Toxic wastes;
C. Grass clippings, leaves or tree limbs; or
D. Items clearly awaiting imminent recycling at an approved recycling use.
Does not display a license plate with a current registration sticker and
does not have a valid state safety inspection sticker (except for licensed
antique cars not required to have an inspection sticker) (licenses or
inspection stickers that expired less than 90 days ago shall be
considered current for the purposes of this subsection);
A.
B. Has been demolished beyond repair;
C. Has been separated from its axles, body or chassis; and/or
Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis, separated
from the remainder of the vehicle.
D.
Land or a structure used for the collection, storage, dismantling,
processing, buying, selling, handling, wrecking and/or salvaging, other
than within a completely enclosed building, of material of one or more
of the following types:
(1) Junk (see definition);
More than one junk vehicle or the parts thereof (this shall not
apply to such vehicles allowed to be stored within the specific
requirements of an auto repair garage or auto service station); or
(2)
Two or more mobile/manufactured homes that are not in a
habitable condition.
(3)
A.
Junk stored within a completely enclosed building for business
purposes shall be considered a warehouse and shall be regulated as a
warehouse.
B.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1076
of pets or the crop farming provisions of this chapter. A nonprofit animal
shelter is a type of kennel.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LANDOWNER — The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of a written, signed and active option or contract to
purchase or a person leasing the property (if authorized under the lease
to exercise the right of the landowner and if such lease is for a remaining
period of at least 12 months), or authorized officers of a partnership or
corporation that is a landowner or other person having a proprietary
interest in land. A person who has clearly received formal notarized powers
of attorney relating to a landowner may act in the capacity of the landowner,
if legally authorized.
LIVESTOCK, RAISING OF — The raising and keeping of livestock, poultry
or insects for any commercial purposes or the keeping of any animals for
any reason beyond what is allowed under the keeping of pets provisions of
§ 445-35 and beyond what is allowed within the definition of "crop farming."
The raising of livestock shall not include:
LOT — A separate parcel of land that is recorded or that will be recorded
after City final subdivision approval in the office of the County Recorder of
As defined by the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(As of 1992, this definition included the following: The improvement of
one or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose
involving either or both of the following: a group of two or more
residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or
cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division or
allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between
or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or
for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.)
A.
In addition, land development shall specifically not include the
following:
The construction of only one accessory agricultural building that
is not intended for the storage of animal wastes or the storage or
feeding of animals; or
(1)
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
an existing single-family semidetached dwelling [one-half (1/2) of a
twin] into two or three total dwelling units.
(2)
B.
A. A slaughterhouse;
B. A stockyard used for the housing of animals awaiting slaughter;
C. A tannery; or
D. A mink farm.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1077
Deeds. A parcel under common ownership that is completely separated into
two parts by a public street shall be considered (to be one tract but two
lots).
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area contained within the lot lines of a lot
(measured in acres or square feet), but excluding the following:
LOT AREA, AVERAGE — The total of the lot areas (see above) of all adjacent
lots in common ownership within a proposed subdivision or land
development divided by the proposed number of dwelling units.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets which
has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of right-of-way
lines of two streets. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve at the points beginning
within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the
street lines intersect at an angle of less than 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and the
rear lot lines, measured through the approximate center of the lot.
LOT, FLAG — An irregularly shaped lot characterized by an elongated
extension from a street to the principal part of the lot. The flag shape of the
lot is normally intended to provide for access to an otherwise landlocked
interior parcel. See § 445-72.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot. Wherever a property line
borders a public street, the lot line shall be considered to be the existing
street right-of-way.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot that abuts two approximately parallel
streets, but only has access onto one street.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that abuts two approximately parallel streets.
Areas within the existing legal rights-of-way of any proposed or existing
public streets or alleys/courts;
A.
Areas that are currently dedicated or will be required to be dedicated
as common open space; or
B.
Areas within rights-of-way intended for overhead electrical lines of
35 kilovolts or higher capacity, which shall only be excluded for the
purposes of determining minimum lot area for residential lots.
C.
FRONT LOT LINE (STREET LINE) — A lot line separating the lot from
the existing street right-of-way.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — A lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. (A three-sided lot has no rear lot line.)
B.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side
street lot line is a side lot line separating a lot from a street.
C.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1078
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at the minimum prescribed front yard setback line, unless otherwise stated.
In the event of a curved lot line, the lot width shall be measured using a
straight line from end to end.
LOW-RISE APARTMENT — See definition under "dwelling."
MANUFACTURE — The making, with substantial use of machinery, of some
product for sale and/or associated assembly, fabrication, cleaning, testing,
processing, recycling, packaging, conversion, production, distribution and
repair, with substantial use of machinery, of products for sale. This term
shall not include the following: retail sales, personal services, solid waste
disposal facility or trucking company terminal.
MASSAGE — The performance of manipulative exercises using the hands
and/or a mechanical or bathing device on a person(s)'s skin, other than
the face or neck, by another person(s), that is related to certain monetary
compensation, and which does not involve persons who are related to
each other by blood, adoption, marriage or official guardianship. See also
"personal services."
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment that meets all of the following
criteria:
MATERNITY SHELTER — A nonprofit residential use in which rooms are
provided to serve as a temporary, safe and supportive environment for
persons who, for varied physical and mental reasons, are forced to leave
their previous living arrangements.[Added 5-20-1998 by Ord. No.
46-1998]
MEDICAL OFFICE OR CLINIC — A use involving the treatment and
examination of patients by state-licensed physicians, chiropractors or
dentists, provided that no patients shall be kept overnight on the premises
unless a hospital is also permitted. This use may involve the testing of
tissue, blood or other human materials for medical or dental purposes.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — An area of land or building used by a recreational,
civic, social, fraternal, religious, political or labor union association of
persons for meetings and routine socializing and recreation that are limited
to bona fide members and their occasional guests and persons specifically
invited to special celebrations, but which is not routinely open to members
A. Massages are conducted (see definition);
The person conducting the massage is not licensed as a health care
professional or a licensed massage therapist by the state;
B.
The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital, nursing
home, personal care center or office of a medical doctor or
chiropractor;
C.
D. The massages are conducted within private or semiprivate rooms; and
The use is not clearly a customary and incidental accessory use to a
permitted exercise club or to a high school or college athletic program.
E.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1079
of the general public and which is not primarily operated as a for-profit
business. The club shall involve a meaningful and substantial membership
system, as opposed to a token system. This use shall not include a target
range for outdoor shooting, a boardinghouse, a tavern, a restaurant or an
auditorium unless that particular use is permitted in that district and the
requirements of that use are met. See also "after-hours club" in this Article.
MINERAL EXTRACTION — The removal from the surface or beneath the
surface of the land of bulk mineral resources using significant machinery.
Mineral extraction includes but is not limited to the extraction of sand,
gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone, clay, coal, shale or iron ore. The
routine movement of and replacement of topsoil during construction shall
not by itself be considered mineral extraction. The reclamation of waste
piles from mining activities conducted prior to the adoption of this chapter
shall be permitted by right in all districts and shall not be considered
mineral extraction.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — See "dwelling" types.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two
or more mobile/manufactured homes for nontransient residential use. The
individual manufactured homes may be individually owned. A development
of mobile/manufactured homes that is subdivided into individual lots shall
be regulated in the same manner as a subdivision of site-built homes and
shall not be considered to be a mobile home park.
MOTEL — See "hotel."
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE OR STATE PLANNING CODE — The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by
Act 170 of 1988, and as may be further amended.159
NATURE PRESERVE — A noncommercial preservation of land for providing
wildlife habitats, forests or scenic natural features that involves no
buildings other than a nature education and/or study center and customary
maintenance buildings.
NIGHTCLUB — A tavern or restaurant that:
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not conform with the minimum
lot width or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is
Has a primary or substantial portion of the total trade in the sale of
alcoholic beverages;
A.
Frequently charges admission or cover charges for entertainment or
music for dancing;
B.
Has a capacity of more than 150 persons for such entertainment or
dancing; and
C.
D. Is not a sexually oriented business.
159. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1080
situated, but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter or is legally established through the granting of a variance by the
Zoning Hearing Board, and which is not abutted by other undeveloped land
owned by the same owner.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable lot area, dimensional
and other provisions in this chapter, as amended, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or applicable
amendment. Such nonconforming structures include but are not limited to
signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendments heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or applicable
amendment.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast.
NURSING HOME — A facility licensed by the state for the housing and
intermediate or fully-skilled nursing care of three or more persons needing
such care because of old age or a physical illness or disability or a
developmental disability, but not including a treatment center.
OFFICE — A use that involves administrative, clerical, financial,
governmental or professional operations and operations of a similar
character. This use shall include neither retail nor industrial uses, but may
include business offices, medical or dental offices, clinics or laboratories,
photographic studios and/or television or radio broadcasting studios.
OFFICIAL MAP — Any official map that may be adopted or amended by the
City Council in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.160
OFFICIAL STREET CLASSIFICATION MAP — The map adopted as part
of this chapter classifying the streets of the City. See definition of "street
classification." This map may be amended by resolution of the City Council.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map as adopted by the City Council which
designates the location and boundaries of zoning districts.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land within a tract which
meets all of the following standards:
Is designed, intended and suitable for active or passive recreation by
residents of a development or the general public;
A.
160. Editor's Note: The Official Map is on file in the City offices.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1081
ORDINANCE [CHAPTER], THIS — The City of Scranton Zoning Ordinance,
including the Official Zoning Map and Official Street Classification Map, as
amended.
PARKING — Off-street parking and aisles for vehicles unless otherwise
stated.
PAVED AREA — All areas covered by gravel and/or impervious surfaces,
other than areas covered by buildings, bicycle paths and pedestrian
sidewalks.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or its
successor, and its subparts.
PERMIT — A document issued by the proper City authority authorizing the
applicant to undertake certain activities.
If not intended to be publicly owned, is covered by a system for
perpetual maintenance;
B.
Will be deeded to the City and/or deed restricted to permanently
prevent uses of land other than common open space and
noncommercial recreation; and
C.
Does not use any of the following areas to meet minimum open space
requirements:
(1) Existing street rights-of-way;
(2) Vehicle accessways;
Buildings (other than accessory buildings and pools clearly
intended for noncommercial recreation);
(3)
Off-street parking (other than that clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation);
(4)
(5) Any area needed to meet a requirement for an individual lot;
Any area deeded over to an individual property owner for his/her
own use; or
(6)
Land with rights-of-way intended eventually for overhead electrical
transmission of 35 kilovolts or greater capacity.
(7)
D.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit that may be issued indicating that a
proposed use, building or structure is, to the best knowledge of the
City staff, in accordance with this chapter and which authorizes an
applicant to proceed with said use, building or structure, within all
other applicable laws and regulations. For the purposes of this chapter,
a "zoning permit" or "a permit under this chapter" shall mean the
applicable portions of a construction permit, unless a specific system of
zoning permits has been established.
A.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1082
PERMITTED BY RIGHT USES — Uses that do not have to be approved as
uses by the Zoning Hearing Board or the City Council. (A site plan review
by the Planning Commission and the City Council is required for certain
permitted by right uses to ensure that the use would comply with all City
ordinances.) A nonconforming use shall not be considered to be a permitted
use.
PERSONAL CARE HOME OR CENTER — A residential use providing
residential and support services primarily to persons who are over age
60, physically handicapped and/or the developmentally disabled and that is
licensed as a personal care center by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and that does not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
PERSONAL SERVICE — An establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs of the general public and which does not involve primarily
retail or wholesale sales or services to businesses. Personal services include
barber- and beauty shops, state-licensed massage therapists, photography
studios, shoe repair shops, household appliance repair shops and other
similar establishments, but shall not include any adult uses.
PETS, KEEPING OF — The keeping of domestic animals that are normally
considered to be kept in conjunction with a dwelling for the pleasures of
the resident family. This shall include dogs, cats, birds, hamsters, gerbils,
rabbits and other animals commonly sold in retail pet shops. See standards
in § 445-35.
PLACES OF WORSHIP — Buildings, synagogues, churches, religious
retreats, monasteries, seminaries and shrines used primarily for religious
and/or spiritual worship and that are operated for nonprofit and
noncommercial purposes. A place of worship may include two dwelling units
as an accessory use to house full-time religious leaders and their families. If
a religious use is primarily residential in nature, it shall be regulated under
the appropriate dwelling type.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of
Scranton.
PLANT NURSERY — The indoor and/or outdoor raising of trees, plants,
shrubs or flowers for sale, but not primarily including commercial forestry
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A permit indicating that a proposed
construction, alteration or reconstruction of a structure is, to the best
knowledge of the City staff, in accordance with the provisions of the
building code(s) adopted by the City.161
B.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit that may be required by the City that
is issued upon completion of the construction of a structure or change
in use of a structure or parcel of land or reoccupancy of a structure or
land indicating that the premises, to the best knowledge of the Building
and Zoning Officers, comply with the provisions of City ordinances. This
shall have the same meaning as a certificate of use and occupancy.
C.
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Building Construction.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1083
for lumber. A plant nursery may include the growth of trees for sale for
internal decoration of homes, such as a Christmas tree farm.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which the principal use of a lot is
conducted. Any building that is physically attached to a principal building
shall be considered part of that principal building.
PRINCIPAL USE — A dominant use(s) or main use on a lot, as opposed to an
accessory use.
PROPERTY LINE — The same meaning as "lot line."
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency or the
City of Scranton School District.
PUBLICLY OWNED RECREATION — Land and/or facilities that are owned
by a government agency or the City and are available for use by the general
public for leisure and recreation.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is designed primarily to
transport a person for primarily recreational, instead of transportation,
purposes or a vehicle that serves as a mobile, temporary dwelling. This may
include a vehicle that is self-propelled, towed or carried by another vehicle,
but shall not include camper cabs that fit over pickup trucks. This term
shall also include the following: watercraft other than canoes with a hull
longer than 12 feet, motor homes, travel trailers, all-terrain vehicles and
snowmobiles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE AREA — An outdoor area used for the
storage of three or more recreational vehicles. Retail sales or major repair
work shall only be allowed if those uses are permitted in that zoning district.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — Leisure-time uses that are principally
operated for commercial purposes and are open to the general public.
RECREATION, PRIVATE — Noncommercial leisure-time uses that are only
open to members, guests or some specific group.
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER — A use for collection and temporary
storage of more than 500 pounds of common household materials for
recycling, but that does not involve processing or recycling other than
routine sorting, baling and weighing of materials. This term shall not
include the indoor storage of less than 500 pounds of household recyclables
and their customary collection, which is a permitted by right accessory use
in all zoning districts, without additional regulations. A recycling collection
center is also a permitted by right accessory use to a public or private
primary or secondary school, a place of worship, a City-owned use, an
emergency services station or a college or university.
RELATED OR RELATIVE — Persons who are related by blood, marriage,
adoption or formal foster relationship to result in one of the following
relationships: brother, sister, parent, child, grandparent, great-grandparent,
grandchild, great-grandchild, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, sister-in-law,
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1084
brother-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law or first cousin; shall not include
relationships such as second, third or fourth cousins.
REPAIR OF HOUSEHOLD ITEMS — Shops for the repair of appliances,
watches, guns, televisions, bicycles and other household items.
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A use or
structure that is clearly accessory, customary and incidental to a principal
residential use on a lot, including the following uses and uses that are very
similar in nature: garage (household), carport, tennis court, garage sale,
basketball backboard, household swimming pool, volleyball court, gazebo,
storage shed, greenhouse, children's playhouse and children's play
equipment. For skateboard ramps, see residential accessory structure
standards in § 445-35.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — The C-R, R-1, R-1C, R-1A, R-2, R-3 and R-2/O
Zoning Districts.
RESIDENTIAL LOT LINES —
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD —
The lot line of a lot that:
Contains an existing single-family detached dwelling, single-family
semidetached dwelling or townhouse on a lot of less than three
acres; or
(1)
Is undeveloped and zoned as a residential district and is not
approved for a principal nonresidential use.
(2)
A.
Additional setbacks and buffer yard requirements from a residential lot
line shall not apply if:
The lot(s) partially or wholly within 75 feet of the lot that would be
required to provide the buffer yard or additional setback currently
have the same owner as the lot that would be required to provide
the buffer yard or additional setback; or
(1)
Where an institutional use would be required to provide the buffer
yard or additional setback and the lot(s) partially or wholly within
75 feet of the lot that would be required to provide the buffer yard
of additional setback are owned by a similar institutional use.
(2)
B.
An establishment that sells ready-to-consume food or drink, that
routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion of such food
on the premises and that does not meet the definition of a "standard
restaurant."
A.
A fast-food restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic
beverages. However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion of
the total trade, the requirements of a tavern or nightclub as applicable
must be met.
B.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1085
RESTAURANT, STANDARD —
RETAIL STORE — A use in which merchandise is sold or rented to the
general public, but not including the following: sales of motor vehicles
or boats, adult movie theater, adult bookstore, manufacturing, tavern, car
wash, auto service station, auto repair garage, convenience store or any
restaurant.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for the public or others for use as a street
or other purpose. Unless otherwise stated, "right-of-way" shall mean the
existing street right-of-way line.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
SANITARY LANDFILL (OR “SOLID WASTE LANDFILL”) — A type of solid
waste disposal area involving the depositing of solid waste on land,
compacting the waste, covering the waste with soil and then compacting
the soil, and which has a permit to operate as a sanitary landfill from the
state.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA OR SATELLITE ANTENNA — A ground-based
reflector, usually parabolic in shape, that receives electronic signals from a
satellite. This term shall also include any pedestal or attached structure.
A restaurant shall not include a use meeting the definition of a
"nightclub" or an "after-hours club."
C.
An establishment that serves ready-to-consume food or drink for
compensation in which the clear majority of sales involve the following:
the customers order their food from a waiter or waitress while seated
inside a building and then the food is delivered to the customer's table
while the customers are seated and then the food is consumed at the
table.
A.
A standard restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic
beverages. However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion of
the total trade, the requirements of a tavern must be met.
B.
A restaurant shall not include a use meeting the definition of a
"nightclub" or an "after-hours club."
C.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING OR LEGAL — The line separating a lot from
the established official street right-of-way that either the City or the
commonwealth will own after the completion of any proposed
subdivision, land development or development of a use under this
chapter.
A.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, FUTURE — Land that may be dedicated or reserved
for future dedication for use as a street and for related public
improvements. The terms "ultimate right-of-way," "right-of-way
reserved for future dedication" and "future right-of-way" shall have the
same meaning. If a future right-of-way is not required to be defined,
then "future right-of-way" shall have the same meaning as "existing
right-of-way."
B.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1086
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY SCHOOL — An
educational institution primarily for persons between the ages of five and 19
that primarily provides state-required or largely state-funded educational
programs. This term shall not include trade schools (such as privately
operated schools of trade, vocation or business).
SELF-STORAGE DEVELOPMENT — A building or group of buildings divided
into individual separate access units which are rented or leased for the
storage of personal and small business property.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SETBACK LINE —
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system to collect, treat and dispose of
sewage. No such system shall be permitted that does not comply with local,
state and federal requirements.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
The line within a lot defining the required minimum distance between
any structure to be erected or use to be developed and the adjacent
existing street right-of-way or exterior lot line (when the property is not
abutted by a right-of-way). Such line shall be measured at right angles
from and parallel to the front lot line.
A.
Any building setbacks shall be measured from the foundation, exterior
wall or other component of a structure that is closest to the right-ofway
line or lot line from which the setback is being measured. See
exceptions for eaves and cornices in § 445-74B.
B.
Unless otherwise stated, setback distances are for both accessory and
principal structures.
C.
Private streets. For a building setback measured from a private street,
the setback shall be measured from the existing right-of-way of such a
street, if a right-of-way exists. If a private street does not have a rightof-
way, the setback shall be measured from the edge of the cartway.
D.
Public sewer service. Service at the time of occupancy of a use by a
central sewage treatment plant that is owned by the City or a municipal
authority.
A.
On-lot or nonpublic sewer service. Any form of sewage service
permitted under local, state and federal law that does not meet the
definition of "public sewer service."
B.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex
A.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1087
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult live entertainment use, adult motel, adult motionpicture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, massage parlor, nude model
studio or sexual encounter center. See definitions of each term in this
Article.
SHARED OWNERSHIP FACILITY — A hotel whose individual units may
be sold as residential units. Each residential unit may have one owner or
multiple owners.[Added 1-29-1997 by Ord. No. 148-1996]
SHOPPING CENTER — A use involving five or more retail or personal
service uses or establishments and that primarily involves retail sales. If two
or more abutting lots each include five or more retail sales uses and are
developed under common or closely related ownership, then those lots shall
together be considered as one shopping center. A shopping center may also
include a mix of permitted office and/or commercial recreation uses.
SIGHT DISTANCE — An area required to be kept free of visual obstruction.
See § 445-74.
SIGN — Any physical device for visual communication that is used for the
purpose of attracting attention from the public and that is visible from
beyond an exterior lot line, including all symbols, words, models, displays,
banners, flags, devices or representations. This shall not include displays
that only involve symbols that are clearly and entirely religious in nature
and which do not include advertising. See definitions of types of signs in
§§ 445-60 and 445-68.
SIGN AREA — See § 445-68.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign which directs attention to an object,
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business
that is primarily offered or located at a location other than the lot upon
which the sign is located.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — Review of a site plan by the Planning Commission
that is required for certain uses under Article I.
SLAUGHTERHOUSE — A use involving the killing of animals for the
production of food or some other commercial product. A commercial
stockyard or similar facility that primarily involves the bulk storage or
transferring of animals on the way to slaughter shall also be considered a
slaughterhouse. This shall not include a custom butcher shop that does not
involve killing of animals (which is a retail sales use).
SLOPE — The vertical change of an area of land divided by the horizontal
change, measured in percent.
SOLICITOR — Unless otherwise stated, the appointed City of Scranton
Solicitor or his/her deputy, as authorized.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
B.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1088
SOLID WASTE —
SOLID WASTE FACILITY —
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY — Any property where solid waste (as
defined by the applicable state rules and regulations in Title 25, Chapter
271, of the Pennsylvania Code or the successor section) is stored or
temporarily stored for any purpose by vehicle, storage container or any
other means, except that storage containers for the solid waste generated
on and located on a specific site (such as trash cans and dumpsters) and
solid waste on the immediate property of its ultimate disposal (such as
a properly permitted sanitary landfill) shall not be considered a transfer
facility for the purpose of this chapter. This shall include, but not be limited
to, uses meeting the definition of a "solid waste transfer facility" in Title
25 of Pennsylvania DEP regulations or the successor section. This use shall
also include but not be limited to an intransit" facility.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use for which the Zoning Hearing Board may
grant permission following a public hearing and findings of fact consistent
with this chapter, provided that the use complies with the conditions and
standards required by this chapter. See § 445-19.
Any garbage, refuse, sewage sludge or other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, institutional, public, household, commercial
or mining activities.
A.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following materials shall not be
considered to be solid waste:
(1) Portions of trees or shrubs, leaves, mulch and rocks;
Substances legally disposed of into the air or water through a
federal or state pollution discharge permit;
(2)
Customary residual wastes from a permitted mineral extraction
use; or
(3)
Materials of a character such as paper, plastic, aluminum and metal
that have been separated from the waste stream for recycling.
(4)
B.
Land or structures where solid waste is processed, incinerated or
disposed of or where coal culm waste is incinerated. This shall only
include the following facilities, each of which shall be required to have
all permits required by the state in place prior to initiation of the use:
sanitary landfill, solid waste transfer facility or waste-to-energy facility
(see separate definitions).
A.
The following uses for the purposes of this chapter shall not be
considered to be a solid waste disposal facility: junkyard, recycling
collection center, leaf composting, clean fill or septage or sludge
application on land.
B.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1089
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — The male genitals and/or the vulva and
labia of the female genitals.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes one or more of the following:
STABLE, NONHOUSEHOLD — Keeping of more than two horses, which
may include a commercial or private riding club. The housing of one or
two horses shall be considered an accessory use under the keeping of pets
provisions (see § 445-35).
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its agencies.
STATE PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania State Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988 and as may be
further amended.162
STORAGE SHED — An enclosed accessory building maintained primarily for
the convenience of the occupant(s) of the principal building on the lot and
which is not used for the housing of a motor vehicle.
STORY (AND HALF-STORY) — A level of a building routinely accessible
to humans having an average vertical clearance six feet or greater shall
be considered a full story, except as provided for in the definition of
"basement." Any level of a building having an average vertical clearance
from floor to ceiling of less than six feet shall be considered a half-story.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which provides the principal
means of access to abutting lots or that is an expressway, but not including
an alley or a driveway. The terms "street," "highway" and "road" have the
same meaning and are used interchangeably.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — The functional classification of streets into
the following types, as shown on the Official Street Classification Map
(attached to Ordinance No. 74-1993), for existing streets and as determined
by the City Engineer for future streets:
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts.
A.
B. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral sex or sodomy.
C. Human masturbation, actual or simulated.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in A through C above.
D.
EXPRESSWAY — Designed for large volumes and high-speed traffic
with access limited to grade-separated intersections.
A.
ARTERIAL STREET — Designed for large volumes and high-speed
traffic with access to abutting properties restricted.
B.
COLLECTOR STREET — Designed to carry a moderate volume of traffic
to intercept local (residential) streets, to provide routes to minor
C.
162. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1090
STREET, PROPOSED — A street which is planned in a proposed subdivision
or land development plan or approved within a subdivision or land
development plan, but not yet open to traffic.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on, below or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land,
subject to the following specific standards:
SUBDIVISION — As defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended. (As of 1993, this definition was as follows:
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OR SUBDIVISION AND LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE — The City of Scranton Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as amended.163
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%,
as the floor areas exist on the date of enactment of this chapter.
SWIMMING POOL, HOUSEHOLD OR PRIVATE — A man-made area with
walls of man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches
deep for bathing or swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of
only one dwelling unit and their occasional guests.
arterial streets and to community facilities and to provide access to the
abutting properties.
LOCAL STREET — Designed to provide access to the abutting
properties and a route to collector routes.
D.
The following specifically shall be considered to be structures:
buildings, signs, stadiums, platforms, communications towers,
walkways, porches or decks that are covered by a permanent structure;
swimming pools (whether above or below ground); storage sheds,
carports and garages.
A.
Any structure shall be subject to the principal or accessory setbacks
of this chapter, as applicable, unless specifically exempted or unless a
specific setback is established for that particular type of structure by
this chapter.
B.
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
A.
The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or residential dwellings is not a subdivision.)
B.
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. 423, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1091
SWIMMING POOL, NONHOUSEHOLD —
TAVERN — A place where alcoholic beverages are served as a primary or
substantial portion of the total trade and which does not meet the definition
of a "nightclub" or an "after-hours club." The sale of food may also occur.
See also the definition of "restaurant."
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
motion pictures or theatrical or performing arts productions as a principal
use, but not including an outdoor drive-in theater or adult movie theater.
TIRE STORAGE, BULK — The storage of more than 250 tires on a lot, except
for manufacture or wholesale or retail sales of new tires.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling" types.
TRACT — In certain zoning districts, the tract is the minimum amount of
adjacent land area (which may be separated by alleys, streets or waterways)
within the City that is required to be approved as part of an overall
preliminary subdivision or land development plan in order to allow either
certain types of uses or to allow the creation of lots smaller than a certain
specified lot area. An area of land shall meet the following requirements in
order to be considered a tract:
TRADE SCHOOL — A facility that is primarily intended for education of a
work-related skill or craft or a hobby and that does not primarily provide
state-required education to persons under age 16. This shall include a
dancing school, martial arts school or ceramics school.
A man-made area with walls of man-made materials intended to enclose
water at least 30 inches deep for bathing or swimming and that does
not meet the definition of a "household swimming pool." This includes:
A semipublic pool that serves only residents of a development or
members of a club and their occasional guests; or
(1)
(2) A public pool intended to serve the general public.
A.
See also the provisions for recreational facilities limited to use by
employees of a use or residents of a development as an accessory use,
which may include a swimming pool, at the end of § 445-29.
B.
Shall only include lands within an approved subdivision or land
development plan that includes a well-defined internal circulation
system, maximum coordination between lots and carefully limited
points of vehicular access onto streets exterior to the tract; and
A.
Shall only include lands that at the time of the approval of the
preliminary plan have one landowner (as defined by Article II), unless
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that there
is a legally binding commitment between two or more landowners to
coordinate the access and development of the tract as shown in the
approved preliminary plan.
B.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1092
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
TREATMENT CENTER — A use (other than a prison or a permitted
accessory use in a hospital) providing housing facilities for persons who
need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling for stays in most
cases of less than one year and who need such facilities because of:
TRUCKING COMPANY TERMINAL — A use involving a large variety of
materials, including materials owned by numerous corporations, being
transported to a site to be unloaded primarily from tractor-trailer trucks and
reloaded onto tractor-trailer trucks, and that does not involve substantial
processing or repackaging of the materials. This shall not include a use that
involves the processing or trucking of solid waste.
TRUCK STOP — A commercial use that primarily involves providing fuel and
other services to tractor-trailer trucks. This use may also involve providing
repair services, sale of gifts and various household items, a restaurant,
showers and a motel.
UNIT FOR CARE OF RELATIVE — A living area especially created for
and limited to occupancy by a person who is related (see definition) to
the permanent residents of the principal dwelling unit. Such use shall be
restricted to a relative who needs such accommodations because of old
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house/criminal
transitional living facility or a treatment/housing center for persons
convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol;
A.
Chronic abuse of or addiction to alcohol and/or a controlled substance;
or
B.
A type of mental illness or other behavior that could cause a person to
be a threat to the physical safety of others.
C.
A use that primarily involves either loading materials from tractortrailers
onto smaller trucks or loading materials from smaller trucks
onto tractor-trailers shall be considered a distribution use.
A.
A trucking company terminal may include the following as clearly
accessory uses if they are closely related to the principal use: repair,
washing, refueling and maintenance facilities for trucks using the
terminal, administrative uses for the terminal and rest facilities for
truck drivers using the terminal.
B.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1093
age, developmental disability, illness, mental illness that does not threaten
physical harm to others or physical handicap. See standards in § 445-35.
USE — The purpose, activity, occupation, business or operation for which
land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained;
uses specifically include but are not limited to the following: activity within
a building, activity outside of a building, any structure, recreational vehicle
storage or parking of commercial vehicles on a lot.
VARIANCE — The granting of specific permission by the Zoning Hearing
Board to use, construct, expand or alter land or structures in such a way
that compliance is not required with a specific requirement of this chapter.
Any variance shall only be granted within the limitations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
VETERINARIAN OFFICE — A building routinely used for the treatment of
animals and related housing or boarding of sick animals. Treatment of small
animals includes only small domestic animals, including but not limited
to dogs, cats, birds or fowl. Treatment of large animals includes all types
of animals, including horses, cows and pigs. Housing primarily healthy
animals shall be considered a kennel and shall meet the requirements of
that use.
WALL — See "fence."
WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings primarily used for the
indoor storage, transfer and distribution of products and materials, but not
including retail uses or a truck terminal, unless such uses are specifically
permitted in that zoning district.
WASTE-TO-ENERGY FACILITY — A type of solid waste disposal facility
that utilizes waste (such as trash, sludge, coal, culm waste or any other
nonhazardous commercial, residential or industrial materials) as a fuel to
produce usable energy (such as steam or electricity).
WATER SYSTEM — A system designed to transmit water from a source
to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate state
agencies and the City.
WETLANDS — An area of land and/or water meeting one or more definitions
of a "wetland" under federal and/or Pennsylvania law and/or regulations
(NOTE: As of 1993, the following was the official United States Army Corps
of Engineers' definition of "wetlands": "Those areas that are inundated or
saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
PUBLIC WATER SERVICE — Central water service by a system owned
by the City or a municipal authority and which serves more than 30
dwellings or principal uses.
A.
ON-LOT OR NONPUBLIC WATER SERVICE — Service by a water
system that does not meet the definition of a "public water service." In
most cases, this would involve an individual well serving an individual
lot, but may also include a common well or another duly approved
system.
B.
§ 445-23 SCRANTON CODE § 445-23
441:1094
to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas." Wetlands are
technically defined on the basis of types of vegetation and soils and the level
of the water table below the surface. As of 1992, the United States Army
Corps of Engineers and DEP enforce the wetlands regulations).
WHOLESALE — Sales that primarily involve transactions with other
businesses and their agents and not to the general public.
YARD — An area not covered by buildings and that is on the same lot as the
subject structure or use. Regulations of specific districts prohibit principal
and accessory structures within specified required minimum yards.
YARD, FRONT — A yard measured from the front lot line (which usually is
the existing street right-of-way line), which restricts the closest portion of
the subject structure or use and which extends the full width of the lot from
side lot line to side lot line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full-width of the lot and measured from
the entire length of the rear line, which restricts the closest portion of the
subject structure and which stretches between the side lot lines parallel to
the rear lot line. (A principal building shall not extend into the required rear
yard for a principal building, and an accessory structure shall not extend
into the required rear yard for an accessory structure, except as provided
in this chapter.)
YARD, SIDE — A yard restricting the closest portion of the subject structure,
measured along the entire length of the side lot line and extending from
the front lot line to the rear lot line. A structure shall not extend into the
applicable minimum side yard, except as provided for in this chapter.
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of the City of Scranton,
Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania.164
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer(s) charged with the duty
of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or his/her officially designated
assistant(s).
ZONING ORDINANCE — The City of Scranton Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
The front yard shall be on a side that faces towards a public street,
whenever one public street abuts the lot.
A.
When a lot abuts onto two or more public streets, the applicant may
choose which is the front yard, unless the Zoning Officer determines
that the front yard should follow the clearly predominant front yard
orientation of the development of abutting lots.
B.
No accessory or principal structure shall extend into the required front
yard, except as provided in this chapter.
C.
164. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the City offices.
§ 445-23 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-23
441:1095

ARTICLE III
Districts
§ 445-24. Districts designated.
§ 445-25. Application of district regulations.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Scranton is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts, as described in this chapter:
C-R Conservation - Residential District
R-1 Low Density Residential District
R-1C Low Density Residential - Cluster District
R-1A Medium Low Density Residential District
R-2 Medium Density Residential District
R-2/O Medium Density Residential - Office District (formerly R-4)
R-3 Medium High Density Residential District
C-D Downtown Commercial District (formerly C-2)
C-N Neighborhood Commercial District (formerly C-1)
C-G General Commercial District (formerly C-3)
I-L Light Industrial District (formerly M-1)
I-G General Industrial/Commercial District (formerly M-2)
INS-G General Institutional District
INS-L Light Industrial - Residential District
HD Historic Overlay District (reserved for future use; see the
current City historic preservation ordinance which
addresses designated areas and landmarks)
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the zoning districts named Subsection
A shall be of the number, size, shape and location shown on the Official
Zoning Map. Any use of the abbreviations listed in Subsection A shall
mean the district name that is listed beside the abbreviation.
C. Floodplain. The floodplain area, as defined by this chapter, shall serve
as an overlay area to all of the underlying districts. The documents and
mapping referenced by the floodplain provisions of this chapter, as
amended, are hereby included in this chapter by reference.
A. The regulations set by this chapter shall apply uniformly to each class
or kind of structure or land, except as provided for in this chapter.
B. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be erected, used,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered and no
building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be used or occupied
unless it is in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
use and district in which it is located.
§ 445-24 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-25
441:1097
§ 445-26. Zoning Map.165
§ 445-27. District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
C. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
D. Any territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City shall be
classified as the zoning district of the City most similar to the zoning of
such territory before annexation (as determined by the Zoning Hearing
Board) until otherwise classified.
A. A map entitled "City of Scranton Zoning Map" accompanies this chapter
and is declared, by reference thereto, a part of this chapter. The Official
Zoning Map shall bear the adoption date of this chapter and the words
"Official Zoning Map."
B. Changes of any nature to the Official Zoning Map shall only be made in
conformity with the amendment procedures set forth in this chapter. All
changes should be noted by date with a brief description of the nature
of the change.
C. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning
Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official
Zoning Map shall be located in the City office and shall be the final
authority on boundaries and districts.
(1) If the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or
difficult to interpret because of changes and additions, the City
Council may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which
shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.
(2) The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors
or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such
correction shall include an amendment thereof, unless the
amendment has been duly advertised and adopted.
(3) Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any part or parts thereof
remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
A. Unless otherwise stated on the Zoning Map, zoning district boundary
lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the center line of street/
165. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the City offices.
§ 445-25 SCRANTON CODE § 445-27
441:1098
§ 445-28. Protection of dwellings across municipal boundaries.
§ 445-29. Table of permitted uses by district.
court rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way, waterways and lot lines as
they existed as of January 1, 1992.
(1) All references on the Zoning Map to tax maps are based upon lots,
lot lines, lot depths, lot numbers and tax map numbers that existed
as of January 1, 1992.
(2) Applicants or the City staff may provide recorded deeds, plans of
record in the County Recorder of Deeds' office, official county tax
maps and/or official PennDOT maps to provide evidence in the
determination of exact district boundary lines.
(3) A subsequent change to or deletion of a lot line shall not by itself
cause a change to a zoning district boundary.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions or other
information on the Zoning Map and where the boundary approximately
follows lot lines, such boundary shall be construed to follow such lot
lines as they existed on January 1, 1992, unless specifically shown
otherwise.
C. Where a district boundary is not fixed by information on the Zoning
Map and where the line does not approximately follow lot lines, then the
location of such boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale of
the Zoning Map.
D. Interpretation of boundaries. See § 445-5D.
A. The intent of this section is to continue compatibility of land uses across
municipal boundaries.
B. Where this chapter requires a certain use to provide additional
setbacks and/or a buffer yard if the use abuts an existing dwelling or a
residential zoning district, the same additional setback and/or buffer
requirements shall apply regardless of whether the dwelling or
residential district is located within the City of Scranton or an abutting
municipality.
A. For the purposes of this section, the following abbreviations shall have
the following meanings:
P Permitted by right (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
C Conditional use (decision by the City Council after an opportunity
for review by the Planning Commission)
SE Special exception use (decision by Zoning Hearing Board after an
opportunity for review by the Planning Commission for uses other
than home occupations)
§ 445-27 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-29
441:1099
N Not permitted
(§ 445-34) See additional requirements in § 445-34
(§ 445-35) See additional requirements in § 445-35
B. Unless otherwise provided by law or specifically stated in this chapter
(including § 445-5B), land or structure shall only be used or occupied
for a use specifically listed in this Article as being permitted in the
respective zoning district, as listed below. Any use shall only be
permitted if it complies with all other requirements of this chapter.
Where different requirements are stated for the same use in this
chapter, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. The following
tables of permitted uses are divided into three tables: Residential
Districts, Business Districts and Institutional Districts.166
(1) The uses specified above shall be permitted:
(a) On the same lot and abutting lots within the INS-G District;
and
(b) On portions of the same lot as a hospital that are within a
commercial district.
(2) The above uses shall be owned by and operated under the
supervision of a United States Internal Revenue Service recognized
nonprofit organization.
(3) The above uses shall comply with the nuisance and performance
standards of this chapter.
(4) The above uses shall clearly serve primarily vocational training and
rehabilitation needs of clients and patients of the parent institution.
C. Permitted accessory uses in all districts. The following accessory uses
are permitted by right as accessory uses to a permitted by right, special
exception or conditional principal use in all districts, within the
requirements of § 445-35 and all other requirements of this chapter:
(1) Air-conditioning equipment, other than central equipment for a
commercial or industrial use.
(2) Antennae, household.
(3) Basketball backboard, which may be within a required setback
area, provided that it is a minimum of two feet from any lot line of
an abutting residence.
(4) Crop storage as an accessory use to crop farming.
(5) Family day-care center as an accessory use, within the limits on
number of children in § 445-35 (see standard in § 445-35C).
166. Editor's Note: The permitted uses tables are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 445-29 SCRANTON CODE § 445-29
441:1100
(6) Fence or wall (see standard in § 445-35C).
(7) Flagpole.
(8) Garage, household.
(9) Garage sale (see standard in § 445-35C).
(10) Home gardening.
(11) Indoor storage, limited to materials that are customarily accessory
to a permitted use.
(12)Keeping of pets (see standard in § 445-35C).
(13) Loading, off-street, only to serve a use that is permitted in that
district.
(14) Parking, off-street, only to serve a use that is permitted in that
district.
(15) Recreational facilities limited to use by employees of a lot or a
development and their occasional guests.
(16) Recreational facilities limited to use by residents of a development
and their occasional invited guests.
(17) Recycling collection center as an accessory use to a permitted
principal business or institutional use.
(18) Recreational vehicle, storage of one or two (see standard in
§ 445-35C).
(19) Residential accessory structure (see definition in Article II and
standard in § 445-35C).
(20) Satellite antennae (see standard in § 445-35C).
(21) Signs, as permitted by Article VII.
(22) Solar energy system.
(23) Stable, household (see standard in § 445-35C).
(24) Swimming pool, household.
(25) Tennis/racquetball court.
(26) Volleyball court.
(27)Windmill.
(28) Such other accessory use or structure that the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer is clearly customary and
incidental to a permitted by right, special exception or conditional
principal use.
§ 445-29 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-29
441:1101
D. Permitted accessory uses to business and institutional uses. The
following are permitted by right accessory uses on the same lot as a
lawful commercial, industrial or institutional principal use, provided
that all requirements of this chapter are met:
(1) Up to three amusement machines, coin or token operated (not
including an adult use; see also amusement arcade for four or more
machines).
(2) Food, beverage and toy machines, coin operated.
(3) Newspaper sales machines, coin operated.
(4) Telephones, coin operated.
(5) The following accessory uses are permitted, provided that such use
is clearly limited to employees, patients, residents and families of
employees of the use and their occasional guests:
(a) Cafeteria without drive-through service and without separate
outside entrances or outdoor signs.
(b) Day-care center, child or adult.
(c) Noncommercial recreational facilities.
E. Essential services. The following are essential services that are
permitted by right as a principal or as an accessory use in all districts:
(1) The following essential services are not required to meet the
accessory or principal setback, lot area or other lot requirements of
this chapter, except that any newly created lot shall meet the
applicable lot requirements if future building or subdivision of the
lot would reasonably be possible for a different use:
(a) Oil pipelines and natural gas transmission and distribution
lines and accessory compressing stations.
(b) Electrical transformers as an accessory use to dwellings.
(c) Electrical, telephone and streetlight poles.
(d) Electrical transmission and distribution lines and meters.
(e) Wells, standpipes, water transmission lines, cisterns and
meters.
(f) Sewage pumping stations, but not including a central sewage
treatment plant, provided that such use be set back a minimum
of 75 feet from any dwelling or any residential lot line.
(g) Cable television and telephone lines.
(h) Stormwater pipes, outfalls, detention basins, swales and catch
basins.
§ 445-29 SCRANTON CODE § 445-29
441:1102
(i) Shelters and benches for buses that transport school children
or that are owned, operated or financed by a public transit
authority and that do not include off-premises signs.
(j) United States mailboxes.
(k) Boxes for receiving individual newspapers.
(l) Railroad lines.
(m) Fire hydrants and emergency call boxes.
(n) Engineered retaining walls that are clearly necessary to hold
back slopes.
(o) Sidewalks and curbs.
(p) Residential driveways.
(q) Accessory improvements that are clearly primarily intended to
provide physical access for persons with disabilities, such as
handicapped access ramps.
(r) Ground level porches that are not covered by a permanent
roof.
(s) Steps leading into the entrance of a building.
(t) On-lot septic disposal systems.
(u) Construction. Temporary storage of vehicles and materials
and/or construction office trailers that are clearly needed and
being actively used for current construction during the time of
an active City construction permit on the same or an adjacent
lot or within the same subdivision, provided that such items are
removed from the site within 30 days of completion of the
portion of the construction that they relate to.
(2) The following are permitted essential services and are required
(except within § 445-6) to meet all of the applicable requirements of
this chapter:
(a) Electrical substations and bulk industrial or commercial
transformers that are not an accessory use to dwellings.
Electric substations involving outdoor structures at least 10
feet in height shall be required to provide evergreen screening
within the requirements of § 445-74 on sides that are within
150 feet of a dwelling, undeveloped residentially zoned land or
an expressway or an arterial street.
(b) Water towers (see height exemption in § 445-73), water
filtration plants and pressure stations.
(c) Emergency and other electrical generators and compressors.
§ 445-29 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-29
441:1103
§ 445-30. Table of lot and setback requirements by district.
(d) Solid waste bulk dumpsters and bulk compactors.
(e) Telephone switching stations.
(f) Industrial or commercial central air-conditioning equipment.
A. For the purposes of this section, the following abbreviations shall have
the following meanings:
sq. ft. Square feet
ft. Linear feet
SFD Single-family detached dwelling
Public sewer Service at the time of occupancy by public sewage
service as defined by Article II
Public water Service at the time of occupancy by public water
service as defined by Article II
NA Not applicable
B. The following requirements shall apply for each respective district,
unless a more restrictive requirement is listed for a particular use in
§ 445-34 or 445-35 or elsewhere in this chapter.167
(1) Requirements for the R-1C District. See § 445-31.
(2) Table of requirements for the C-R, R-1 and R-1A Districts.
(3) Table of requirements for the R-2, R-3 and R-2/O Districts for uses
other than manufactured/mobile home parks (for that use see
§ 445-34).
(4) Table of requirements for the C-D, C-N, C-G, I-L and I-G Districts.
(5) Table of requirements for the INS-L and INS-G Districts (other than
residential uses permitted in an R-2 District).
C. See also additional requirements in the following sections:
(1) Additional requirements for specific types of principal uses,
§ 445-34.
(2) Additional requirements for specific types of accessory uses,
§ 445-34.
(3) Off-street parking: Article VI (including paved area setbacks in
§ 445-55).
(4) Signs: Article VII.
167. Editor's Note: The Tables of Lot and Setback Requirements for Subsections B(1) through
(5) are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 445-29 SCRANTON CODE § 445-30
441:1104
§ 445-31. R-1C District.
(5) Buffer yards: § 445-74.
(6) Steeply sloped areas: § 445-40.
(7) Environmental protection: Article V.
(8) Temporary structures: § 445-78.
(9) Site plan review for certain uses: §§ 445-16 and 445-17.
(10) Outdoor storage and display as an accessory use: § 445-34.
A. Purposes. To allow flexible, clustered development of areas with
sensitive natural features such as to:
(1) Avoid severe soil erosion and sedimentation.
(2) Avoid severely increased stormwater flows and speeds, steer
development to those areas that are more physically suited for it.
(3) Avoid construction of steep roads that are difficult, time-consuming
and expensive to maintain and plow snow upon.
(4) Conserve forested areas that are an important part of the
ecological cycle, that provide for groundwater recharge, that
reduce air pollution and that serve as wildlife habitats.
(5) Reduce construction costs while allowing each property owner a
reasonable use of their land, related directly to the natural features
and location and accessibility of the land. In certain cases, this
option will encourage the preservation of significant areas of
common open space.
B. Applicability. This section allows an applicant to develop land based
upon an average density within the R-1C District. The applicant shall
prove, as a conditional use, to the satisfaction of the City Council that
all of the requirements of this § 445-31 will be complied with.
C. Unified development.
(1) Land within the R-1C District shall be designed as a unified,
coordinated residential development and shall be approved within
a development plan controlled by a single developer. After final
subdivision approval and within an approved development
agreement, a developer may sell individual lots to different builders
or home buyers, provided that the developer or his/her successor
remains responsible for ensuring the compliance with the approved
development plan.
(2) Phasing. The development shall include a phasing system that shall
be approved by the City Planning Commission under the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.168 Such phases
§ 445-30 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-31
441:1105
shall ensure that the requirements of this § 445-31 would be met
after the completion of any one phase and that the development
could properly function without the construction of additional
phases.
D. Other requirements. A development within the R-1C District shall be
required to comply with all requirements of this chapter and the
procedural, improvement and all other requirements of the City
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
E. Permitted uses.
(1) Only the following dwelling types shall be permitted within the
R-1C District: single-family detached dwelling, single-family
semidetached dwelling/twin dwelling or townhouses and sharedownership
facilities when located within a gated community/
planned development community. [Amended 1-28-1996 by Ord.
No. 148-1996]
(a) Dwelling units within the R-1C District shall have a minimum
building width and a minimum building length of not less than
18 feet. [Amended 1-28-1996 by Ord. No. 148-1996]
(b) A group home is permitted by right within any lawful dwelling
unit, provided that the requirements of § 445-34 for group
homes are complied with.
(2) Any accessory use or nonresidential principal use permitted in the
R-1 District shall also be permitted in the R-1C District, provided
that the use meets all of the same procedures and conditions as
would apply within the R-1 District. Permitted nonresidential
principal uses shall be located on their own lots and shall not be
considered in the calculation of the maximum residential density
under this section.
F. Maximum density and preservation of natural features.
(1) Lot area and lot width. Provided that the maximum permitted
average density established by this section is complied with, then
any lot containing a single-family detached dwelling may have a
minimum lot area of 5,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of
45 feet. A single-family detached dwelling shall have a minimum lot
width of 35 feet. A townhouse dwelling shall have a minimum width
as specified in § 445-34.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the term "total area of the tract"
shall mean the total lot area or the total lot area of contiguous lots
in common ownership, but not including areas within the existing
and future rights-of-way of existing streets, but including the right-
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. 423, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 445-31 SCRANTON CODE § 445-31
441:1106
of-way of any new future streets proposed within the tract and any
proposed common open space.
(3) All principal structures shall be served by both public water and
public sewage service.
(4) The following maximum average density shall be permitted on any
tract in the R-1C District: 2.5 dwelling units per acre, except within
a gated community/planned development community which shall
be 5.0 dwelling units per acre. The maximum number of dwelling
units permitted on a tract shall be calculated based upon the total
area of the tract (in acres) multiplied by 2.5 (or 5.0 in a gated
community/planned development community). No single acre of
land, after the deletion of street rights-of-way, shall include more
than 15 dwelling units. [Amended 1-28-1996 by Ord. No.
148-1996]
(5) Any areas used in the calculation of density which are not shown on
the development plan as intended to be used for development or for
which the Zoning Officer determines could possibly be subdivided
for future development shall have a permanent conservation
easement and/or deed restriction preventing the construction of
buildings or parking lots or any commercial use upon such land.
G. Preservation of natural features.
(1) Slopes. No building shall be placed upon any land that has or had a
natural slope of 25% or greater.
(2) Waterways. No building shall be placed within any of the following:
(a) The one-hundred-year floodplain.
(b) Seventy-five feet of the center line of any waterway shown on
the Official Zoning Map.
(c) Seventy-five feet of the shoreline of any lake as determined by
the City Engineer.
(3) All areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain and upon areas
with a slope of 25% or greater shall be preserved in their natural
vegetation, except for:
(a) Driveway, street and/or utility crossings.
(b) Permitted outdoor recreation facilities specifically approved as
part of a subdivision or land development plan by the City.
(c) Routine clearance of brush and undesirable vegetation.
(d) The clearance of pedestrian trails and fire-fighting roads.
(e) Necessary stormwater and erosion control improvements.
§ 445-31 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-31
441:1107
(4) All areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain and areas with
concentrations of slopes greater than 25% slope within the
boundaries of the development shall include restrictions, through a
ninety-nine-year minimum deed restriction or conservation
easement, with all rights to enforce such restriction held by the
City of Scranton, in addition to the City's authority to enforce this
chapter.
(a) Such restriction should but is not required to be able to be
enforced by a homeowners' association and/or a nature
conservancy, in addition to the authority required to be
granted to the City.
(5) Any development in the R-1C District shall be designed in full
consideration of important natural features, including mature
woodlands, creek valleys, steep slopes and wetlands.
H. Setbacks and lot requirements.
(1) No building shall be placed within 30 feet of the right-of-way of any
public street that existed at the time of adoption of this chapter
and/or 20 feet of any other public or private street right-of-way.
(2) Townhouses shall comply with the provisions of § 445-34 for that
use, other than density. A maximum of six townhouse dwelling units
may be attached.
(3) If two or more principal buildings are on the same lot, each such
building shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any other
principal building.
(4) If two principal buildings are not attached to each other and are
located on abutting lots, then each building shall have a minimum
setback along such abutting lot line of six feet.
(5) Principal and accessory structure setbacks, other than those
specified by this section, shall be regulated under the same
restrictions as would apply within the R-2 District.
(6) The maximum height of all buildings shall be 2.5 stories or 35 feet,
whichever is more restrictive. The maximum height of any sharedownership
facility shall be six stories. [Amended 1-29-1997 by
Ord. No. 148-1996]
I. Open space. If any area of a tract is not part of a privately owned lot,
then the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the City Council that
a permanent method for the oversight and maintenance of such land is
provided. Such method may be any of the following:
(1) Dedication to a formal homeowners' association as common
nonpublic open space, with such homeowners being legally bound
to ensure the maintenance and preservation of such land.
§ 445-31 SCRANTON CODE § 445-31
441:1108
§ 445-32. Uses without public water and/or sewage service.
(a) Any homeowners' association agreement shall be subject to
review by the City Solicitor, and the Planning Commission may
require reasonable adjustments to such agreement based upon
such review. The provisions of § 705(f), Subdivision (1) and (2),
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,169 as
amended, or such successor sections shall serve as a general
guide for such agreement.
(2) Dedication to the City or the county, if such entity agree, in writing,
in advance to accept such land for public recreation.
(3) Dedication as a nature preserve to a well-established nature
conservancy acceptable to the City Council.
J. Improvements to open spaces. The application shall include a detailed
and legally binding (if approved) description of what improvements the
applicant will make to any land intended to be publicly dedicated to
make it suitable for its intended purpose.
(1) Examples of such improvements for areas intended for passive
recreation include preservation and planting of trees, development
of nature, bicycle or jogging trails, the stabilization of creek banks
and the removal of undesirable vegetation.
(2) All proposed open spaces shall be cleared of construction debris,
materials from illegal dumping and any rocks that were not
naturally on the land, unless those rocks are incorporated into
landscaping improvements.
K. Access. Development within the R-1C District shall have an interior
street system that minimizes or avoids the need for individual
driveways entering directly onto arterial or collector streets.
A. Any lot that will not be served by either public water or public sewage
service at the time of occupancy by humans of any principal buildings
shall be required to have a minimum lot area of one acre per equivalent
dwelling unit and a minimum lot width of 150 feet, unless a more
restrictive requirement is established by another section of this
chapter.
B. Any lot that will be served by public water service but not public
sewage service or by public sewage service but not public water service
at the time of occupancy by humans of any principal buildings shall be
required to have a minimum lot area of 30,000 square feet per
equivalent dwelling unit and a minimum lot width of 120 feet, unless a
more restrictive requirement is established by another section of this
chapter.
169. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10705(f)(1) and (2).
§ 445-31 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-32
441:1109

ARTICLE IV
Specific Uses
§ 445-33. Applicability.
§ 445-34. Specific principal uses.
Each of the following uses shall meet all of the following requirements for
that use:
A. This Article establishes additional specific requirements for certain
specific uses, in addition to the sign, parking, environmental and other
general requirements of this chapter and the requirements of each
district. Wherever two or more requirements apply to the same use or
structure, then the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
B. For uses allowed within a specific zoning district as special exception or
conditional uses, see the procedures and general standards in §§ 445-18
and 445-19. Sections 445-34 and 445-35 list a set of additional
standards to be used in determining whether a proposed special
exception or conditional use should be approved.
A. Abused person shelter.
(1) See definition in Article II.
(2) Where permitted, such use shall have a maximum total of 12
residents in a residential district and 20 residents in any other
district. Such maximum number of residents shall include any staff
or volunteers that routinely stay overnight.
(3) The use shall include a minimum of one off-street parking space for
each household intended to be housed on-site, unless the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that less
parking is needed because excess parking spaces are available onstreet
during all hours of the day.
(4) The use shall have secure locks and alarm systems to protect the
occupants from physical violence.
(5) The use shall include a minimum of 250 square feet of usable
outdoor open space for play by children or be within 250 feet of a
public park.
B. Adult use. See Subsection OO, Sexually oriented business.
C. Amusement arcade (see definition in Article II).
(1) The use shall be set back a minimum of 400 feet from any place of
worship or a public or private primary or secondary school.
(2) The use shall be set back a minimum of 250 feet from any
residential district.
§ 445-33 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1111
(3) The use shall not be open to persons age 16 or younger during
school hours.
D. Auditorium, commercial or nightclub.
(1) A forty-foot buffer yard shall completely separate the structure and
all off-street parking areas from any residential lot line.
(2) Any such use that allows the consumption of alcohol and that has a
capacity of 150 or more persons shall be set back a minimum of 150
feet from any residential lot line.
E. Auto repair garage.
(1) All major repair, welding and paint work shall be performed within
a building, with a fume collection and ventilation system that
directs noxious fumes away from any adjacent dwellings.
(2) All reasonable efforts shall be made to prevent or minimize noise,
odor, vibration, glare or electrical interference nuisances to
adjacent lots.
(3) Outdoor storage of motor vehicles shall not be within a buffer yard
or planting strip area required by §§ 445-74 and 445-75 nor closer
than 10 feet from a residential lot line.
(4) Overnight outdoor storage of junk, other than permitted vehicles,
shall be prohibited within view of a public street or an adjacent
dwelling.
(5) An individual junk vehicle (as defined by Article II) shall not be
stored within view of a public street or a dwelling for a total of
more than 20 days. A maximum of six junk vehicles may be parked
on a lot outside of an enclosed building at any one time, unless
screened from view by evergreen plants.
(6) Whenever practical in the determination of the Zoning Officer,
service bay doors shall not face directly towards an abutting
dwelling (other than a dwelling separated from the repair garage
by a street).
(7) A use that is primarily intended to serve trucks with three or more
axles or tractor-trailer trucks shall have a minimum lot area of one
acre, and all areas used for repairs, fueling and serving of such
vehicles shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from a residential
lot line.
F. Auto, boat or manufactured home sales.
(1) No vehicle or home on display shall occupy any part of the existing
street right-of-way or required customer parking area or any buffer
yard or planting strip area required by § 445-74 or 445-75.
(2) See light and glare standards in § 445-46.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1112
G. Auto service station.
(1) See definition in Article II and definition of "auto repair garage."
See also § 445-79, Motor vehicle access, in Article VIII. No
driveway entrance or fuel pumps of an auto service station shall be
within 50 feet of the lot line of a primary or secondary school or a
hospital.
(2) All activities, except those customarily performed at fuel or air
pumps, shall be performed within a building. Spray painting or
body or fender work is prohibited as part of an auto service station,
unless such work is approved as part of an auto repair garage use.
(3) Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from the existing street rightof-
way.
(4) Overnight outdoor storage of junk and vehicle parts, other than
permitted whole junk vehicles, shall be prohibited within view of a
public street or dwelling.
(5) An individual junk vehicle (as defined by Article II) shall not be
stored within view of a public street or a dwelling for more than a
total of 20 days. No more than three junk vehicles shall be stored
on the lot outside of an enclosed building at any point in time.
(6) There shall be an ability for a minimum of three vehicles to be
serviced at each cluster of gasoline pumps or to be lined up behind
cars being serviced, without obstruction of access into or out of the
driveways from public streets.
(7) A use that is primarily intended to serve trucks with three or more
axles or tractor-trailer trucks shall have a minimum lot area of one
acre, and all areas used for fueling and servicing shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from all residential lot lines.
H. Bed-and-breakfast use.
(1) In a residential district, a maximum of six rental units shall be
provided and a total maximum of 12 guests may occupy the facility
at one point in time. A maximum of four persons may occupy one
rental unit.
(2) In a residential district, a maximum of four off-street parking
spaces may be located within the required front yard. See buffer
yard requirements in § 445-74.
(3) At least one bathroom for guest use shall be provided for every
three rental units.
(4) No signs, show windows or any type of display or advertising shall
be visible from outside the premises, except for a single wall or
freestanding sign, which shall not be internally illuminated, with a
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1113
maximum sign area of four square feet on each of two sides, if
freestanding, and with a maximum height of six feet.
(5) In a residential district, the exterior of the building shall not be
changed in any way that would decrease its residential appearance
and character, except for needed modifications for historic
restoration, handicapped access or firesafety.
(6) The use shall be primarily operated by residents of the lot.
(7) There shall not be separate cooking facilities in any guestroom.
Food shall only be served to guests who are staying overnight,
unless a restaurant is also permitted by the district regulations.
(8) Guests shall not routinely stay for more than 14 days in any month.
(9) The use of any amenities provided by the bed-and-breakfast, such
as a swimming pool or tennis court, shall be restricted in use to the
guests and permanent residents of the establishment and their
occasional invited guests, unless commercial recreation is also
permitted by the district regulations.
(10) In a residential district, it shall be restricted to buildings that
existed prior to January 1, 1950.
I. Betting use.
(1) The use shall be located abutting an arterial or collector street, as
defined by the Official Street Classification Map.
(2) Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum building setback from any residential lot line or any lot
line of a place of worship: 150 feet.
J. Boardinghouse (or rooming house).
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks: 15 feet on each side yard and 40 feet in the
rear yard.
(3) Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
(4) Each sleeping room shall be limited to two adults each, with a
maximum of three persons of any age per sleeping room.
(5) A ten-foot-wide buffer yard with screening complying with
§ 445-74D shall be provided between any boardinghouse and any
abutting single-family detached dwelling that is within 100 feet of
the boardinghouse building.
(6) Interior space: Each rental unit shall include a minimum of 120
square feet of habitable interior floor space if occupied by one
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1114
person and a minimum of 190 square feet of such space if occupied
by two or three persons.
(7) Maximum number of residents: 40 in an INS-G District and 80 in
any other permitted district.
(8) See also standards for personal care homes, dormitories, abused
person shelters and treatment centers, which are separate uses.
(9) Signs shall be limited to one wall sign with a maximum of two
square feet per side and a maximum height of six feet.
(10) Rooms shall be rented for a minimum period of five consecutive
days, except for an approved homeless shelter.
(11) A minimum of one full bathroom shall be provided for every four
rental units.
J.1. Bottle clubs (see definition in Article II) are permitted uses in
a C-D District and a special exception use in a C-G District
but shall not be permitted in any other district. [Added
12-29-2003 by Ord. No. 145-2003]
(1) In any district that a bottle club is a permitted use or a
special exception use, it shall not be located within 500
feet of the following:
(a) Places of worship, primary or secondary schools;
(b) Commercial enterprises catering primarily to persons
under 18 years of age;
(c) A public library;
(d) A child-care facility or nursery school; and/or
(e) A public park, including but not limited to a national
historic site or national historic park.
(2) No bottle club shall operate between the hours of 2:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(3) Limit of use. It shall be a violation of this subsection
for any person to cause or permit the operation,
establishment or maintenance of more than one bottle
club in the same building, structure or portion thereof.
K. Car wash.
(1) Traffic flow and ingress/egress shall not cause traffic hazards on
adjacent streets.
(2) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas shall be
clearly marked.
(3) Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper and convenient
disposal of refuse.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1115
(4) Water used in the operation shall not flow into streets, sidewalks,
separated storm sewers or waterways.
(5) Any car wash that is located within 200 feet of an existing primarily
residential, nursing home or hospital building shall not operate
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(6) Any chemicals that may be hazardous to aquatic life shall be stored
within an area that will completely contain any leaks or spills.
L. Cemetery.
(1) Minimum lot area for any cemetery approved after the adoption of
this chapter: two acres; maximum lot area for any cemetery
approved after the adoption of this chapter: 10 acres.
(2) A crematorium, where permitted, shall be set back a minimum of
250 feet from all residential lot lines. Such use shall require special
exception approval.
(3) All structures and graves shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from the lot line of a residential lot line or the existing right-of-way
of any public street and eight feet from the cartway of an internal
private driveway.
(4) No grave sites shall be located within the one-hundred-year
floodplain.
(5) The applicant shall provide evidence that proves to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Officer, based upon a review by the Planning
Commission and the City Solicitor, that there will be an appropriate
financial system to ensure perpetual maintenance of the land.
M. Communications antennae, commercial.
(1) Any such antenna that is attached to an existing business building
or a nonresidential building of more than five stories shall not be
regulated by this section, and instead is permitted by right without
additional regulations under this chapter. See requirements of the
City building code.170
(2) A freestanding antenna shall be set back a minimum distance equal
to half its height from all lot lines and existing street right-of-way
lines.
(3) The base of a freestanding antenna shall be surrounded by a secure
fence with a minimum height of eight feet.
(4) Any freestanding antennae higher than 50 feet that is within 100
feet of a public street or dwelling shall be buffered along that street
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Building Construction.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1116
or lot line (except at the driveway crossing) by evergreen screening
or preserved woods meeting the requirements of § 445-74.
N. Conversion of a building to an additional number of dwelling units
(including but not limited to development of one accessory apartment
within a single-family detached dwelling, but not including a unit for
care of a relative as provided in § 445-35).
(1) All parking spaces provided on the lot shall be paved in asphalt,
concrete or decorative paving block. See requirements for number
of parking spaces in § 445-53.
(2) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of 600 square
feet of habitable floor area, with all areas used to meet such
required floor area complying with the following conditions:
(a) All such floor area shall have a floor-to-ceiling height clearance
of at least six feet eight inches that is not unobstructed by
pipes, ducts, joists or other intrusions.
(b) All such floor area shall be heated and completely enclosed.
(c) A minimum of 50% of the floor surface of such required floor
area shall be located above the average surrounding ground
level.
(3) Windows. Each dwelling unit shall have at least one window that
opens to the outside. See also Section 401 of the City existing
property maintenance code.171
(4) The use shall comply with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act,172 as amended, and state and local firesafety regulations.
(5) A total maximum over the lifetime of the property of no more than
two dwelling units may be added to any existing single-family
detached dwelling, single-family semidetached dwelling, twofamily
detached dwelling or townhouse beyond the number of
dwelling units that existed in such building at the time of adoption
of this chapter.
(6) The following regulations shall apply to the conversion of an
existing single-family detached dwelling into a greater number of
dwelling units:
(a) The building shall maintain the appearance of a single-family
detached dwelling with a single front entrance. Additional
entrances may be placed on the side or rear of the structure.
The dwelling units may internally share the single front
entrance.
171. Editor's Note: The City's existing property maintenance standards are in Ch. 360, Property
Maintenance.
172. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1117
(b) The conversion shall not be permitted if it would require the
placement of an exterior stairway on the front of the building
or would require the placement of more than three off-street
parking spaces in the required front yard abutting an arterial
street.
(7) Separate cooking and sanitary facilities shall be provided for each
dwelling unit.
(8) Off-street parking lots with four or more spaces shall be buffered
from abutting dwellings by evergreen screening meeting the
requirements of § 445-74.
(9) Dumpster screening. See § 445-48.
(10) A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer.
(11) Density. See the tables in § 445-30 for the applicable district, where
permitted. Conversions of existing dwellings into increased
numbers of dwelling units is prohibited in the R-1, R-1A, R-2 and
R-2/O Districts, except as is permitted as a unit for care of relative
under § 445-35.
O. Correctional facility, county-owned. The applicant shall prove to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed use will
include sufficient security measures to protect the general public and
adjacent residents.
O.1 Dance halls (see definition in Article II) are permitted uses in a C-D
District and a special exception use in a C-G District but shall not
be permitted in any other district. [Added 12-29-2003 by Ord.
No. 145-2003]
(1) In any district that a dance hall is a permitted use or a special
exception use, it shall not be located within 500 feet of the
following:
(a) Places of worship, primary or secondary schools;
(b) Commercial enterprises catering primarily to persons
under 18 years of age;
(c) A public library;
(d) A child-care facility or nursery school; and/or
(e) A public park, including but not limited to a national
historic site or national historic park.
(2) No dance hall shall operate between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
(3) Limit of use. It shall be a violation of this subsection for any
person to cause or permit the operation, establishment or
maintenance of more than one dance hall in the same building,
structure or portion thereof.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1118
P. Day-care center, child. As a principal use:
(1) See also day-care center as an accessory use in § 445-35.
(2) The use shall comply with any applicable county, state and federal
regulations, including having an appropriate Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare registration certificate or license.
(3) Convenient parking spaces within the requirements of Article VI
shall be provided for persons delivering and waiting for children.
(4) In residential districts, where permitted as a principal use, it shall
have a minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet and a minimum
setback of five feet from an abutting residential lot line.
(5) Any area routinely used for outdoor play by children under the age
of 12 shall be surrounded by a secure fence with a minimum height
of four feet.
(6) Outside play areas in residential districts shall be limited to use
between 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. if located within 100 feet of an
abutting dwelling.
(7) Outdoor play areas of a day-care center involving the care of 20 or
more children at any one time shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from windows or doors of an abutting existing occupied
dwelling.
(8) In residential districts, any permitted day-care center shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible
with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
(9) A day-care center may occur in a building that also includes
permitted or nonconforming dwelling units.
(10) See also the standards for a place of worship in this section, which
allows a day-care center as an adjunct use. See also § 445-29D,
which allows day-care centers limited to employees of a business or
institution.
Q. Dormitory (see definition in Article II).
(1) This use shall be limited to full-time students, faculty or staff of an
accredited college, university, nursing school, medical training
program or teaching hospital.
(2) The building shall be set back a minimum of 80 feet from any
existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family
semidetached (twin) dwelling that is not owned by the institution
providing such dormitory.
(3) A dormitory shall include a maximum of one cooking area for every
20 students.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1119
R. Forestry, commercial (excluding plant nursery).
(1) See definition in Article II.
(2) A forestry management plan shall be prepared and followed for any
commercial forestry involving more than one acre. This plan shall
be prepared by a professional forester and be consistent with the
timber harvesting guidelines of the Pennsylvania Forestry
Association.
(3) Clear cutting shall be prohibited except on tracts of less than onefourth
(1/4) acre.
(4) On tracts larger than one-fourth (1/4) acre, at least 20% of the
forest cover (canopy) shall be kept, and the residual trees shall be
well distributed. At least 20% of these residual trees shall be
composed of higher value species as determined by a professional
forester.
(5) An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the
County Conservation District for any review and recommendation.
(6) The forestry management plan shall include an appropriate method
to ensure reforestation, except for areas approved for a permitted
use.
(7) Commercial forestry is prohibited on areas with slopes greater
than 25% or within the one-hundred-year floodway.
S. Funeral home. Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet, which may
include adjacent parking lots in common ownership or under long-term
lease.
T. Golf course.
(1) The course shall be designed so that golf balls are highly unlikely to
enter public streets or property that is not part of the golf course.
(2) A clubhouse, retail sales of golf supplies, nonhousehold swimming
pool and/or restaurant may be permitted as an accessory use. Any
principal building or swimming pool shall be located a minimum of
80 feet from any residential lot line, unless the owner of such lot
grants a waiver, in writing, from such setback.
(3) Minimum lot area: 10 acres in a residential district.
(4) Any outdoor lighting shall be located and designed in such a way
that it does not generate more light onto residential properties
than what is customary in a residential neighborhood.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 5%.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 10%.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1120
(7) Fairways and greens shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from
the lot line of any existing dwelling.
U. Group home (permitted within any lawful dwelling unit).
(1) See definition in Article II.
(2) Supervision. There shall be adequate supervision as needed by an
adequate number of person(s) trained in the field for which the
group home is intended.
(3) Certification. The use shall be licensed or certified under an
applicable state, county or federal program for group housing, if
applicable. A copy of any such license or certification shall be filed
with the City and shall be required to be shown to the Zoning
Officer in the future upon request. The group home shall notify the
City within 14 days if there is a change in the type of clients, the
sponsoring agency, the maximum number of residents or if an
applicable certification/license expires, is suspended or is
withdrawn.
(4) Registration. The group home shall register its location, general
type of treatment/care, maximum number of residents and
sponsoring agency with the Zoning Officer. Such information shall
be available for public review upon request.
(5) Counseling. Any medical or counseling services provided on the lot
shall be limited to residents and a maximum of three nonresidents
per day.
(6) Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
employee on duty at any one time and every two residents of a type
reasonably expected to be capable of driving a vehicle. Off-street
parking areas of more than five spaces shall be buffered from
adjacent existing single-family dwellings by a planting screen
meeting the requirements of § 445-74.
(7) Appearance. If the group home is within a residential district, the
building shall be maintained and/or constructed to ensure that it is
closely similar in appearance, condition and character to the other
residential structures in the area. No exterior signs shall identify
the type of use.
(8) The following maximum number of persons shall reside in a group
home, including the maximum number of employees/supervisors
and/or care providers routinely in the group home at any point in
time:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling with minimum lot area of
10,000 square feet and minimum building setbacks from all
residential lot lines of 10 feet: eight total persons.
(b) Any other lawful dwelling unit: six persons.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1121
(9) Employees of the group home shall be prohibited from having
visitors on the premises, except for visitation necessary for the
operation of the group home and except for emergencies.
(10) See the City existing property maintenance code.173
V. Hospital.
(1) Minimum total area of all lots: 30,000 square feet.
(2) See definition in Article II.
(3) See buffer yard requirements in § 445-74.
(4) See regulations of the INS-G and INS-L Districts in § 445-30.
(5) A hospital may also include the treatment for drug and alcohol
addiction as a clearly accessory use, provided that the use is
included completely within a general medical hospital building.
(6) A hospital may also include inpatient and outpatient mental health
facilities, provided that the use does not primarily include the
housing or treatment of the criminally insane or persons committed
to such institution as a result of having been charged with a violent
felony. Any inpatient mental health facilities shall be located
completely within a general medical hospital building, unless such
building is located a minimum of 200 feet from any residential lot
line.
(7) A hospital may also include any of the following additional principal
or accessory uses:
(a) Medical research facilities and training/education facilities for
health-care professions.
(b) Short- and long-term medical care.
(c) Management and administrative offices for health-care
organizations.
(d) Hospice facilities.
(e) Medical testing facilities.
(f) Operating rooms and emergency facilities.
(g) Medical and dental offices and clinics for treatment.
(h) A nursing home or personal care center.
(i) Ambulatory surgery center.
173. Editor's Note: The City's existing property maintenance standards are in Ch. 360, Property
Maintenance.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1122
(8) See § 445-30 for accessory vocational training uses to an existing
hospital specializing in rehabilitation.
W. Hotel/motel.
(1) This use may be combined with commercial recreational facilities
and a restaurant, if such uses are permitted in that district.
(2) See definition in Article II, which distinguishes between a hotel/
motel and a boardinghouse and a bed-and-breakfast use.
(3) Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.
(4) The use shall include a minimum of one full bathroom for every
eight residents.
X. Junkyard (includes automobile salvage yard).
(1) Storage of garbage or biodegradable waste is prohibited, other
than what is customarily generated on-site and routinely awaiting
pickup.
(2) Outdoor storage of junk shall be a minimum of:
(a) One hundred feet from any residential lot line for any junkyard
or portion thereof approved after the adoption of this chapter.
(b) Sixty feet from any residential lot line for any portion of a
junkyard existing or approved prior to the adoption of this
chapter.
(c) Thirty feet from any other lot line or from the existing right-ofway
of any public street.
(3) The site shall contain a minimum of two exterior points of access,
each of which is not less than 20 feet in width. One of these
accesses may be limited to emergency vehicles. Cleared driveways
shall be provided throughout the entire use to allow access by
emergency vehicles. Adequate designated off-street parking spaces
shall be provided for customers.
(4) Outdoor storage shall be completely enclosed (except at approved
driveway entrances) by a ten-foot-wide buffer yard which complies
with § 445-74, unless such storage is not visible from an exterior lot
line or street. The initial height of the evergreen planting shall be
four feet.
(5) Fencing.
(a) Secure weather-treated wood, plastic-coated chain link metal
fencing with a minimum height of eight feet shall be provided
and well-maintained around all outdoor storage areas of a
junkyard. Fences shall not be constructed of solid metal, junk
vehicles, unregistered vehicles or junk. Fences shall be
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1123
constructed of uniform materials and generally be of uniform
height, except where variations in height may be needed to
prevent unauthorized access from certain sloped areas.
(b) Fencing shall be placed inside of any evergreen screening.
(c) Sufficient gates shall be provided in the fence only for
necessary vehicle entry and exit and for emergency access. All
such gates shall be kept securely closed when the junkyard is
not open for business.
(d) To control the entry of children into the junkyard as an
attractive nuisance and to control the exit of rats from the
facility and to control offensive odors and to buffer noise and to
avoid negative effects on property values of adjacent
properties, all existing junkyards and auto salvage yards shall
be required to meet this requirement for fencing as stated in
this Subsection X(5) within 24 months of the adoption of this
chapter.
(6) Burning or incineration of vehicles or junk is prohibited. The use
shall not include the bulk storage of explosive or flammable
materials. The use shall fully comply with the City fire protection
code.174
(7) The use shall comply with the performance standards of Article V,
especially regarding noise, dust and odor regulations.
(8) All gasoline, coolant and oil shall be drained from all vehicles and
properly disposed of. All such substances shall not be stored on-site
for more than 90 days and shall be properly labeled. All batteries
shall be removed from vehicles and properly stored in a suitable
area on an impervious, properly drained surface.
(9) Lot area: two acres minimum, 20 acres maximum.
(10) Tires. See the outdoor storage and display standards in § 445-35.
(11) Any material stored on-site that may attract rodents or insects or
noxious odors or create fire hazards shall be stored within enclosed
containers and be removed from the site and properly disposed of
within 90 days.
(12)No junk or junk vehicles shall be stacked or stored in such a way
that it results in a height greater than 35 feet above the
surrounding ground level.
Y. Kennel.
174. Editor's Note: See Ch. 243, Fire Prevention.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1124
(1) All buildings in which animals are housed and all runs shall be
located at least 150 feet from all residential lot lines and all lot lines
of a hotel/motel and 30 feet from all other lot lines.
(2) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot routinely be heard within
any adjacent dwelling.
(3) No animal shall be permitted to use outdoor runs from 8:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m. that are within 300 feet of an existing dwelling. Runs for
dogs shall be separated from each other by visual barriers a
minimum of four feet in height, to minimize dog barking.
(4) See state law regulating kennels.
(5) A kennel may be used for breeding.
(6) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(7) An evergreen screen meeting the requirements of § 445-74 shall be
required between any outdoor animal runs and any residential lot
line.
(8) The use shall be maintained in a sanitary manner to avoid noxious
odors to other properties. No incineration of refuse shall be
permitted on-site.
Z. Livestock, raising of.
(1) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(2) Any newly developed indoor area used for the keeping of animals or
indoor or feeding areas that are part of a raising of livestock use
shall be located a minimum of 250 feet from the following:
residential lot lines, existing restaurants and existing office uses;
and a minimum of 100 feet from all other exterior lot lines.
(3) Any additions to an existing indoor area used for the raising of
livestock or feeding areas that are part of a raising of livestock use
shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from a residential lot line.
(4) Bulk storage of manure shall be set back a minimum of 300 feet
from any exterior lot line.
(5) Any area routinely used for the keeping of animals as part of a
raising of livestock use that is not regulated by Subsections Z(2)
and (3) above shall be separated by a fence or wall and set back 50
feet from any residential lot line.
(6) The raising of garbage-fed pigs shall be set back a minimum of 300
feet from any exterior lot line.
AA. Low-rise apartments. See Subsection VV, Townhouses and low-rise
apartments.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1125
BB. Mineral extraction. These regulations shall not apply to the regrading
and reclamation of coal mining waste/culm banks existing from mining
operations that occurred prior to the adoption of this chapter. Such
reclamation is permitted by right in all districts.
(1) The activities and residual effects shall not create conditions that
are significantly hazardous to the health and safety of neighboring
residents.
(2) After areas are used for mineral extraction, they shall be reclaimed
in phases to a nonhazardous and environmentally sound state
permitting some economically productive future use.
(3) A seventy-five-foot-wide yard covered by natural vegetative ground
cover (except at approved driveway crossings) shall be required
along all exterior lot lines that are within 250 feet of an area of
excavation or within 250 feet of machinery that is greater than 35
feet in height. This yard shall include an earthen berm averaging a
minimum of six feet in height and an average of one shade tree for
each 50 feet of distance along the lot lines. Such shade trees shall
be planted outside of any berm and any fence and shall meet the
size and type requirements of § 445-55.
(4) The following minimum setbacks shall apply for the excavated area
of a mineral extraction use from property that is not owned by the
owner of the mineral extraction use:
(a) One hundred feet from the existing right-of-way of public
streets and from all exterior lot lines of the property.
(b) One hundred fifty feet from a commercial or industrial
building, unless released by the owner thereof.
(c) Two hundred fifty feet from a residential lot line, other than an
abandoned dwelling.
(d) One hundred fifty feet from the lot line of a publicly owned
recreation area that existed at the time of the application for
the use or expansion.
(5) Setbacks.
(a) The excavated area of a mineral extraction use shall be set
back 150 feet from the center line of a perennial stream.
(b) Any rock crushing or other processing machinery shall be set
back a minimum of 500 feet from any dwelling.
(6) Fencing, stockpiling and slopes.
(a) Any area of excavation that creates slopes of greater than 25%
shall be surrounded by secure fencing with a minimum height
of eight feet.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1126
(b) Except for cuts into solid rock, the maximum slope of an
excavation shall be one foot vertical to three feet horizontal.
(c) Excavated materials shall be used as fill or in fill and regraded
once excavation of an area is completed and shall not remain
stockpiled in piles or mounds.
(7) Noise and performance standards. See Article V.
(8) Erosion control. A soil erosion and sedimentation plan shall be
prepared by the applicant and found to be acceptable to the County
Conservation District. See also § 445-52, entitled "Removal of
topsoil."
(9) Hours of operation. The Board may reasonably limit the hours of
operation of the use and of related trucking and blasting operations
to protect the character of adjacent residential areas.
(10) Additional reviews. The applicant shall submit at least 14 days
prior to the initial Zoning Hearing Board hearing a complete copy
of all application materials and a site plan to the Planning
Commission for advisory review. The application shall be sent to
the City Engineer for review, with the reasonable costs of such
review paid by the applicant.
(11) The applicant shall also submit a copy to the Zoning Officer of all
materials submitted by the applicant to state agencies regarding an
application for this project. The use shall comply with all applicable
state regulations as a condition of City approval under this chapter,
and such City approval may be revoked for violation of this
condition.
(12) Preemption. It is not the intent of this section to unlawfully
preempt any federal or state law or regulation. Unless a
preemption of this chapter would exist, the most restrictive
requirement shall be in effect where a conflict might exist.
(13) Application requirements. Each application for a mineral
extraction use involving an excavation of more than one acre shall
include the following:
(a) Present uses of the site.
(b) A scaled map, prepared by a professional engineer, showing
the locations of:
[1] The proposed area to be excavated (and maximum depth).
[2] Other land to be affected, including but not limited to
storage sites for overburden, access and haulage streets,
storage sites for equipment and offices and other
accessory structures.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1127
[3] Lot lines of adjacent lots and owners and existing uses of
these lots.
[4] Watercourses, bodies of water, street rights-of-way,
buildings and publicly owned recreation areas within 250
feet of the boundaries of land to be affected by the mineral
extraction operation.
[5] Any wetlands and forested areas to be removed or
protected and preserved as part of the use.
(c) A detailed land reclamation plan of the area to be excavated,
showing:
[1] Proposed reclaimed use and topography of the land
following the mineral extraction.
[2] Actions to be taken during mining to conserve and replace
topsoil removed during mining operations.
[3] Reasonable assurances that the applicant will be capable
of reclaiming the land in accordance with the plan within a
reasonable time after completion of the mineral extraction
operations to be covered by the requested permit.
(14) Regulation of the maximum acreage actively used for mineral
extraction.
(a) To ensure that large areas of land will be reclaimed in
compliance with state and City regulations, the Board may
establish a maximum number of acres which may be affected
by mineral extraction at any one time on any lot or any series of
lots owned by one applicant or closely related applicants.
(b) "Land affected by mineral extraction" shall mean all total land
area at any point in time that is currently under active mineral
extraction, that is not adequately reclaimed or backfilled
following prior extraction operations and/or that contains
waste or spoil piles from existing or prior mining activities.
CC. Mobile/manufactured home. On an individual lot or within a mobile/
manufactured home park:
(1) The use shall be constructed in accordance with the safety and
construction standards of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development. These standards supersede the BOCA
code for the actual construction of the unit itself.
(2) The use shall have a site graded to provide a stable and welldrained
area.
(3) The use shall have the hitch mechanisms removed. The wheels and
axles shall be removed or screened from view.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1128
(4) Foundation. The use shall be securely attached to the ground in
such a way as to prevent overturning, shifting or uneven settling of
the home. This shall involve the following method, unless the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that
another appropriate method will be used that is recommended by
the manufacturer of the home or by the manufacturing housing
industry or is specified by a future edition of the BOCA code:
(a) The foundation system shall consist of ten-inch diameter
concrete piers, concrete footing perpendicular to the main
longitudinal frame or equivalent and shall be installed from
ground level to below the frost line (36 inches minimum). This
foundation system shall be placed on eight-foot centers (unless
a different length is specified by the manufacturer) along each
of the two main longitudinal frames for each section of the
home, with no more than a three-foot overhang at each end of
the section.
(b) One-half-inch diameter by twelve-inch-long eyebolts, unshaped
bars or equivalent metal bars shall be cast in place at each
corner and at two midpoints in the concrete piers, concrete
footing, slab or equivalent. Concrete blocks shall be used to
support the home on the foundation system, and wood shims
may be used for final leveling. The concrete support blocks
shall not be wider than the support foundation.
(c) The mobile/manufactured home shall be securely anchored or
tied down with cable and turnbuckles or equivalent connecting
the frame to the cast-in-place eyebolts on at least four corners
and two midpoints. The tie-down shall also be in accordance
with the manufacturers' recommendations furnished with each
home.
(d) Mobile homes shall not be placed more than four feet above
the supporting ground area.
(5) The use shall be enclosed from the bottom of the home to the
ground or stand using industry-approved skirting material
compatible with the home or, if a slab foundation is used, masonry
walls underneath the home with soil backfill to result in the
surrounding ground level being flush or one normal step height
below the first floor elevation. If masonry walls are used, then an
appropriate service access area shall be provided.
(6) Homes shall have a pitched instead of a flat roof.
(7) The use should be located with the longest side facing the public
street.
DD. Mobile/manufactured home park.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1129
(1) The use shall comply with all of the provisions of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance175 that apply to a land
development, including the submission, approval and
improvements provisions, other than specific provisions altered by
this section. The placement of each mobile home unit shall require
a building permit.
(2) Minimum tract size: three contiguous acres, which shall be under
single ownership.
(3) Maximum average overall density: five dwelling units per acre. To
calculate this density, land in common open space or proposed
streets within the park may be included, but land within the onehundred-
year floodway or that has slopes of 15% or greater shall
not be included.
(4) The use shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer yard around the
perimeter of the site, meeting the requirements of § 445-74. This
buffer yard shall be 50 feet wide abutting lots, including existing
single-family detached dwellings.
(5) Minimum separation between dwelling units: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum principal and accessory building setbacks:
(a) From the exterior lot lines of the mobile home park: 60 feet.
(b) From the cartways of streets within the mobile home park that
serve 10 or more homes: 25 feet.
(c) From the cartways of parking courts or streets within the
mobile home park that serve less than 10 homes: 10 feet.
(d) From the lot lines of existing single-family detached dwellings:
75 feet.
(7) Recreation area. The mobile home park shall include a minimum of
8% of the tract set aside as permanent common open space for
recreation use by the residents. Areas that would not be suitable
for recreation shall not be counted towards the required open
space.
(8) Each unit shall comply with the above requirements for mobile/
manufactured homes in this section.
(9) A mobile/manufactured home park may include a recreation center
for residents, a rental/management office, maintenance buildings
for the park, a swimming pool(s) and the sale of mobile/
manufactured homes that will be placed on the tract. A mobile
home park shall not include the sale of homes for placement off the
175. Editor's Note: See Ch. 423, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1130
tract, unless such use is specifically permitted in the applicable
district.
(10) If any of these requirements conflict with those of the mobile home
park regulations of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, as amended, then the regulations of this subsection
shall apply instead. Streets within a mobile home park that serve
10 or more dwelling units shall be constructed to City road bed
construction standards, although curbing and the establishment of
a right-of-way is not required for private streets.
(11) In addition to the required parking per dwelling, an appropriate
area shall be set aside for the parking of recreational vehicles of
residents and for overflow guest parking.
(12) The maximum height, building coverage and impervious coverage
of the applicable zoning district shall apply.
(13) All mobile home spaces shall be wired underground for cable
television and telephone lines.
(14) Each mobile home may have one accessory building, which shall
not have a floor area greater than 300 square feet.
(15) Streets and parking courts within the mobile home park shall be
adequately illuminated by the owner of the mobile home park for
security purposes.
(16) Any recreational facilities shall be limited to use by residents of the
mobile home park and their occasional invited guests.
(17) The owner of the mobile home park shall ensure that all
infrastructure and facilities are adequately maintained, kept in a
clean and sanitary condition and kept in good repair.
(18) The operator of the mobile park shall, at a minimum once a year,
report, in writing, the names of all residents age 18 years or older
to the single tax office or its successor.
EE. Nightclub. This use shall meet the requirements for an auditorium,
commercial.
FF. Nursing home or personal care home.
(1) Licensing. See definition in Article II.
(2) A minimum of 5% of the lot shall be suitable and developed for
outdoor passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting
areas and pedestrian walks and may also include the floor area of
each balcony.
GG. Parking lot as a principal use.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1131
(1) The parking lot shall not be used for parking of heavy construction
equipment, for vehicle repairs or for sales unless such uses are
specifically permitted by the applicable district regulations.
(2) See lighting and glare standards in Article V and buffer yard and
planting strip standards in §§ 445-74 and 445-75.
(3) A parking area of more than six parking spaces to serve a principal
business use that would be located within a residential district
abutting existing dwellings shall not be approved if it would routine
require the movement of vehicles between 12:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
HH. Personal care home. See Subsection FF, Nursing home or personal care
home.
II. Place of worship.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet in a residential district.
(2) Weekly religious education rooms and meeting rooms are
permitted accessory uses, provided that such uses are of such a
character and intensity that they would be clearly customary and
incidental to the place of worship. A primary or secondary school
and/or a child or adult day-care center are permitted on the same
lot as a place of worship as long as the total lot area is a minimum
of one-half (1/2) acre.
(3) For accessory dwelling units, see definition in Article II.
JJ. Plant nursery.
(1) Evergreen screening and buffer yards are not required around the
outdoor storage of trees or shrubs.
(2) The only retail sales that shall be permitted shall be of trees and
plants that were primarily grown upon the lot and clearly
customary and accessory sales of closely related items (such as
mulch, topsoil and tools) unless retail sales or a retail store are
specifically permitted in the district.
(3) Minimum lot area: one-half (1/2) acre if there is any retail sales
within a primarily residential district.
KK. Recycling collection center.
(1) This use shall not be bound by the requirements of a solid waste
disposal facility.
(2) All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with
appropriate sanitary measures and frequent-enough emptying to
prevent the attraction of insects or rodents and to avoid fire
hazards.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1132
(3) Adequate provision shall be made for movement of trucks if needed
and for off-street parking.
(4) A ten-foot buffer yard with screening as described in § 445-74 shall
be provided between this use and any abutting residential lot line.
(5) This use may be a principal or accessory use, including being an
accessory use to a commercial use, an industrial use, a public or
private primary or secondary school, a place of worship or a Cityowned
use, subject to the limitations of this section.
(6) Materials to be collected shall be of the same character as the
following materials: paper, fabric, cardboard, plastic, metal,
aluminum and glass. No garbage shall be stored as part of the use,
except for that generated on-site and that accidentally collected
with the recyclables. Only materials clearly being actively collected
for recycling may be stored on-site.
(7) The use shall only include the following operations: collection,
sorting, baling, loading, weighing, routine cleaning and closely
similar work. No burning or landfilling shall occur. No mechanical
operations shall routinely occur at the site other than operations
such as baling of cardboard.
(8) The use shall not routinely include the collection or processing of
pieces of metal that have a weight greater than 50 pounds, except
within an industrial district.
(9) The use shall include the storage of a maximum of 200 tons of
materials on the site if the use is within a residential district and is
within 150 feet of an existing dwelling.
LL. Restaurant, fast-food or standard.
(1) Dumpster screening and waste containers. See § 445-48.
(2) A maximum of two outdoor menu boards are permitted, beyond the
signs normally permitted, with a maximum sign area of 40 square
feet each if drive-through service is provided, if the words on such
signs are not readable from beyond the lot line.
(3) Traffic circulation onto, within and off of the lot shall be clearly
marked. A drive-through use shall be designed with space for an
adequate number of waiting vehicles while avoiding conflicts with
traffic onto, around and off of the site.
MM.School, public or private, primary or secondary.
(1) Minimum lot area: one-half (1/2) acre, unless a larger acreage is
required by another section of this chapter.
(2) No children's play equipment, basketball courts or illuminated
recreation facilities shall be within 15 feet of a residential lot line.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1133
(3) The use shall not include a dormitory unless specifically permitted
in the district.
NN. Self-storage development.
(1) All storage units shall be fire resistant and water resistant.
(2) Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles, boats and
trailers. No junk vehicles shall be stored within view of a public
street or a dwelling.
(3) Trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse,
explosives or flammable materials, hazardous substances, animal
carcasses or skins or similar items shall not be stored.
(4) Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, required off-street
parking areas, loading areas or accessways.
(5) Major body work on vehicles shall not be permitted. The use shall
not include a commercial auto repair garage unless that use is
permitted in the district and the use meets those requirements.
(6) Adequate lighting shall be provided for security, but it shall be
directed away or shielded from any adjacent residential uses.
(7) Any areas of the use that are within 200 feet of the existing right-ofway
of an expressway, arterial street or collector street or a
dwelling shall be separated from that street and/or dwelling by a
buffer yard with screening under § 445-74.
(8) Maximum building length: 250 feet.
(9) Minimum separation between buildings: 20 feet.
(10) The use may include one dwelling unit for a full-time caretaker.
OO. Sexually oriented business.
(1) Findings.
(a) The City Council of the City of Scranton finds that sexually
oriented businesses and adult uses are frequently used for
unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual
liaisons of a casual nature.
(b) The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate
health concern of the City of Scranton which demands
reasonable regulation of sexually oriented businesses and
adult uses in order to protect the health and well-being of the
citizens.
(c) Permitting and/or licensing is a legitimate and reasonable
means of accountability to ensure that operators of sexually
oriented businesses and adult uses comply with reasonable
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1134
regulations and to ensure that operators do not knowingly
allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual
activity or solicitation.
(d) There is convincing documented evidence that sexually
oriented businesses and adult uses, because of their very
nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing
businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas
adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the
downgrading of property values.
(e) It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses and adult
businesses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable
operational characteristics, particularly when they are located
in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to
neighborhood blight and downgrading the quality of life in the
adjacent area.
(f) The City desires to minimize and control these adverse effects
and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizenry; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve
the quality of life; preserve the property values and character
of surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of
neighborhood blight.
(g) It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech
activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a
content neutral ordinance which addresses the secondary
effects of sexually oriented businesses and adult uses.
(h) It is not the intent of the City to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material or to encourage the violation
of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.176
(i) It is necessary to amend this chapter to ensure that
enforcement proceedings are in compliance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(2) Purposes. Purposes shall be as follows: to regulate sexually
oriented businesses and/or adult uses in order to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
continued deleterious location and concentration of sexually
oriented businesses and/or adult uses within the City; to have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented or adult materials; to not totally restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials or adult
materials protected by the First Amendment; to not deny access by
the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
176. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1135
to their intended market; to not condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material or to encourage any violations of
the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
(3) Sexually oriented businesses (see definition in Article II) are
allowed only in a C-D District and shall not be permitted:
(a) In any residential district.
(b) In any district, including a C-D District, within 500 feet of the
following:
[1] Places of worship or primary or secondary schools.
[2] Commercial enterprises catering primarily to persons
under 18 years of age.
[3] A public library.
[4] A child day-care facility or nursery school.
[5] A public park, including but not limited to a National
Historic Site or National Historic Park.
(c) In any district, including C-D, within 300 feet of any other
sexually oriented business.
(4) Measurement. The distances described in this section shall be as
measured from the edge of the premises of the portion of a building
used for the subject use, measured in a straight line (without
regard to intervening structures or objects) to the nearest lot line
of the premises of a use from which a setback applies under this
chapter (including but not limited to the following: a place of
worship, school, public library, a child day-care facility, nursery
school, public park, a commercial enterprise catering primarily to
persons under 18 years of age, tavern, restaurant, membership
club or any other sexually oriented business).
(5) Enlargement. An existing, lawful sexually oriented business may be
expanded once in total floor area by a maximum of 10% beyond the
floor area that lawfully existed in such use at the time of adoption of
the Zoning Ordinance of 1993. Any further expansion shall only
occur if approved as a variance.
(6) Limit of one use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to cause or permit the operation, establishment or
maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the
same building, structure or portion thereof or an increase of floor
area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or
portion thereof that contains another sexually oriented business.
(7) Nonconformity. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating
on the date of enactment of this chapter that is in violation of
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1136
Subsection OO(1) through (7) of this subsection shall be deemed
a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except as permitted in
Subsection OO(5) above and except that the use may be changed
to a conforming use.
(8) Location of new neighboring uses. A sexually oriented business
lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a
nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of a sexually oriented business permit, of a use from which
a sexually oriented business is required to provide a setback from
under this section (including but not limited to a place of worship,
school, commercial enterprise catering primarily to persons under
18 years of age, public library, child-care facility, nursery school
and public park) is located within the distances described in this
section. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit
and does not apply when the application for a permit is submitted
after a permit has expired or has been revoked.
(9) Alcohol. No sexually oriented business shall be operated in
combination with the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(10) Sexually oriented business permit.
(a) Any person who operates a sexually oriented business without
a valid permit issued by the City is guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
(b) Application. An application for a permit to operate a sexually
oriented business must be made on a form provided by the
Zoning Officer. The application must be accompanied by a
sketch or diagram showing the floor plan and plot plan
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business. A sketch or diagram need
not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches.
(c) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter, and the premises must be inspected and found to
be in compliance with the law by the Zoning Officer, the
Department of Community Development, the Fire Department
and the City Health Inspector or their successor agencies/
personnel.
(d) Signature. If the person who wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business is an individual, he/she must sign the
application for the permit as the applicant. For a person who
wishes to operate a sexually oriented business as other than an
individual, each individual who has a ten-percent or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a permit
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1137
as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually
oriented business or as the entity which wishes to operate such
a business, each individual having a direct or indirect interest
of 10% or greater in the corporation must sign the application
for a permit as applicant and shall provide their home address
and full legal name.
(e) The fact that a person possesses other types of City permits
does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining
a sexually oriented business permit.
(f) The Zoning Officer shall approve the issuance of a permit to an
applicant within 30 days after receipt of a full and complete
application, unless he/she finds one or more of the following to
be true:
[1] An applicant is under 18 years of age.
[2] An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his/her
payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines or penalties
assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in
relation to a sexually oriented business.
[3] An applicant has failed to provide information recently
necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the
application form.
[4] An applicant is residing with the person who has been
denied a permit by the City to operate a sexually oriented
business within the preceding 12 months or residing with
a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been revoked within the preceding 12
months.
[5] The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business
has been reviewed and has been disapproved either by the
Zoning Officer, the Department of Community
Development, the Fire Bureau or the Health Inspector as
not being in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances.
[6] The permit fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
[7] An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation
of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this
chapter.
[8] An individual applicant or any individual holding a direct
or indirect interest of more than 10% of a corporate
applicant or any of the officers or directors of a corporate
applicant (if the applicant is a corporation) or any of the
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1138
partners, including limited partners (if the applicant is a
partnership), or manager or other person in charge of the
operation of the applicant's business has or have been
convicted of an offense involving sexual misconduct within
the United States of, but not limited to, prostitution, aiding
and abetting prostitution, obscenity, possession or sale
of child pornography, corrupting the morals of a minor,
sale of pornography to minors, statutory rape, involuntary
sexual intercourse or sexual assault. In order for approval
to be denied pursuant to this subsection, such person
or persons must have been convicted of such sexual
misconduct within one year prior to the date of application
in the event of a summary offense, three years prior to
the date of application in the event of a misdemeanor and
10 years prior to the date of application in the event of a
felony.
(g) The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date
and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance
to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read
at any time.
(h) The Zoning Officer, the Fire Bureau, the Department of
Community Development and the Health Inspector or their
successor agencies/personnel shall complete their certification
if the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within
20 days of the receipt of the application by the Zoning Officer.
The certification shall be promptly presented to the Zoning
Officer.
(i) Manager. Each sexually oriented business shall provide the
name of a responsible on-site manager as part of the permit.
Such manager shall have the authority to ensure that the use
complies with this chapter, in addition to the responsibilities
held by the owners of the business. The business and home
addresses and telephone numbers of such manager shall be
reported, in writing, to the Zoning Officer. If such name,
address or telephone number of such manager changes, the
change shall be reported, in writing, to the Zoning Officer
within one working day.
(11) Fees and inspection of sexually oriented businesses.
(a) The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $500
unless such fee is updated by future resolution of the City
Council. Such fee is intended to fund administrative, review
and inspection costs of the City concerning the use.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1139
(b) An applicant or permittee and his/her employees shall permit
representatives of the Police Bureau, Fire Bureau, Zoning
Officer, Department of Community Development and the
Health Inspector to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law
at any time that the sexually oriented business is occupied or
opened for business.
(c) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his/her
employee violates this chapter if he/she refuses to permit such
lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or
open for business.
(12) Expiration of permit for sexually oriented business.
(a) Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in
this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30
days before the expiration date and, when made less than 30
days before the expiration date, the pendency of the
application will not prevent the expiration of the permit.
(b) If the Zoning Officer denies renewal of a license, the applicant
shall not be issued a permit for one year from the date of
denial, except that after 90 days have elapsed since the date of
denial, the applicant may be granted a permit if the Zoning
Officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit has
been corrected and abated. Nothing herein is intended to limit
or impair the right of any applicant to appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board from a decision of the Zoning Officer. In the
event that the Zoning Hearing Board, after hearing, reverses
the Zoning Officer's decision, this subsection shall not apply.
(13) Suspension of permit. The Zoning Officer shall suspend a permit
for a period not to exceed 30 days if he/she determines that a
permittee or an employee of a permittee has:
(a) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter.
(b) Engages in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the
sexually oriented business premises.
(c) Allowed a visibly intoxicated person on the premises at any
time that the sexually oriented business is open for business.
(d) Refuses to allow an inspection of a sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this section.
(e) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on a sexually
oriented business premises.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1140
(f) Failed to man managers' stations and/or maintain viewing
rooms as set forth in Subsection OO(16) below.
(14) Revocation of permit.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if a cause or
suspension set forth in Subsection OO(13) above occurs, and
the permit has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
(b) The Zoning Officer shall revoke the permit if he/she determines
that:
[1] A permittee or any other person specified in Subsection
OO(8) is or has been convicted of the offenses specified in
Subsection OO(9).
[2] A permittee gave false or misleading information in the
materials submitted to the City during the application
process.
[3] A permittee or employee of a permittee has knowingly
allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on
the premises.
[4] A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly
allowed prostitution or solicitation for prostitution on the
premises.
[5] A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly
operated the sexually oriented business during a period of
time when the permittee's permit was suspended.
[6] A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation or other explicit sexual conduct
to occur in or on the permitted premises.
[7] A permittee is delinquent in payment to the City of any
fees relating to sexually oriented businesses.
(c) If the Zoning Officer revokes a permit, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date
revocation became effective, except that if the revocation is
pursuant to Subsection OO(14)(b)[1] above, the revocation
shall be effective for one year for a summary offense, two years
in the event of a misdemeanor or five years in the event of a
felony.
(d) After denial of an application or denial of a renewal of
application or suspension of revocation of a permit, the
applicant or licensee or permittee shall have the right to
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1141
appeal the Zoning Officer's determination to the Zoning
Hearing Board, and from there to the Court of Common Pleas.
(15) Transfer of permit. A permittee shall not transfer his permit to
another person unless such transferee submits an application
pursuant to this chapter. A permittee shall not operate a sexually
oriented business under a permit at any place other than the
address designated in the application.
(16) Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or
videos.
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on
the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of
floor space a film or videocassette or other video or image
production or reproduction which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the
following requirements:
[1] The application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented
business shall be accompanied by a floor plan and plot
plan diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof,
specifying the location of one or more managers' stations,
the location of all viewing rooms, partitions and doors, the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be
permitted. A managers' station may not exceed 32 square
feet of floor area. The diagrams shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature
of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and should be
drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions
sufficient to show the interior dimensions of all areas of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The Zoning Officer may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a
diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that
the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was submitted.
[2] The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.
[3] No alteration in the configuration or location of a
managers' station may be made without the prior approval
of the Zoning Officer or his/her designee.
[4] It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises
to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situate
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1142
in each managers' station at all times that any patron is
present inside.
[5] The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a
managers' station of every area of the premises to which
any patron is permitted access for any purposes, excluding
rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video
reproduction or viewing equipment. If the premises has
two or more managers' stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the managers' stations.
The view required by this subsection must be by direct line
of sight from the managers' station.
[6] It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and also
the duty of any agents and employees present on the
premises to ensure that the viewing area specified in this
Subsection OO(16) remains unobstructed by any doors,
walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all
times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to Subsection OO(16)(a) of this
section.
[7] No viewing room may be occupied by more than one
person at any time. No connections or openings to an
adjoining viewing room may be permitted.
[8] The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to
which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of
not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level.
[9] It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall
also be the duty of any agents and employees present in
the premises to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that any patron is present
in the premises.
(b) A person having a duty under Subsection OO(16)(a)[1] through
[9] of this subsection is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he/
she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(17) Visibility. No sexually explicit material, signs, display or word shall
be visible from outside of the building.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1143
(18) Exemption for modeling class. It is a defense to prosecution under
this section that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
modeling class operated:
(a) By a proprietary school, licensed by the state or an
academically accredited college or university.
(b) By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation.
(c) In a structure:
[1] Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is
available for viewing.
[2] Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class.
[3] Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time.
(d) By an organization which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code as a nonprofit
organization or foundation.
(19) Violation punishable. Any person, partnership or corporation who
or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor, in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the City, pay a judgment of
not more than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by a municipality as a result thereof. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until
the date of the determination of a violation of the District Justice. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
City may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation, unless a District Justice determines, in
addition to a violation, that there is a good basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this section to believe that
there was no such violation, in which case, there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and
thereafter that each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Each violation of a section of this chapter shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be
paid to the City Treasurer.
(20) See also the City of Scranton Obscenity Ordinance of 1981.177
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1144
(21) See § 445-66, Prohibited signs.
PP. Solid waste sanitary landfill (not including a solid waste transfer facility
or a waste-to-energy facility).
(1) All solid waste storage, disposal and incineration shall be at least
200 feet from the following: a public street right-of-way, exterior lot
line, one-hundred-year floodplain, edge of a surface water body
(including a water-filled quarry) or wetland of more than two acres
in area.
(2) All areas to be used for the storage, disposal or incineration of solid
waste shall be a minimum of 500 feet from any residential lot line
or publicly owned recreation area or the banks of any perennial
creek or river.
(3) The use shall be served by a minimum of two paved access roads,
each with a minimum cartway width of 24 feet. One of these roads
may be restricted to use by emergency vehicles.
(4) Any solid waste that is to be stored for more than three hours shall
be stored in an enclosed structure.
(5) The operation and day-to-day maintenance of the solid waste
disposal area shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations as a condition of the continuance of any permit of the
City. Violations of this condition shall also be considered to be
violations of this chapter.
(6) Open dumps and open burning of refuse are prohibited.
Incineration of solid waste shall be prohibited unless also approved
as a waste-to-energy facility.
(7) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the City Council that
the existing street network can handle the additional truck traffic,
especially without bringing extraordinary numbers of trash hauling
trucks through or alongside existing residential or residentially
zoned areas.
(8) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the City Council that
the use would not routinely create noxious odors off of the tract.
(9) A chain link or other approved fence with a minimum height of
eight feet shall surround active solid waste disposal areas to
prevent the scattering of litter and to keep out children. The Board
shall require earth berms, evergreen screening and/or shade trees
as needed shall be used to prevent operations from being visible
from an expressway or arterial streets or dwellings.
(10) A minimum total lot area of 30 acres (which may include land in an
adjoining municipality) is required.
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 324, Obscene Materials.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1145
(11) Health hazards. Any facility shall be operated in such a manner to
prevent the attraction, harborage or breeding of insects, rodents or
vectors.
(12) Attendant. An attendant shall be present during all periods of
operation or dumping.
(13) Gates. Secure gates, fences, earth mounds and/or dense vegetation
shall prevent unauthorized access.
(14) Emergency access. The operator of the use shall cooperate fully
with local emergency services. This should include allowing
practice exercises on the site and the provisions of all information
needed by the emergency services to determine potential hazards.
Adequate means of emergency access shall be provided.
(15) Under authority granted to the City under Act 101 of 1988,178 the
hours of operation shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.
(16) Tires. See § 445-35C(9), Outdoor storage and display.
(17) Litter. The operator shall regularly police the area of the facility
and surrounding streets to collect litter that may escape from the
facility or trucks.
(18) Dangerous materials. No radioactive, hazardous,
chemotherapeutic or infectious materials or substances may be
stored or processed in any way, except for types and amounts of
hazardous substances customarily kept in a commercial business
for on-site use. "Infectious materials" are defined as medical wastes
used or created in the treatment of persons or animals with
seriously contagious diseases.
(19) The applicant shall provide sufficient information for the City to
determine that the requirements of this chapter will be met.
(20) The applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with a copy of all
written materials and plans that are submitted to the Pennsylvania
DEP within five days after they are submitted to the DEP.
(21) For any solid waste facility other than a sanitary landfill, all loading
and unloading of solid waste shall only occur within an enclosed
building and over an impervious surface which drains into a
holding tank that is then adequately treated.
QQ. Solid waste transfer facility.
(1) The solid waste transfer facility use as defined in Article II is a
conditional use only in the district(s) specified in Article III and is
178. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1146
subject to the conditions stated below, in addition to the other
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The applicant shall provide evidence of compliance with all other
local laws, state laws and federal laws.
(3) Traffic. The applicant shall provide evidence by a professional
person or firm competent to perform traffic analysis showing that
the traffic generated by the site will not cause a reduction in the
level of service on the roads used by said transfer facility. The
applicant shall provide copies of the completed traffic analysis to
the Chief of Police, Director of Public Works and the City Engineer
for review and approval. The Chief of Police, Public Works and City
Engineer shall transmit their review, in writing, to the City Council,
the applicant and other known parties of interest prior to the
hearing.
(4) Fencing. All such facilities shall be enclosed by a chain link fence or
wall having a minimum height of eight feet, which is adequate to
screen such uses and the contents thereof from adjacent property,
and such fence or wall shall not detract from the character of
surrounding area.
(5) The applicant shall provide documentation to the satisfaction of the
City Council that the proposed facility shall be in conformance with
all performance standards found in Article V of this chapter.
(6) The applicant shall provide documentation to the satisfaction of the
City Council that the proposed use will be free from vectors. The
applicant shall, if granted a conditional use permit, provide
monthly to the City Health Inspector a statement that the site is
free from vectors.
(7) The applicant shall provide an erosion and sedimentation and
stormwater control plan prepared by a professional engineer using
accepted engineering principles and implement such plans prior to
the beginning of operations.
(8) The applicant shall provide documentation to the satisfaction of the
City Council that the proposed facility shall operate in such a
manner as to not create a general nuisance, endanger the public
health, safety and welfare or inhibit the public's use or enjoyment
of their property.
(9) The applicant shall, if granted a conditional use permit, allow
access at any time to the facility for inspection by appropriate City
officials and provide the City with the name and phone number of a
responsible person(s) to be contacted 24 hours a day in the event of
an inspection.
(10) All solid waste, including but not limited to municipal, infectious or
hazardous waste (as defined by Title 25, Chapter 271, of the
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1147
Pennsylvania Code) shall only be stored or transferred in a
completely enclosed building, in addition to all other conditions of
solid waste transfer facilities.
(11) Setbacks.
(a) All such facilities shall be located a minimum of 800 feet from
any residential district or any lot line of an existing dwelling
and a minimum of 150 feet from any commercial district as
shown on the Official Zoning Map, as amended.
(b) All solid waste storage or disposal shall be at least 200 feet
from the following: a public street right-of-way, exterior lot
line, one-hundred-year floodplain, edge of a surface water body
(including a water-filled quarry) or wetland of more than two
acres in area.
(c) All areas to be used for the storage or disposal of solid waste
shall be a minimum of 500 feet from any publicly owned
recreation area or the banks of any perennial creek or river.
(12) All solid waste transfer facilities (as defined by this chapter) shall
be subject to all requirements of Title 25, Chapter 279, of the
Pennsylvania Code (as amended), Transfer Facilities, regardless of
whether a permit pursuant to said requirement is required. Where
no permit is required by the DEP, all references to the DEP shall be
amended to read the "City of Scranton." Where a DEP permit is
required and said regulations provide for information to be
provided to the DEP, a duplicate copy of said information provided
to the City will satisfy these requirements. Where a difference
exists between applicable state regulations and City regulations, it
is intended for the purposes of this section that the more stringent
requirements shall apply.
(13) All such facilities shall provide a fifty-foot minimum buffer yard
along the perimeter of the property line. Said buffer yard shall
include natural screening of trees and shrubs adequate to
completely visually screen such facilities from neighboring
properties and complying with § 445-74. The fencing required by
this section shall be located inside the buffer yard. The fencing and
buffer area shall be maintained for the life of the proposed facility.
(14) Under the authority granted to the City under State Act 101 of
1988,179 all such uses shall be permitted only between the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (prevailing local time), Monday through
Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon (prevailing local time) Saturday and
are not permitted to operate on Sundays, Christmas Eve Day,
Christmas Day, New Year's Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day,
Memorial Day or Thanksgiving Day. All deliveries of solid waste
shall be made during the hours between 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon
179. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1148
(prevailing local time), Monday through Friday, and not on
Saturdays, Sundays or the above-specified holidays.
(15) Solid waste transfer facilities shall provide documentation to the
satisfaction of the City Council that the proposed use will be
controlled and operated by a municipality, municipal authority,
county or county authority duly incorporated in the state.
(16) Exempt from the provisions of this chapter are vehicles containing
less than one cubic yard of solid waste and vehicles parked at a
retail store or restaurant for a reasonable amount of time while the
operator makes use of the establishment.
(17) This section regulating solid waste transfer facilities is not
intended to regulate the City of Scranton, a municipal corporation,
and therefore by this statement the City of Scranton is exempt from
all aspects of this subsection except for the administration and
enforcement of this subsection with respect to others.
(18) The use shall be served by a minimum of two paved access roads,
each with a minimum cartway width of 24 feet. One of these roads
may be restricted to use by emergency vehicles.
(19) Open dumps and open burning of refuse are prohibited.
(20) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the City Council that
the use would not routinely create noxious odors off of the tract.
(21) A minimum total lot area of four acres (which may include land in
an adjoining municipality) is required for the first 250 tons per day
of capacity to treat or dispose of waste, plus one acre for each
additional 100 tons per day of capacity. The facility shall have a
maximum total capacity of 750 tons per day.
(22) Attendant. An attendant shall be present during all periods of
operation or dumping.
(23) Emergency access. The operator of the use shall cooperate fully
with local emergency services. This should include allowing
practice exercises on the site and the provision of all information
needed by the emergency services to determine potential hazards.
Adequate means of emergency access shall be provided.
(24) Tires. See § 445-35C(9), Outdoor storage and display.
(25) Litter. The operator shall regularly police the area of the facility
and surrounding streets to collect litter that may escape from the
facility or trucks.
(26) Dangerous materials. No radioactive, hazardous,
chemotherapeutic or infectious materials or substances may be
stored or processed in any way, except for types and amounts of
hazardous substances customarily kept in a commercial business
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1149
for on-site use. "Infectious materials" are defined as medical wastes
used or created in the treatment of persons or animals with
seriously contagious diseases.
(27) The applicant shall provide sufficient information for the City to
determine that the requirements of this chapter will be met.
(28) The applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with a copy of all
written materials and plans that are submitted to the Pennsylvania
DEP at the same time as they are submitted to the DEP.
(29) All loading and unloading of solid waste shall only occur within
over an impervious surface drains to a holding tank that is then
adequately treated.
RR. Stable, nonhousehold.
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(2) Any horse barn, corral, fenced-in area or stable shall be a minimum
of 25 feet from any lot line, except 150 feet from any residential lot
line.
SS. Swimming pool, nonhousehold.
(1) The water surface shall be set back at least 25 feet from any
residential lot line.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Any water surface within 100 feet of an existing dwelling shall be
separated from the dwelling by evergreen screening meeting the
requirements of § 445-74.
(4) The water surface shall be surrounded by a secure, well-maintained
fence at least six feet in height.
(5) Water service. Any inlet from a central water system shall be above
the overflow level of the pool.
(6) Nuisances. A pool shall not include illumination of adjacent
residential properties beyond what is customary in a residential
neighborhood. A pool shall also not include the playing of a radio or
recorded music at a volume louder than is necessary for the
convenient hearing of persons at the pool.
TT. Target range, non-completely indoor and enclosed.
(1) All target ranges shall have a barrier behind the target area which
is of sufficient height and thickness to adequately protect the
public safety. This barrier shall be made of earth for an outdoor
firearms range.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1150
(2) An outdoor firearms target range shall comply with National Rifle
Association standards and other applicable federal, state and local
regulations.
(3) An outdoor firearms target range shall be located a minimum of
250 feet from a residential lot line.
(4) An outdoor firearms target range shall be fenced and be properly
posted.
(5) The applicant shall show that the noise limits of Article V will be
met.
(6) An indoor firearms target range shall be adequately ventilated to
allow the building to remain completely enclosed.
UU. Tavern. Any place serving alcoholic beverages as a significant portion of
its business that also has a capacity of more than 150 persons for
entertainment or dancing shall also meet the standards of a nightclub.
See noise standards in Article V.
VV. Townhouses and low-rise apartments.
(1) Maximum number of attached townhouses. See Article III.
(2) Changes in facade. For every attached grouping of townhouses, a
minimum of two changes in the front wall plane shall be provided.
Such change shall involve a minimum variation or offset of four
feet. This requirement may be met by differing setbacks between
an attached garage and a dwelling or differing setbacks among
different dwellings or differing setbacks along the front of a
dwelling or dwellings set back further than attached private garage
structures.
(3) Buffer yard. An eight-foot-wide buffer yard with screening shall be
provided by the developer of the townhouses or low-rise
apartments, as described in § 445-74, between any townhouse or
low-rise apartment principal buildings and any of the following
features that are at least partially within 100 feet of such buildings:
(a) Any abutting existing single-family detached dwelling.
(b) The existing right-of-way of an expressway.
(c) The existing right-of-way of an arterial street that abuts the
rear of townhouse units.
(4) Lot requirements within a residential district shall be:
(a) Maximum building length: 200 feet.
(b) Maximum building height: The requirements of the applicable
district in Article III shall apply.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1151
(c) Minimum tract width: 100 feet each.
(d) Floor area. See § 445-72.
(e) Minimum tract area: 6,000 square feet for townhouses and
8,000 square feet for low-rise apartments, except for the R-1A
District see Article III.
(5) Building separation. Each principal building shall be separated by a
minimum of 20 feet from any other principal building on the same
lot.
(6) See §§ 445-35 and 445-29 for regulations on specific accessory
uses. To avoid incompatible structures in a higher density
environment, townhouse developers are strongly encouraged to
establish deed restrictions or homeowners' association regulations
controlling the general types and material of attached decks,
fences and accessory structures that may be added or constructed
in the future.
(7) Minimum width of townhouses. Each townhouse dwelling unit shall
have a minimum width of 18 feet, except the minimum width shall
be 24 feet for any townhouse that has two or more off-street
parking spaces located within 20 feet of the front of the townhouse
or has a garage door(s) for two or more motor vehicles facing onto
the front of a townhouse.
(8) Minimum private area.
(a) For each townhouse, there shall be a yard, balcony, patio or
other outdoor area other than a driveway immediately adjacent
to the front, back or side of each dwelling of not less than 200
square feet for the exclusive use of the occupants of that
dwelling.
(b) If townhouses are subdivided into individual lots, the minimum
lot area shall be the building footprint, plus this 200 square
feet.
(c) Design measures shall be used to seek an appropriate level of
privacy in any rear yards. Such measures might include
landscaped screening, compatible fencing or earthen berming.
The intent is to avoid the placement of incompatible fencing by
individual lot owners in the future.
(9) Architectural renderings. Preliminary architectural renderings,
models or photos are requested for any garden apartment or
townhouse development of more than 25 units.
(10) Paved area setback. All off-street parking spaces, except spaces on
driveways immediately in front of a carport or garage entrance,
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any dwelling.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1152
(11) Utilities. Both public sewage and public water service shall be
provided to each dwelling unit. All utilities within the development,
including cable television, shall be placed underground.
(12) Density. See § 445-30.
WW. Treatment center.
(1) The applicant shall provide a written description of all types of
residents the use is intended to include over the life of the permit.
Any future additions or modifications to this list shall require
approval of the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
(2) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing
Board, with the burden of proof being upon the applicant, that the
use will involve adequate supervision and security measures to
protect public safety.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions on the use as
necessary to protect public safety, including conditions on the types
of residents and security measures.
XX. Veterinarian office (includes animal hospital).
(1) Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet.
(2) Any structure in which animals are treated or housed shall be a
minimum of 50 feet from any residential lot line. Buildings shall be
adequately soundproofed so that sounds generated within the
buildings cannot routinely be perceived within any adjacent
dwellings.
(3) Outdoor animal runs may be provided for small animals for use
between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., provided that the runs are at
least 150 feet from any existing dwelling and provided that the runs
for dogs are separated from each other by visual barriers a
minimum of four feet in height, to minimize dog barking.
(4) A commercial kennel shall only be an accessory and not a principal
use, unless a kennel is permitted in that district, and the applicable
requirements are met.
(5) Any outdoor solid waste receptacles (other than routine trash
receptacles for visitors) and all structures housing animals shall be
set back a minimum of 50 feet from any existing dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
YY. Warehouse or wholesale sales.
(1) See off-street loading requirements in § 445-57.
(2) No storage of trash, garbage, refuse, highly explosive or flammable
materials, hazardous or highly toxic substances, animals, animal
carcasses or similar items shall be permitted.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1153
(3) Uses that would involve the entrance to the use of an average of
more than 200 tractor-trailers per weekday shall be required to
meet the additional standards in this section for a truck terminal.
(4) See requirements in § 445-35C(9) for outdoor storage or display.
ZZ. Waste-to-energy plant.
(1) As a condition for approval as a conditional use, the applicant shall
prove to the satisfaction of the City Council that the use will not
create any significant hazards to the public health. Such
determination shall be based upon any reviews provided by the
Planning Commission, the City Engineer, other City staff persons
and any professional studies provided to the City Council. The
burden of proof for such determination shall be upon the applicant.
Such assessment of health risks shall consider the ambient health
and the environmental conditions in the community, to fully reflect
the aggregated or synergistic effects of the proposed project.
(2) The applicant shall be required to provide an escrow account of a
minimum of $25,000 that may be used by the City only to fund
professional review(s) of the applicant's proposal by environmental
health professionals. Any funds not utilized for such purpose shall
be returned to the applicant.
(3) The applicant shall provide evidence that the use will not generate
significant hazards or significant nuisances to the public. Such
evidence shall be based upon the operating characteristics of the
most similar uses that are actually in operation in the United States
and/or Canada, including actual data or a professional summary of
such data over a minimum two-year period on emissions into the air
and any emissions into the water and/or the ground.
(4) All buildings and any smokestack of such use shall not be located
within 250 feet of a lot line of an existing primarily residential use
or within 1,000 feet of a lot line of a hospital or nursing home
within the City or within any adjacent municipality.
(5) Traffic.
(a) The applicant shall describe in detail the proposed method of
transportation of materials to the site.
(b) The use shall not be approved if the City Council determines
that the majority of materials would need to be brought to the
use using tractor-trailer trucks mainly using streets that
primarily abut existing residences within residential zoning
districts in such a manner that significant noxious noise and
soot nuisances would be created to these residential areas
within the City or in adjoining municipalities.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-34
441:1154
(c) The applicant's description of transportation methods may
consider road improvements that will be fully funded by the
applicant or that are scheduled for completion in PennDOT's
Official Twelve-Year Plan prior to the intended initiation of
operations of the use.
(6) The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the types of
materials intended to be processed and/or incinerated on the site.
(7) The applicant is requested to provide a preliminary architectural
rendering of the exterior of the proposed building as visible from at
least one public street. Such rendering shall not be binding upon
the applicant and shall not be a basis for a conditional use decision.
(8) The applicant shall provide a detailed description of proposed
methods to monitor hazards and emissions from the facility.
(9) The applicant shall provide a description of the proposed processes
and operations of the use and methods of controlling hazards and
nuisances in sufficient detail for the City Council and any
environmental health consultants to determine potential hazards
and nuisances from the use. Such description shall also include any
backup safety mechanisms, in case the primary systems of control
fail.
(10) The applicant shall describe any proposed host fees that may or
may not be offered to or required by the City. For solid waste uses,
see State Act 101 of 1988.180
(11) Lot area. A waste-to-energy plant (as defined by Article II of this
chapter) shall include a minimum lot area of 30 contiguous acres
for up to 500 tons of total daily incineration capacity, plus five
additional contiguous acres for each additional 200 tons of total
daily incineration capacity. For example, a total daily incineration
capacity of 700 tons would require a minimum contiguous lot area
of 35 acres. Such capacity shall apply to the total of all materials
and substances intended to be incinerated, burned and/or
otherwise converted to energy, whichever is more inclusive.
(12) All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 80 feet from all
exterior lot lines, except for where greater distances are provided
by other sections of this chapter.
(13) If the use would involve groundwater usage or withdrawals from
surface waters other than that obtained through the public water
system, the applicant shall provide a detailed analysis of the water
quantity and quality impacts of such use.
(14) The operation and day-to-day maintenance of the use shall comply
with all applicable state and federal regulations as a condition of
180. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 445-34 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-34
441:1155
§ 445-35. Accessory uses.
the continuance of any permit of the City. Violations of this
condition shall also be considered to be violations of this chapter.
(15) The applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with a copy of all
written materials and plans that are submitted to Pennsylvania DEP
and the United States Environmental Protection Agency or their
successor agencies at the same time as they are submitted to such
agencies.
(16) Attendant. An attendant shall be present during all periods of
operation or dumping.
(17) Gates. Secure gates, fences, earth mounds and/or dense vegetation
shall prevent unauthorized access.
(18) Emergency services.
(a) The operator of the use shall cooperate fully with local
emergency services. This should include allowing practice
exercises on the site and the provision of all information
needed by the emergency services to determine potential
hazards.
(b) Adequate means of emergency vehicle access shall be
provided.
(c) The applicant shall provide evidence that there will be
sufficient water pressure and water supplies available for fire
fighting on the site.
(19) The City Council may place such reasonable conditions on the use
as are necessary to ensure that the public health and safety are
protected and to address the concerns stated in this section.
(20) Operators. The applicant shall state the proposed minimum
qualifications and/or professional certifications of persons intended
to be in charge of and on-site during the use's operations during the
different shifts.
(21) Insurance. The applicant shall state the minimum amount of
liability insurance intended to be held by the owner of the use
during its operations.
A. General. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are clearly
customary and incidental to a permitted by right, special exception or
conditional use are permitted by right, except as is provided for in this
chapter.
B. Accessory setbacks.
§ 445-34 SCRANTON CODE § 445-35
441:1156
(1) The accessory setback requirements of the applicable district shall
apply to every accessory building, structure or use unless a
standard that is clearly meant to be more restrictive or less
restrictive is specifically stated in this Article for a particular
accessory use. See the list of essential services in § 445-29.
(2) No accessory structure, use or building shall be permitted in a
required front yard in any district, unless specifically permitted by
this chapter.
(3) Any portions of a building (such as a garage) that is structurally
attached to a principal building shall be considered part of the
principal building for the purposes of determining setbacks.
C. Additional standards. Each accessory use shall comply with all of the
following standards listed for that use:
(1) Antenna (other than commercial communications antennae).
(a) Height. No antenna in a residential district, including its
supporting structure, shall have a total height above the
average surrounding ground level of greater than 75 feet.
(b) Anchoring. Any antenna shall be properly anchored to resist
high winds. See requirements in the City building code.181
(2) Composting.
(a) Composting shall be limited to the composting of
biodegradable vegetative material, including grass clippings,
trees, shrubs, leaves and vegetable waste. The composting
shall not include animal wastes or fats.
(b) Composting shall be conducted in such a way that a fire, rodent
or disease-carrying insect hazard are not created, nor noxious
odors perceptible from neighboring properties.
(3) Day-care center as accessory use to a residential use.
(a) The following shall be the maximum number of children under
age 15 that may be cared for in any dwelling unit:
[1] In a single-family detached dwelling with a minimum lot
area of 9,000 square feet and a ten-foot setback from all
existing dwellings: a maximum of six children who are not
related (see definition in Article II) to a permanent
resident of the dwelling.
[2] In any other dwelling unit: a maximum of three children,
beyond those children who are related (as defined by
Article II) to a permanent resident of the dwelling.
181. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Building Construction.
§ 445-35 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-35
441:1157
(b) The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no
change to the exterior of the dwelling to accommodate the use,
other than cosmetic improvements.
(c) Any day-care center involving seven or more children shall be
considered a principal use and meet the standards of § 445-34
for such use, if permitted. See also day-care centers as an
accessory to a place of worship (§ 445-35) or to a place of
employment (§ 445-29).
(d) The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of
the dwelling.
(e) If four to six children who are not related to a permanent
resident of the dwelling are cared for, then the following
requirements shall be met:
[1] Smoke detectors shall be provided throughout the
building, an ABC-rated fire extinguisher shall be provided
and exit lights shall be provided at outdoor exits and at
least one exit window shall be provided with an opening
within six feet of the adjacent exterior grade level.
[2] A minimum of 100 square feet of safe fenced-in exterior
play area shall be available, with play areas outside of the
front yard separated from any abutting single-family
detached dwellings by evergreen screening.
(4) Drive-through use. Any vehicle drive-through window(s) and
waiting lanes shall be located and have capacity for sufficient
numbers of vehicles to ensure that traffic conflicts and hazards are
avoided within the site and along the streets and highways
adjoining the use.
(5) Fences and walls.
(a) Fences, walls and hedges are permitted by right in all districts.
Any fence or wall shall be durably constructed and wellmaintained.
Fences that have deteriorated shall be replaced or
removed. A building permit is required for all fences and walls
(other than seasonal temporary snow fences and temporary
fences around active construction sites, with a maximum
height of nine feet in a residential district).
(b) Sight distance, stormwater and easements. No fence, wall or
hedge shall obstruct the sight distance requirements of
§ 445-74C, nor obstruct safe sight distance within an alley. No
fence or wall shall obstruct the flow of stormwater, except as
part of a City-approved stormwater system. No fence, wall or
continuous hedge shall be constructed within an easement in
such a way that it would prevent use of the easement for its
intended purpose.
§ 445-35 SCRANTON CODE § 445-35
441:1158
(c) Setbacks. No fence or wall shall be built within the existing
right-of-way of a street. A fence or wall may be constructed on
a lot line, but shall not be located within an existing street
right-of-way or within a required buffer yard or planting strip
required by §§ 445-74 and 445-75 of this chapter.
(d) Fences.
[1] Front yard. Any fence of a dwelling in the required front
yard of a lot in a residential district shall have a minimum
ratio of one to one (1:1) of open to structural areas and
shall not exceed four feet in height.
[2] A fence shall not be required to comply with minimum
setbacks for accessory structures.
[3] Height. A fence located in a residential district in a
location other than a required front yard shall have a
maximum height of six and one-half (6 1/2) feet, except:
[a] A maximum of height of 10 feet is permitted to enclose
a tennis or racquet sport court or a nonhousehold
swimming pool or an electric substation, provided that
such fence is set back a minimum of 10 feet from all
lot lines;
[b] If an applicant clearly proves, in writing, to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that a higher fence is
needed to protect public safety around a specific
hazard; or
[c] A maximum height of eight feet is permitted for fences
located outside of the front yard and located a
minimum of 10 feet from a lot line, such as fences
enclosing a patio.
[4] Fence materials. No fence shall be constructed out of
fabric, junk, junk vehicles, sheet metal, appliances, tanks
or barrels.
(e) Walls.
[1] Engineered retaining walls necessary to hold back slopes
are exempted from setback regulations and the
regulations of this section and are permitted by right as
needed in all districts.
[2] A wall shall have a maximum height of three feet within
the required front yard or a required accessory structure
setback in a residential district, except as permitted as a
backing for a permitted sign at an entrance to a
development.
§ 445-35 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-35
441:1159
[3] Walls that are attached to a building shall be regulated as
a part of that building.
(6) Garage sale.
(a) See definition in Article II. A garage sale shall not include
wholesale sales, nor sales of new merchandise of a type
typically found in retail stores. The use shall be clearly
accessory to the principal use.
(b) No garage sales shall be held on a lot during more than a total
of four days in any three consecutive months.
(c) Signs. See § 445-60.
(7) Heliport as an accessory use.
(a) The applicant shall prove compliance with applicable federal
and state regulations.
(b) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board or the City Council, as applicable, that nearby
aerial hazards will be well-marked.
(c) The landing pad shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any
existing dwelling.
(8) Home occupation (see definitions in Article II).
(a) The following standards shall apply to both light and general
home occupations:
[1] The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to prove
that the standards of this section will be met, especially
regarding possible nuisances and truck traffic. Based upon
the potential nuisances of a proposed home occupation,
the Zoning Hearing Board may determine that a particular
type or intensity of use is unsuitable to be a home
occupation or that the proposed lot area or setbacks are
not sufficient.
[2] The home occupation shall be conducted completely
indoors and may be within a principal or accessory
residential building. The total amount of floor area of all
buildings used for a home occupation shall not be greater
than 25% of the total floor area of the principal dwelling
unit.
[3] There shall be no outdoor operations or outdoor storage of
materials, products or equipment.
[4] Signs and displays. There shall be no use of show windows,
business display or advertising visible from outside the
§ 445-35 SCRANTON CODE § 445-35
441:1160
premises, except as is specifically permitted for a general
home occupation.
[5] Truck traffic. The use shall not require the parking or
servicing by a vehicle with more than 26,000 pounds
registered gross vehicle weight, except for deliveries a
maximum of two times per day. The use shall not involve
the parking of more than two trucks of any type on the lot
or on adjacent streets at any period of time. The use shall
not need servicing by, deliveries by or parking of tractortrailer
trucks.
[6] Uses permitted as a home occupation include but are not
limited to art studio, office, custom sewing, tax
preparation or musical instruction.
[7] The following uses shall not be permitted as a home
occupation: veterinarian office, stable, kennel, funeral
parlor, retail store, restaurant, auto repair or trucking
company terminal.
[8] Nuisances. No machinery or equipment shall be permitted
that produces noise, noxious odor, vibration, glare,
electrical interference or radio or electromagnetic
interference beyond the boundary of the property. Only
general types and sizes of machinery that are typically
found in dwellings for hobby or domestic purposes shall be
permitted. No use shall generate noise or glare in excess
of what is typical in a residential neighborhood.
[9] The use shall also comply with all environmental and
nuisance control regulations of this chapter, including
Article V.
[10] Parking and loading.
[a] If a home occupation can reasonably be expected to
routinely involve visitation of the site by customers or
patrons, then a minimum of one off-street parking
space shall be provided in addition to a minimum of
one off-street parking space for the dwelling.
[b] The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board in the case of a general home
occupation that the use will include adequate offstreet
parking and loading spaces.
[c] The Board may regulate the location of needed offstreet
parking to maintain a residential character and
may deny a general home occupation if adequate offstreet
parking cannot be accommodated without
§ 445-35 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-35
441:1161
substantially harming the residential character of the
lot.
[11] Building appearance. The exterior of the building and the
lot shall not be changed in such a way as to decrease its
residential appearance, except for permitted parking
spaces and the permitted sign.
[12] Hours. A home occupation shall not be conducted in a way
that is perceptible from beyond the lot line between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. This time limit shall also
apply to any loading or unloading of vehicles on the
property or on a street that causes noise to adjoining
residents.
[13] Hazardous substances. The use shall not involve the
storage or use of hazardous, flammable or explosive
substances, other than types and amounts commonly
found in a dwelling. The use shall not involve the use or
storage of toxic substances.
[14] Advertising. The address and business hours of the home
occupation shall not be advertised in such a way that
would encourage customers or salespersons to come to the
property without an appointment.
[15] Law or medical office. The main office of a medical doctor,
chiropractor, dentist or attorney shall only be allowed as a
home occupation if the property abuts an arterial street
and has a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet.
(b) General home occupation. In addition to the standards in
Subsection C(8)(a) above, the following shall apply to a general
home occupation:
[1] Only the following sign shall be permitted: one
nonilluminated sign with a maximum sign area of two
square feet on each of two sides, with a maximum height of
eight feet. Such sign shall not be located within the
existing right-of-way of a street, unless it is attached to a
mailbox.
[2] Number of employees. A total maximum of one person
shall work on the premises who is not a permanent
resident of the dwelling, except a barber- or beauty shop
may not include any nonresident employees.
[3] Instruction. Any instruction or tutoring shall be limited to
a maximum of three students on the property at any one
time and six students on the property on any day.
§ 445-35 SCRANTON CODE § 445-35
441:1162
[4] Barber/beautician. Any barber, beautician, hair stylist or
similar personal service use shall only be permitted as a
home occupation if a total of only one person works on the
premises, who must be a permanent resident of the
dwelling.
[5] If the home occupation involves nonmechanical work on a
vehicle(s), such vehicle(s) shall not be parked on the lot or
on abutting streets overnight.
[6] Traffic. The use shall not routinely involve the arrival at
the property for business purposes of more than 10
vehicles per day or the parking of more than four vehicles
of nonresidents at any one time.
(c) Home occupation, light. In addition to the standards in
Subsection (C)(8)(a) above, the following standards shall apply
to a light home occupation:
[1] Traffic. The use shall not routinely involve the arrival at
the property for business purposes of more than four
vehicles per day. The use shall not require a need for
parking beyond what is typically provided for a dwelling.
[2] Only persons who are permanent residents of the dwelling
shall work on the premises.
[3] No sign shall identify the business.
(9) Outdoor storage and display. Commercial or industrial as a
principal or accessory use:
(a) Location. Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part
of any of the following: the existing or future street right-ofway,
sidewalk or other area intended or designed for
pedestrian use, buffer yard, required parking area or required
planting strip (see §§ 445-74 and 445-75).
(b) No such storage or display shall occur on areas with a slope in
excess of 25% or within the one-hundred-year floodway.
(c) Tires. If more than 250 tires are stored on a lot, each stack
shall be a maximum of 20 feet high and cover a maximum of
400 square feet. Each stack shall be separated from other
stacks by a minimum of 75 feet. A maximum of 5,000 tires may
be stored on a lot out of doors, unless the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the City Council as a conditional use that
there will be adequate measures to protect the public health
and safety. Where tire storage is also regulated by the
Pennsylvania DEP, whichever specific City or state regulations
that are more restrictive upon the applicant shall apply.
§ 445-35 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-35
441:1163
(d) No commercial or industrial outdoor storage or display shall
occur within a required front yard, except:
[1] Vehicles for sale or rent; and
[2] Trees, shrubs and plants for sale.
(e) Buffer yards and plant screening. See §§ 445-74 and 445-75.
(10) Pets, keeping of. (NOTE: This does not apply to the raising of
livestock, which is regulated by § 445-34.)
(a) This is a permitted by right accessory use in all districts.
(b) Types. Only those animals that are domesticated and are
compatible with a residential character shall be permitted as
the keeping of pets. Examples of permitted pets include dogs,
cats, rabbits, lizards, turtles, gerbils and fish, but do not
include bears, wolves, wolf-dog hybrids, goats, cows,
venomous snakes that would be poisonous to humans, pigs
(other than miniature breeds) or sheep.
(c) Nuisances. No use shall involve the keeping of animals or fowl
in such a manner or of such types of animals that it creates a
serious nuisance (including noise or odor), a health hazard or a
public safety hazard.
[1] The person with the duty of care of the animals shall be
responsible for collecting and properly disposing of all
fecal matter from pets.
[2] No animal that is dangerous to humans shall be allowed
outdoors in a residential district, except within a secure
caged or fenced area or on a leash under full control of the
owner.
(d) Cats and dogs.
[1] On a residential lot of fewer than one acre, the total
number of dogs and cats over three months in age shall be
a combined maximum of six. On any other lot, the total
number of dogs and cats over three months of age shall be
a combined maximum of 12.
[2] Keeping of more than the specified number of cats or dogs
shall be considered a kennel.
(e) No numerical restriction shall apply to animals of fewer than
three months age, although commercial breeding shall only be
permitted as a general home occupation or as a kennel.
(f) Fowl. A maximum total of two pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese
and similar fowl shall be kept on lots of fewer than 20,000
square feet. Such animals shall be kept on the property of the
§ 445-35 SCRANTON CODE § 445-35
441:1164
applicant. Additional numbers of pigeons may be permitted if
the applicant proves compliance with the State Carrier Pigeon
Act.182 If there is more than two such fowl on a lot, they shall
be kept a minimum of 50 feet from any dwelling other than that
of the owner of the animals. Any commercial keeping of such
fowl shall require approval as a raising of livestock use.
(g) Horses. A maximum of two horses may be kept if the lot has a
minimum area of two acres or more, but fewer than five acres.
The keeping of up to five horses is permitted on a lot of five
acres or more. Any horse barn, corral, manure storage area or
stable shall be a minimum of 150 feet from any residential lot
line. Keeping of more than the specified number of horses shall
be considered a stable.
(h) Bees. Any area intentionally used for the outdoor keeping of
bees shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from all lot lines.
Such area shall be well-marked.
(11) Recreational vehicle storage of one or two.
(a) A maximum of two uninhabited recreational vehicles in
transportable condition may be stored or parked on a lot
outside of an enclosed building. A recreation vehicle shall not
block required sight distance (see § 445-74) or a public
sidewalk.
(b) Any recreational vehicle or trailer that is required to be
registered or licensed under state law to be operated and is not
registered or licensed shall be kept out of view from any public
street or abutting dwelling.
(c) A maximum total of one recreational vehicle may be inhabited
as a temporary accessory residence to a single-family detached
dwelling for a maximum period of seven days. Such use shall
occur only once per lot in a calendar year.
(12) Residential accessory structure (see definition in Article II).
(a) Accessory structures and uses (other than fences) shall not be
within a required front yard or within the required accessory
use setback as stated in § 445-30, unless specifically exempted
by this chapter. See § 445-35B concerning setback.
(b) Accessory buildings on a lot with a lot area of two-thirds (2/3)
acre or fewer in a residential district shall meet the following
requirements:
[1] Maximum total floor area of all accessory buildings: 1,200
square feet.
182. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 3951 et seq.
§ 445-35 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-35
441:1165
[2] Maximum of two accessory buildings per lot.
(c) Any such skateboard ramp shall be a maximum of five feet in
height and five feet in length and shall be moved inside when
not actively in use and shall not be in use more than five hours
a day.
(d) Height. See Article III.
(13) Satellite antennas.
(a) Purpose. The purposes shall be to provide for reception of
satellite communications, while assuring that such uses will
not detract from the character of any area or adversely affect
property values and to recognize that the solidness and
visibility of satellite antennas can create a very strong visual
impact on a neighborhood compared to most other
noncommercial antenna.
(b) Satellite antenna shall be a permitted by right accessory use in
all districts for all uses, subject to the restrictions in this
subsection.
(c) The following regulations on satellite antennae shall apply only
for residential uses in a residential district:
[1] A satellite antenna shall not be located within the required
front yard.
[2] Any satellite antenna placed on a roof shall have a
maximum diameter of four feet.
[3] A maximum of one satellite antenna shall be permitted per
lot.
[4] A satellite antenna shall have a maximum diameter of nine
feet if visible from a public street or a dwelling.
[5] A ground-mounted satellite antenna shall have a maximum
height of 15 feet above the average ground level if visible
from a public street or a dwelling.
[6] Any satellite antenna that is ground mounted and visible
from a public street shall be screened by appropriate
evergreen plantings with a minimum height of three feet
between the antenna and any public street, unless the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer
that screening in such a location would make it impossible
to receive the electronic signals.
[7] No satellite antenna under this section shall be used for
the transmission of commercial electronic signals.
§ 445-35 SCRANTON CODE § 445-35
441:1166
(d) A satellite antenna shall comply with the accessory setback
requirements of the applicable district. Satellite antennae in a
nonresidential district shall not be subject to the maximum
height restrictions of the district regulations.
(14) Swimming pool, household (referred hereafter as "pool").
(a) The pool shall not involve any commercial use.
(b) Enclosure around in-ground pools. A new or existing in-ground
pool shall be completely surrounded by a secure fence, wall,
portion of a building and/or similar enclosure not less than four
feet in height. This enclosure shall be constructed to make it
very difficult for small children to climb up or slip through the
enclosure. All gates or door openings through such enclosure
(other than a door to a building) shall be self-closing and
include a self-latching device on the pool side for keeping the
gate or door securely closed at times when not in use.
(c) Enclosure around aboveground pool. Any existing or new
aboveground pool shall include a secure fence, wall or other
enclosure a minimum of four feet high above the surrounding
average ground level. This enclosure may include the walls of
the pool itself. Such pools shall be equipped with an access
ladder that can be raised and locked in a position so that it is a
minimum of four feet above the surrounding ground level or
otherwise completely inaccessible to children when the pool is
unattended.
(d) Location.
[1] Any deck or shelter that is elevated above the average
surrounding ground level shall meet the applicable
setback requirement for an accessory building.
[2] Patios around pools that are level with the average
surrounding ground level are not required to meet
setbacks.
[3] Where practical, a pool shall be located to the rear of a
dwelling. A pool is not permitted within a required front
yard.
[4] The structural walls of a pool shall be set back a minimum
of eight feet from the lot line of an abutting dwelling.
(e) The City does not assume responsibility for guaranteeing to the
public that all new and existing pools fully comply with these
provisions.
(f) Water service. Any inlet from a public water system shall be
above the overflow level of the pool.
§ 445-35 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-35
441:1167
(15) Unit for care of relative.
(a) See definition in Article II.
(b) This use shall be restricted to a relative (as defined by Article
II) of a permanent resident of the principal dwelling unit on the
property. A maximum of two persons may inhabit such unit.
(c) Such relative shall need care and supervision because of old
age, disability, handicap or illness.
(d) Such unit shall be designed and installed in such a way that it
can easily be reconverted into part of the principal dwelling
unit after such relative no longer lives within it. Once such unit
is no longer occupied by such relative, the dwelling shall be
reconverted into part of the principal dwelling unit or be
completely removed within 180 days.
(e) Such unit shall require a permit, which shall be renewed every
two years. The occupants of the principal dwelling unit shall
every two years report the name and relationship of such
occupant to the Zoning Officer.
(f) Once a unit under this section is required to be removed, there
shall be no physical evidence visible from the exterior to the lot
lines that such apartment existed, other than possibly the
expanded size of the dwelling.
(g) Such unit shall not decrease the single-family residential
exterior appearance of a dwelling.
(h) Such unit shall not have its own exterior separate entrances.
The unit shall maintain at least one interior connection to the
principal dwelling unit. The unit shall not have its own electric
or water meter.
(i) Such unit shall be connected to or within the principal dwelling
unit.
§ 445-35 SCRANTON CODE § 445-35
441:1168
ARTICLE V
Environmental Protection
§ 445-36. General performance standards.
§ 445-37. Nuisances and hazards to public safety.
§ 445-38. Wetlands.
A. Information. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that the
proposed use may have difficulty complying with the standards of this
Article, then the Zoning Officer may require an applicant to provide
written descriptions of proposed machinery, hazardous and toxic
substances, operations and safeguards.
B. Federal and state permits. City permits under this chapter are issued
conditioned upon compliance with applicable federal and state permits.
Failure to comply with such federal and state permits on a substantive
matter shall be sufficient reason for suspension or withdrawal of a City
permit under this chapter.
A. No landowner, tenant nor lessee shall use or allow to be used land or
structures in a way that seriously threatens to or creates any of the
following conditions:
(1) Communicable disease or other public health hazards, including
activities that would be attractive to or encourage the breeding of
disease-prone insects or rodents.
(2) Significant physical hazards to the public, especially hazards that
would be easily accessible by small children.
(3) Activity that creates a significant hazard to public health and safety
because of serious explosive, fire, biological, biogenetic or toxic
hazards (see Chapter 243, Fire Prevention).
(4) Activity that causes serious pollution to groundwaters or surface
waters.
B. It is the responsibility of every property owner to ensure that their
property does not threaten public health or safety and to remove or
alter any structure or situation that threatens the public health and
safety. This includes, but is not limited to, structurally unsound
structures, including those damaged by fire.
A. If the Zoning Officer or the City Engineer have reason to believe that a
portion of a site proposed to be altered or drained may possibly meet
the state or federal definitions of a "wetland," the Zoning Officer may
require the applicant to provide a study by a qualified professional
delineating the locations of wetlands. However, the City accepts no
responsibility to identify all wetlands or to warn parties of such
possibilities.
§ 445-36 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-38
441:1169
§ 445-39. Setback from rivers and creeks.
B. All permits of the City are issued on the condition that the applicant
comply with federal and state wetlands regulations, and such permits
may be revoked by the Zoning Officer for noncompliance with such
regulations.
A. Purposes. The purposes shall be to protect the water quality of surface
waters, preserve physical access to surface waters in case of future
public acquisition, minimize erosion and sedimentation, preserve the
natural stormwater drainage system of the area, conserve sensitive
wildlife and aquatic habitats, preserve vegetation along waterways that
will help screen out eroded soil and other pollutants and provide for
setbacks that can be used as required yard areas for a use and to
preserve adequate flow capacity for floodwaters and to encourage
groundwater recharge.
B. Setback from creeks and rivers.
(1) No new principal building or paved area (except as exempted in
Subsection C below) shall be located within:
(a) Seventy-five feet of the top edge of the primary bank of the
Lackawanna River and the Roaring Brook Creek;
(b) Seventy-five feet of the center of the following creeks for land
in the R-1, R-1C or C-R District: Stafford Meadow Brook,
Keyser Creek, Leggett Creek, Lindly Creek and Meadowbrook
Creek; and
(c) Thirty feet of the center of the following creeks in any zoning
district other than the R-1, R-1C or C-R District: Stafford
Meadow Brook, Keyser Creek, Leggett Creek, Lindly Creek
and Meadowbrook Creek.
(2) These setbacks shall only apply to portions of these creeks that are
above ground as of the adoption of this chapter. See the City
Floodplain Map in case a wider area is regulated under the
floodplain ordinance.183
C. Setback exemptions. The setbacks of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Public utility facilities.
(2) Stormwater control or flood control structures authorized by the
City or a state or federal agency.
(3) Publicly owned recreational facilities.
(4) Approved and necessary street and driveway crossings that are
approximately perpendicular to the waterway.
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 445-38 SCRANTON CODE § 445-39
441:1170
§ 445-40. Steep slopes.
D. Setback areas and construction. During any filling, grading or
construction activity, all reasonable efforts shall be made to leave the
setback areas of this section undisturbed, except at approved waterway
crossings. See the grading and erosion control requirements of
§ 445-47.
A. Site plan. If an area of a lot including slopes of 25% or greater is
proposed for construction of buildings, streets or driveways or
nonagricultural grading, then the applicant shall submit a steep slope
site plan to the Zoning Officer. These submittal requirements may be
met by including the required information on subdivision and land
development plans.
B. Submission requirements. A steep slope site plan shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) Show detailed slope contours for all areas that potentially may be
disturbed and/or constructed upon.
(2) Identify all areas of greater than 25% slope.
(3) Be to scale (such as one inch equals 50 feet).
(4) Show substantial areas of trees and dense vegetation proposed to
be removed or preserved prior to or during the development of the
use.
(5) Be stamped by a professional surveyor, professional engineer,
engineer-in-training, registered landscape architect or registered
architect.
(6) Show proposed locations of principal buildings, streets, driveways,
on-lot septic fields and other areas of soil disturbance. (If the exact
location of these features is not definitely determined at the time of
plan submittal, then the plan shall designate the outer limits of
areas where such features may potentially be located. If different
locations outside of the approved location would be proposed after
approval of the site plan, then the applicant shall prove to the
Zoning Officer that the revised location would still meet the
requirements of this section.)
(7) State the maximum slope of proposed driveways and streets.
(8) Show an area of 20 feet around the proposed principal building
locations.
C. Greater than 25% in R-1. If, within the R-1 District, a proposed principal
building location and any areas within 20 feet of such location on the lot
include more than 1,500 square feet with slopes greater than 25%, then
the following regulations shall apply, unless more restrictive
regulations are stated elsewhere in this chapter:
§ 445-39 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-40
441:1171
§ 445-41. Storage of explosive and hazardous substances.
§ 445-42. Sewage disposal.
(1) Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet per dwelling unit or per
principal nonresidential use.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage: 15% on the lot.
D. Streets, driveways and septic systems. See applicable street and
driveway slope standards in the City Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. See also DEP regulations on slopes of on-lot
septic systems.
E. Erosion. See § 445-47.
F. Grading. No grading shall occur in such a way that would circumvent
the requirements of this chapter, such as prior to submittal for a zoning
or building permit or subdivision or land development approval. The
steep slope requirements shall apply based on the slope of land at the
time of the adoption of this chapter.
G. Man-made slopes. This section shall not apply to man-made slopes that
naturally were not 15% or greater slopes.
A. Storage. See the City fire protection code.184 See fencing requirement
in § 445-48.
B. Water quality hazards.
(1) No substance shall be stored in such a way that it could be washed
into the groundwater or surface water, if such substance could
seriously contaminate groundwater or surface water or seriously
harm aquatic life of a waterway.
(2) If a substance threatens groundwater or surface water
contamination, it shall be stored within an impermeable
containment. Such storage shall be surrounded if needed by a berm
that would drain any spilled substance to an engineered collection
area or other method that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer is safe.
A. Generally. All methods of wastewater disposal shall meet the
requirements of the DEP, the City, the sewer authority and the Official
City Sewage Facilities Plan, as amended, as applicable.
B. Recertification of on-lot systems. Any septic system is required to be
reviewed and/or tested by the sewage enforcement officer for adequacy
if a change of use or expansion of use would cause an increase in
sewage flows or if there would be an increase in the number of dwelling
units.
184. Editor's Note: See Ch. 243, Fire Prevention.
§ 445-40 SCRANTON CODE § 445-42
441:1172
§ 445-43. Noise.
C. Alternate septic location. Any lot using an on-lot septic system that is to
be granted final subdivision approval after the adoption of this section
shall include a second open unpaved land area suitable for an alternate
septic system location. Such site shall be tested by the City sewage
enforcement officer and found to meet state and City requirements.
This requirement for the alternate system location shall not apply if the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that public
sewage service can reasonably be expected to serve the lot within five
years from the date of occupancy.
D. On-lot systems and lot area. A more restrictive minimum lot area may
be established by the sewage enforcement officer based upon DEP
regulations.
A. No land use or its operations shall generate a sound level exceeding the
limits established in the table below, when measured at the specified
locations:
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use/District
Land Use or Zoning
District Receiving
the Noise
Hours/Days Maximum
Sound Level
(in dBA)
10 feet inside a lot in a
residential district
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. other
than Sundays, Christmas
Day, Thanksgiving Day, New
Years Day, Fourth of July,
Labor Day and Memorial
Day
69
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., plus
all day Sundays, Christmas
Day, Thanksgiving Day, New
Years Day, Fourth of July,
Labor Day and Memorial
Day
64
10 feet inside a lot in
an I-G or I-L District
All times and days 78
10 feet inside any lot
line not listed above
All times and days 70
NOTE:
"dBA" means A-weighted decibel.
B. The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in the above table
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) Sound needed to alert people about an emergency.
§ 445-42 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-43
441:1173
§ 445-44. Vibration.
No use shall generate vibration that is perceptible to an average person
through his/her senses without the use of measuring instruments on private
property beyond the exterior lot line of the use generating the vibration.
This requirement shall not apply to occasional nonroutine blasting that may
be necessary during construction of streets, structures and utilities.
§ 445-45. Odors; dust; air and water pollution.
No use shall generate odors or dust that are significantly offensive to
persons of average sensitivities beyond the boundaries of the subject lot. All
uses shall comply with federal and state air and water pollution regulations
as a condition of any City permit.
§ 445-46. Light and glare control.
(2) Repair or installation of utilities or construction of structures,
sidewalks or streets between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.,
except for clearly emergency repairs which are not restricted by
time.
(3) Household power tools and lawn mowers between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(4) Agricultural activities, including permitted raising of livestock, but
not exempting a commercial kennel.
(5) Railroads and aircraft; motor vehicles operating on public streets
and highways. See vehicle noise restrictions in the state motor
vehicle code.185
(6) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the City Council or a
county, state or federal government agency or body.
(7) Unamplified human voices or the barking of a single dog.
(8) Routine ringing of bells and chimes by a place of worship or
municipal clock.
C. Professional studies and costs. If a District Justice determines that
professional analysis is needed to enforce this section regarding a
particular situation, the Zoning Officer may require that the applicant
reimburse the City for such reasonable costs of such analysis. In
addition, the Zoning Officer may base a determination under this
chapter upon a written study accomplished by and signed by a qualified
professional and submitted by an affected party. Any such study
provided by an affected party shall state the methods used and the
credentials of the person(s) who accomplished the study.
185. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 445-43 SCRANTON CODE § 445-46
441:1174
§ 445-47. Grading and erosion control.
A. Streetlighting exempted. This section shall not apply to streetlighting
that is owned, financed or maintained by the City or the state.
B. Height of lights. No luminaire, spotlight or other light source that is
within 200 feet of a dwelling or residential district shall be placed at a
height exceeding 35 feet above the average surrounding ground level.
This limitation shall not apply to lights needed for air safety nor lights
intended solely to illuminate an architectural feature of a building.
C. Diffused. All light sources, including signs, shall be properly diffused as
needed with a translucent or similar cover to prevent the lighting
element from being directly visible from streets, public sidewalks,
dwellings or adjacent lots. Two or more bare incandescent light bulbs of
40 watts or greater shall not be hung along a public street or an
abutting property.
D. Shielding. All light sources, including signs, shall be shielded around
the light source and carefully directed and placed to prevent the
lighting from creating a nuisance to reasonable persons in adjacent
dwellings or undeveloped residentially zoned areas and to prevent the
lighting from shining into the eyes of passing motorists. Light sources
shall also be shielded to avoid excessive fugitive emissions into the sky
in such a way as could harm astronomical visibility from an observatory.
E. Flickering. Flashing, flickering or strobe lighting are prohibited, except
for nonadvertising seasonal lights between October 25 and January 10.
A. Permit required.
(1) A zoning permit shall be required for:
(a) The deposit of more than 15 cubic yards of soil, stone, rock,
clean fill or similar material on a site in a calendar year.
(b) Grading activities involving more than one-half (1/2) acre of
land.
(c) Any grading, dumping or fill activities within the one-hundredyear
floodplain. All such activities may be subject to review by
the City Engineer.
(2) A separate City permit is not required for fill or grading specifically
approved under another zoning permit, under a subdivision or land
development approval or as part of a City-approved flood control
project.
(3) See the City stormwater management ordinance.186
186. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Stormwater Management.
§ 445-46 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-47
441:1175
§ 445-48. Placement; screening of waste containers; outdoor
machinery; fencing of storage.
B. Erosion control. All City permits are granted on the condition that state
erosion and sedimentation regulations and any officially submitted
erosion and sedimentation plan are fully complied with. The Zoning
Officer may require the submittal of an erosion and sedimentation
control plan with review by the County Conservation District wherever
soil will be disturbed. Failure to comply with such regulations or plan
shall be cause for suspension of City permits.
C. Unstable slopes. Slopes that would have the serious threat of instability,
in the determination of the City Engineer, shall not be created. The
Zoning Officer may require applicants to provide certification from a
professional engineer that finished slopes greater than four to one (4:1)
will be stable.
D. Drainage. The ground adjacent to a building shall be graded so that
surface water will be drained away from such building. Any fill or
grading shall only occur in such a way that it does not increase the flow
of stormwater onto public streets, without approval by the City
Engineer or PennDOT, as applicable. Any fill or grading shall not
increase flooding hazards for neighboring properties.
E. Grading, fill, dumping of clean fill, excavation or movement of materials
shall be completed to avoid an unsightly appearance and to prevent
interference with drainage, streets or utilities. Any fill placed on a site
shall be leveled off and properly sloped within three months of
placement, except for soil stockpile areas shown on an approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
A. Placement. Whenever reasonable, commercial, industrial and
institutional outdoor machinery that could create a noise nuisance shall
be placed towards a side of a building that does not face an abutting
existing dwelling, residential district, school or other noise sensitive
use.
B. Safety. General types of toxic, biological, electrical and other significant
hazards involving stationary outdoor machinery and storage shall be
marked with signs.
C. Solid waste containers.
(1) Screening. All trash dumpsters shall be screened on three of four
sides (not including the side it is to be emptied from) as needed to
screen the dumpster from view from public streets or dwellings on
abutting lots. A solid wooden fence, brick wall, evergreen plants or
structure designed to be architecturally compatible with the
principal building shall be used for such screening.
(2) Setback from dwellings. If physically possible, any solid waste
container with a capacity of over 15 cubic feet shall be kept a
§ 445-47 SCRANTON CODE § 445-48
441:1176
§ 445-49. Radioactivity and electrical disturbances.
No use shall routinely cause electrical, radio or electromagnetic
disturbances to equipment on other lots. No radioactive wastes shall be
disposed of in any district, and no radioactive wastes shall be stored on
a lot for longer than 90 days after their active use is completed. See also
Pennsylvania DEP regulations.
§ 445-50. Tree preservation.
minimum of 15 feet from any window or door of a dwelling unit on
an abutting lot.
(3) Food sales. Any use that involves the sale of ready-to-eat food for
consumption outside of a building shall provide at least one outdoor
solid waste receptacle at a convenient location outside of the main
exit door of the property for customer use. The operator of such use
shall be responsible for regular emptying and maintenance of such
receptacle.
(4) Enclosed containers. Solid waste receptacles stored outdoors shall
be adequately enclosed and covered to control the attraction of
rodents and insects.
D. Fencing of outdoor storage and machinery. The following shall be
secured by fencing or walls that are reasonably adequate to make it
extremely difficult for small children to enter:
(1) Outdoor industrial storage areas involving storage covering more
than 5,000 square feet of land.
(2) Stationary hazardous machinery and equipment that are outdoors.
(3) Outdoor bulk above ground or surface storage of potentially
explosive or hazardous liquids, gases or substances.
A. Intent. The intent shall be to protect wildlife and bird habitats,
encourage groundwater recharge, avoid pollution of creeks by high
temperature runoff, maintain the attractive character of areas and
conserve energy.
B. Tree removal.
(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(a) A permitted commercial forestry use (which is a special
exception use within standards in § 445-29); or
(b) Routine selective cutting of up to 15% of the trees throughout a
lot to thin woods that does not involve clear-cutting of any
areas other than areas approved for the development of a new
use.
§ 445-48 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-50
441:1177
§ 445-51. Flood-prone areas.
(2) Except as permitted in Subsection B(1) above, a maximum of 10
trees per lot, or on any combination of adjoining lots in common
ownership, with a trunk diameter of eight inches or more
(measured at a height four feet above original grade) shall be
removed in any calendar year unless each such additional tree
meets or will meet one or more of the following conditions:
(a) Is located within 10 feet of an uncurbed vehicular cartway.
(b) Is within a proposed or existing vehicular cartway, shoulder or
sidewalk.
(c) Is within 10 feet of an approved stormwater detention basin,
paved area, driveway or on-lot sewage system.
(d) Is within 25 feet of the foundation of an approved structure.
(e) Is within an approved utility corridor.
(f) Is diseased, dead or poses a clear danger to a structure, utility
or public improvement.
(g) Is a hazard to vehicular sight distance.
(h) Is clearly of old age and unhealthy and cannot reasonably be
expected to live for more than an additional five years.
(i) Is within an area of an approved principal or accessory use that
clearly requires the removal of the tree.
(j) Is within an area that must be cleared to develop an approved
golf course.
(k) Is necessary to allow longer rows for crop farming.
C. Protection of trees during construction. Adequate measures shall be
used to prevent the damage and destruction of trees during
construction. This should typically include the erection of temporary
wooded barriers around the dripline of trees, to prevent compaction of
root systems and damage to trunks from machinery.
D. Applicability. This section shall not apply to an owner of a residential lot
of fewer than one acre after occupancy.
A. Purposes. The purposes shall be to prevent loss of life and destruction
and damage of property; to avoid government expenditure for flood
protection, rescues and reconstruction; to avoid public health and
safety hazards; to avoid increases in flood levels and velocities; and to
reduce the numbers of persons unknowingly investing in land or new
structures that are prone to flooding.
B. Floodplain applicability.
§ 445-50 SCRANTON CODE § 445-51
441:1178
(1) The regulations of this section shall apply throughout the entire
City as overlay zoning regulations that supplement the zoning
district regulations. Where the regulations of this section differ
from the regulations of any other section of this chapter, the
provision that is more restrictive on development shall apply. If any
portion of this section shall be voided by judicial action, such action
shall not affect the applicability of the underlying zoning district
regulations.
(2) No structure shall be erected or enlarged or land used or graded
except in full compliance with the regulations of this section, the
City Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the City
building code187 and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended.
(3) See the liability section in Article I. The City makes no guaranty
that any area or structure is free from vulnerability to flooding.
(4) See the 1980 amendment to the City building code regarding
construction in floodplains.
C. Description of floodplain areas. For the purposes of this Article, the onehundred-
year floodplain shall be those areas identified as such on the
latest version of the Official Flood Insurance Study for the City as
issued by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, which shall hereafter be referred to as the "Federal
Floodplain Study." As of 1992, the latest official version was dated May
27, 1979. The one-hundred-year floodplain shall consist of the following
three components: the one-hundred-year floodway, the one-hundredyear
flood-fringe and the general floodplain area.
(1) "Floodway" (FW) shall mean the channel of a stream plus any
adjacent portions of the one-hundred-year floodplain that must be
kept free of encroachment in order to prevent the increase of flood
levels by more than one foot.
(2) "Flood-fringe" (FF) shall mean portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain that are not within the one-hundred-year floodway.
(3) "General floodplain area" (FA) shall mean areas identified as such
in the Federal Floodplain Study, for which no detailed one-hundredyear
flood elevations or profiles have been provided. In such areas,
information shall be used from any available federal, state or other
qualified studies that are found to be acceptable by the City
Engineer. If no such reliable information is available, then the onehundred-
year flood elevations shall be determined by using a point
on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest
the construction site in question if determined to be acceptable to
the City Engineer. Otherwise, an applicant shall be required to
187. Editor's Note: See Ch. 423, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 187, Building
Construction.
§ 445-51 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-51
441:1179
provide a detailed floodplain study of the site as specified in this
section.
(4) Floodplain amendments. The City Council may by resolution
officially amend the one-hundred-year floodplain to account for
man-made or natural changes or to incorporate an updated federal
or state study or to accept an appropriate professional study that
provides a detailed analysis of a specific segment of a waterway.
However, any such official amendment of the Official Floodplain
Map requires prior approval of the Federal Insurance
Administration or its successor agency.
(5) Interpretation.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall initially determine the location of the
one-hundred-year floodplain areas based upon the Federal
Floodplain Study.
(b) Where exact measurements do not exist, the boundaries of the
one-hundred-year floodplain areas shall be determined by
scaling distances from the Official Floodplain Map, unless the
City Engineer determines that a detailed floodplain study
needs to be submitted by the applicant. The Zoning Officer may
request the advice of the City Engineer.
(c) The applicant may appeal such determination to the Zoning
Hearing Board as a variance. In such case, the full burden of
proof shall be on the applicant to prove that the determination
of the Zoning Officer or the study being used is not accurate.
See the standards for a professional floodplain study in
§ 445-51D(3) below.
D. Permitted and prohibited uses in the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(1) Prohibited uses in the floodway. Within the one-hundred-year
floodway and portions of the general floodplain area determined to
be within the one-hundred-year floodway, each of the following is
prohibited:
(a) Construction, development, placement or extension of a
structure that could inhibit the passage of one-hundred-year
floodwaters or that could reduce the water capacity of a onehundred-
year floodplain or of any watercourse.
(b) Filling in or grading within the one-hundred-year floodway,
other than minor finished grading or excavation that the
applicant proves to the written satisfaction of the City
Engineer will not result in a net reduction in the watercarrying
capacity of the floodplain.
(c) Redirections of a perennial waterway, other than stream
improvements authorized by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat
§ 445-51 SCRANTON CODE § 445-51
441:1180
Commission that are intended solely to improve aquatic
habitats.
(2) Prohibited uses within the entire one-hundred-year floodplain. The
following uses are prohibited anywhere within the one-hundredyear
floodplain:
(a) The development or expansion of any of the following buildings
or uses:
[1] Manufactured/mobile homes or manufactured/mobile
home parks.
[2] Jails or prisons.
[3] Nursing homes or hospitals.
[4] Junkyards or solid waste disposal facilities.
[5] Bulk manure storage.
[6] Cemeteries.
[7] Commercial forestry.
(b) Storage of any of the following materials or items that would
be:
[1] Buoyant and not anchored or tied down or easily moved
within the time available after a flood warning.
[2] Toxic.
[3] Highly hazardous.
[4] Explosive.
[5] Radioactive.
(c) Any new or substantially improved structure that will be used
for the production or storage of any of the following substances
or substances involving a similar degree of hazards or any use
involving the maintenance of more than 550 gallons of any of
the following substances:
[1] Acetone.
[2] Ammonia.
[3] Benzene.
[4] Calcium carbide.
[5] Carbon disulfide.
[6] Celluloid.
§ 445-51 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-51
441:1181
[7] Chlorine.
[8] Hydrochloric acid.
[9] Hydrocyanic acid.
[10] Magnesium.
[11] Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
[12] Petroleum products (such as gasoline and fuel oil).
[13] Phosphorus.
[14] Potassium.
[15] Sodium.
[16] Sulfur and sulfur products.
[17] Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
[18]Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are
not otherwise regulated.
(3) Standards. Before any action affecting the one-hundred-year
floodplain occurs, the applicant shall prove to the written
satisfaction of the City Engineer that:
(a) All applicable City, state and federal requirements have been
met and applicable permits have been granted;
(b) Compensating improvements will be made to prevent any net
increase in flood levels or adverse affects on flood velocities
and drainage patterns; and
(c) Any municipalities that will be affected by a change in an
alteration or relocation of a waterway have been given prior
notice of such proposal.
(4) Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the one-hundred-year floodplain
(except areas that an applicant proves are not within the onehundred-
year floodway) shall be limited to the following uses and
uses that the Zoning Officer are closely similar:
(a) Nature preserves.
(b) Plant nurseries.
(c) Outdoor recreation uses.
(d) Golf courses.
(e) Parking areas.
§ 445-51 SCRANTON CODE § 445-51
441:1182
(f) Yard/setback areas.
(g) Parking areas (see setback from Johnston's Run in § 445-39).
(h) Crop farming.
(i) Bridges, culverts and similar structures that the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the City Engineer will:
[1] Pass over the one-hundred-year floodplain;
[2] Carry stormwater within a City-approved stormwater
improvement;
[3] Float over floodwaters; or
[4] Allow one-hundred-year floodwaters to easily pass through
the structure without causing debris to block the flood
channel.
(5) General floodplain areas and studies. To avoid the application of
the prohibition on construction of structures within the general
floodplain area, an applicant may prove to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, based upon review by
the City Engineer, that a particular portion of such area is not
within the one-hundred-year floodway. Such proof shall be based
upon a professional hydrological study. Such study shall:
(a) Only be conducted by a professional engineer, licensed
surveyor, registered landscape architect or hydrologist.
(b) Follow current accepted hydraulic technical methods and
federal standards.
(c) Provide sufficient analysis and computation information for the
City Engineer to determine that such study is accurate.
(6) Flood-fringe. Within the one-hundred-year flood-fringe, the
following provisions shall apply:
(a) All new buildings and all existing buildings that are
substantially improved as specified in the following subsection
below shall be fully floodproofed in compliance with this
chapter and all City building codes. This shall include the
following:
[1] The elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement)
of any new or substantially improved residential structure
shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1 1/2) feet above
the one-hundred-year-flood elevation. Enclosed areas
below this lowest floor are prohibited.
[2] The elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement)
of any new or substantially improved nonresidential
§ 445-51 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-51
441:1183
structure shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1 1/
2) feet above the one-hundred-year-flood elevation or be
floodproofed up to that height.
[a] Enclosed areas below this lowest floor (including the
basement) are prohibited.
[b] Such required floodproofing shall follow the standards
stated in the Army Corps of Engineers' Floodproofing
Regulations publication or some equivalent standard
acceptable to the City Engineer. The applicant shall
ensure that plans for such floodproofing shall be
certified by a professional engineer or architect,
certifying that a building has been adequately
designed to withstand the one-hundred-year-flood
elevations, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces associated with a one-hundred-year flood and
that utility extensions have been designed to take the
one-hundred-year flood levels fully into account.
(7) Existing structures in floodplains.
(a) Structures that existed prior to the adoption of this section
within the one-hundred-year floodplain shall not be expanded
or enlarged, except:
[1] If such structures are determined to not be within the onehundred-
year floodway and the expansion meets the
requirements for the one-hundred-year flood-fringe; or
[2] For upper story additions that do not decrease the water
carrying capacity of the one-hundred-year floodplain; or
[3] If any negative effects on flood heights are fully offset by
accompanying improvements.
(b) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement to
a structure that existed prior to the adoption of this section
within the one-hundred-year floodplain (or the one-hundredyear
floodway where such has been officially defined) that is
equal in value to less than 50% of the structure's market value
(based upon the value of the structure before the improvement
or repair started and before any flood damage that may be
being repaired) shall to the greatest extent possible be
elevated and/or floodproofed.
(c) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement to
a structure that existed prior to the adoption of this section
within the one-hundred-year floodplain (or the one-hundredyear
floodway where such has been officially defined) that is
equal in value to 50% or more of the structure's market value
(based upon the value of the structure before the improvement
§ 445-51 SCRANTON CODE § 445-51
441:1184
§ 445-52. Removal of topsoil.
The permanent stripping and removal of more than 50% of the topsoil from
any lot is prohibited, except on portions of a lot for which approval has
been received from the City to construct a building, street or paving. This
section shall not restrict approved mineral extraction uses, the temporary
stockpiling and regrading of soil during construction or routine crop
farming practices. See § 445-47, Grading and erosion control.
or repair started and before any flood damage that may be
being repaired) (which shall be considered to be substantially
improved) shall only occur in full compliance with the
provisions of this Article.
(d) Historic and safety exception. Subsection D(7)(b) and (c) above
shall not apply to improvements that are necessary to comply
with a City, county or state health, safety or sanitary regulation
or to historically rehabilitate and restore a structure listed on
the National or State Registry of Historic Places or that is
clearly a contributing structure to a state-certified historic
district.
(e) The applicant shall provide written information to the Zoning
Officer on the lowest floor elevation of each structure approved
within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(f) "Basement" shall be defined for the purposes of this section as
any area of a building having its floor below ground level on all
sides.
(8) Floodplain variances.
(a) A variance shall not be granted to the provisions of this Article
if such variance would result in unacceptable increased flood
heights or to increased threats to the public safety. Any
variances to this Article shall be annually reported to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) If a variance is granted to allow construction of a structure
below the one-hundred-year floodplain elevation, the applicant
should be notified, in writing, by the Zoning Officer that such
construction will likely result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance and that the applicant may be creating a risk to
life and property and that the applicant is completing such
work at his/her own risk.
§ 445-51 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-52
441:1185

ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 445-53. Required number of parking spaces.
A. Overall requirements.
(1) Number of spaces. Each use that is newly developed, enlarged,
significantly changed in type or increased in number of
establishments shall provide and maintain off-street parking spaces
in accordance with Table 6.1188 and the regulations of this Article,
except as exempted by § 445-54F in the C-D District.
(2) Uses not listed. Uses not specifically listed in Table 6.1 shall comply
with the requirements for the most similar use listed in Table 6.1,
unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer
that an alternative standard should be used for that use.
(3) Multiple uses. Where a proposed lot contains or includes more than
one type of use, the number of parking spaces required shall be the
sum of the parking requirements for each separate use, except as
may be allowed under § 445-53B.
(4) Calculation. Where the calculation of required parking spaces does
not result in a whole number, the calculation shall be rounded to
the closest whole number.
(5) Mixed-Use Adaptive Reuse. For lots involving development under
Mixed-Use Adaptive Reuse, the number of parking spaces required
shall be as specifically listed for this category in Table 6.1189 and
not based on the sum of the parking requirements for each
separate use. [Added 1-12-2012 by Ord. No. 59-2011]
B. Reduction of parking requirements by special exception.
(1) Purposes. The purposes shall be to minimize impervious surfaces,
while ensuring adequate parking; to recognize that unique
circumstances may justify a reduction in parking.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board may permit a reduction, through the
special exception process of § 445-19, of the number of parking
spaces required to be developed if the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Board that less parking spaces are needed.
(a) Proof. To prove that less parking spaces are needed, the
applicant shall provide existing and projected employment,
customer, resident or other relevant data. Such data may
include a study of parking at similar developments during peak
periods of use.
188. Editor's Note: Table 6.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
189. Editor’s Note: Table 6.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 445-53 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-53
441:1187
§ 445-54. General regulations.
(b) Shared parking. Under this section, an applicant may seek to
prove that parking permanently shared with another use or
another lot with shared internal access or another lot within
400 feet of the entrance to the use will reduce the total amount
of parking needed because the uses have different peak times
of parking need or overlapping customers.
(c) Reservation of future parking areas. If a reduction is permitted
under this section, the Board may require as a condition of the
special exception that the lot include the reservation,
permanently or for a specified number of years, of areas for
use if needed in the future for additional parking.
[1] Such reservation shall be provided in a legal form
acceptable to the Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor. A legally
binding deed restriction is recommended.
[2] In such case, the applicant shall be required to submit site
plans to the Zoning Officer showing where and how the
additional parking could be accomplished. Such future
parking areas shall be designed to meet all City
requirements, including stormwater runoff. Such future
parking areas shall not be covered by buildings and shall
be attractively landscaped unless needed for parking.
[3] Such additional parking shall be required to be provided
within one year by the owner of the lot at that time after
the Zoning Officer may determine, in writing, to such
owner that such parking has become needed to meet
actual use. Such determination shall be based upon the
Zoning Officer's on-site review on at least three different
days.
A. General. Parking spaces and accessways shall be laid out to result in
safe and orderly use and to fully take into account all of the following:
vehicular access onto and off the site, vehicular movement within the
site, loading areas, pedestrian patterns and any drive-through facilities.
No parking area shall cause a safety hazard or impediment to traffic off
the lot.
B. Existing parking. Structures and uses in existence at the effective date
of this chapter shall not be required to add additional parking spaces to
meet the requirements of this Article unless the general type of use is
significantly changed or the use is expanded a total aggregate over time
of more than 5% or 2,000 square feet in floor area, whichever is more
restrictive. Any parking spaces serving such preexisting structures or
uses at the time of adoption of this chapter shall not in the future be
reduced in number below the number required by this chapter.
§ 445-53 SCRANTON CODE § 445-54
441:1188
C. Change in use or expansion. If a building or use significantly changes in
type of principal use or expands by a measure used in this Article to
determine parking need (such as floor area, maximum number of
employees, number of dwelling units or seating capacity) and if such
expansion or change would increase the number of required parking
spaces by at least 10% or 20 spaces, whichever is less, then the use
shall provide the total number of parking spaces that would be required
if the entire existing and proposed uses would be newly developed
under this Article, instead of only being required to provide the
additional uses for the change or expansion.
D. Continuing obligation of parking and loading spaces. All required
numbers of parking spaces and off-street loading spaces shall be
available as long as the use or building which the spaces serve still
exist, and such spaces shall not be reduced in number below the
minimum required by this chapter. No required parking area or offstreet
loading spaces shall be used for any other use (such as storage or
display of materials) that interferes with the area's availability for
parking to serve a use, except that an owner of a parking area may
allow use of the spaces by another use during specific times of the day
and week when they are clearly not needed for the primary user.
E. Location of parking. Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the
same lot or abutting lot with the principal use served, unless the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that a
guaranteed method of providing the spaces is available using parking
spaces within 400 feet of a patron/patient entrance of the principal use
being served, provided that such parking is in a district where such
parking is permitted.
(1) Such distance between the entrance of the use and the parking
spaces shall be 200 feet instead of 400 feet for parking that serves
uses located within the R-2/O District, provided that such parking is
in a district where such parking is permitted.
(2) To meet the requirement that the availability of the parking be
guaranteed, an applicant may provide a suitable deed restriction or
a lease extending 25 years or for the life of use of the property,
whichever is of shorter duration.
(3) Such distance between entrance of use and the parking spaces may
be up to 700 feet for Mixed-Use Adaptive Reuse in the I-L District.
[Added 1-12-2012 by Ord. No. 59-2011]
F. Downtown exemption. In recognition of the need to strongly encourage
new construction and to reuse building space in the downtown and
recognizing the availability of public parking areas, the requirements
for minimum numbers, minimum aisle widths, minimum sizes and
landscaping requirements of off-street parking spaces in this Article
shall not apply within the C-D District.
§ 445-54 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-55
441:1189
§ 445-55. Design standards.
A. General requirements.
(1) No parking area shall be designed to require or encourage parked
vehicles to back into a public street in order to leave a parking
space, except for a single-family or two-family dwelling with its
access onto a local street or parking court.
(2) Every required parking space shall be designed so that each motor
vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other vehicle, except spaces
for a single-family detached dwelling, twin dwelling or for approved
valet parking areas.
(3) Parking areas shall not be within any of the following: a required
buffer yard or a required paved area setback.
(4) Defined trafficways. All parking areas shall include clearly defined
and marked traffic patterns. In any lot with more than 30 off-street
parking spaces, raised curbs and landscaped areas shall be used to
direct traffic within the lot. Major vehicular routes shall be
separated as much as is reasonable from major pedestrian routes
within the lot.
(5) Separation from street. All areas for off-street parking, off-street
loading and unloading and the storage or movement of motor
vehicles shall be physically separated from the street by a raised
curb, planting strip, wall or other suitable barrier against
unchanneled motor vehicle entrance or exit, except for necessary
and approved vehicle entrances and exits to the lot. All commercial
and industrial parking areas approved after the adoption of this
chapter shall be separated from the street by a grass or landscaped
strip of land. Parking spaces may back into an alley. See § 445-55G.
(6) Stacking. Each lot shall provide adequate area upon the lot to
prevent backup of vehicles on a public street while awaiting entry
to the lot or while waiting for service at a drive-through facility.
(7) Stormwater management. The applicant for any new or expanded
parking lot that would result in 5,000 square feet or greater of
impervious coverage (compared to what previously existed),
outside of the C-D District, shall be required to submit stormwater
management calculations to the City Engineer and prove to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer that stormwater will be adequately
managed.
B. Size and marking of parking spaces. Each parking space shall include a
rectangle with a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of
18 feet, except:
(1) The minimum length shall be 21 feet for parallel parking.
§ 445-55 SCRANTON CODE § 445-55
441:1190
(2) If a lot or parking deck includes more than 30 parking spaces, a
maximum of 20% of the required spaces include a rectangle with a
minimum width of eight feet and a minimum length of 16 feet,
provided that those spaces are marked as "compact cars only" and
provided that those spaces do not include the most desirable
spaces in the lot or deck.
(3) All spaces shall be marked to indicate their location, except those
of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
(4) If a parking area is permitted to not be paved, then a minimum
width of 10 feet per space shall be used.
C. Aisles.
(1) Each aisle providing access to stalls for one-way traffic only shall
be at least the maximum aisle width specified as follows:
Angle of Parking
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
Parallel or 30 12
45 14
60 18
90 20
(2) Each aisle providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be at
least 20 feet in width.
(3) Maximum length of parking aisle: 300 feet.
(4) Modification. By special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may
reduce the minimum size of parking spaces or aisles to reflect
congested conditions and the need for parking spaces in older
commercial areas of the City.
D. Access drives and driveways.
(1) Width of driveway/accessway at entrance onto public street (at the
edge of the cartway):
One-Way Use
(feet)
Two-Way Use
(feet)
Minimum 12 20
Maximum 35 50
NOTE:
The standards shall apply unless a different standard is required
by PennDOT for an entrance to a state street.
§ 445-55 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-55
441:1191
(2) Drainage. Adequate provisions shall be made to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street at the point of
driveway or access drive entry.
(3) Separation between driveways. At least 50 feet shall be provided
between the center lines of any two accessways or driveways along
one street within one lot.
(4) Separation from intersection. If a driveway or accessway enters
onto a collector or arterial street, then the center line of that
driveway or accessway where it enters the collector or arterial
street shall be a minimum of 75 feet from the center line of any
other street, where that street enters the collector or arterial street
at a different point than the driveway or accessway.
(5) State permit. Where there will be new or intensified access to a
state street or other work within the right-of-way of a state street, a
state highway occupancy permit shall be obtained, as applicable.
(6) Sight distance for driveways. See § 445-74C(2).
E. Paving, grading and drainage.
(1) Parking, loading facilities, driveways and vehicle sales display
areas shall be graded and adequately drained to prevent erosion or
excessive water flow across streets or adjoining properties. See the
City stormwater management ordinance.190
(2) Except for landscaped areas, all portions of required parking,
loading facilities and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete or decorative paving block, except that portions or all of
driveways or parking areas may be left in grass or gravel where the
applicant proves to the full satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that
the parking or driveway:
(a) Is clearly intended for use for a maximum of one year or for a
maximum of 30 days in a calendar year;
(b) Serves an agricultural use; or
(c) Involves a single-family residential driveway with a length of
over 100 feet.
(3) Each of the following existing parking areas shall be paved with
asphalt, concrete or decorative paving block within three years of
the adoption of this chapter:
(a) Parking lots in the C-D District that have existed for at least
five years prior to the adoption of this chapter and that include
a minimum of 25 parking spaces, except for lots for which an
official development plan or building permit has been approved
190. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Stormwater Management.
§ 445-55 SCRANTON CODE § 445-55
441:1192
or is being reviewed prior to approval, and except where the
property owner has signed an agreement to develop the
property within a specified period of time.
(b) Off-street parking spaces serving three or more dwelling units.
F. Lighting of parking areas. See § 445-46, Light and glare control.
G. Paved area setbacks (including off-street parking setbacks).
(1) Intent. The intent shall be to ensure that parked or moving vehicles
within a lot do not obstruct sight distance or interfere with
pedestrian traffic, to aid in stormwater management along streets
and to prevent vehicles from entering or exiting a lot other than at
approved driveways.
(2) Uses within the paved area setback. The paved area setback
required by this section, in addition to areas of any existing street
right-of-way area not used as a cartway, street shoulder or on-street
parking, shall be maintained in natural ground cover (such as
grass) and shall not be used for any of the following:
(a) Paving except approved driveway/access drive entrances and
except any concrete sidewalks of eight feet wide or fewer are
permitted.
(b) Fences.
(c) Parking or storage of vehicles or display of vehicles or items for
sale or rent.
(3) A paved area setback is not required abutting a parking deck.
(4) A paved area setback may include the following: permitted
freestanding signs, stormwater facilities that are not impervious or
approved driveway crossings. If sidewalks exist, the paved area
setback may be provided between the sidewalk and the street or
between the sidewalk and the paving.
(5) Any commercial, industrial, institutional, townhouse or low-rise
apartment use developed after the adoption of this chapter shall
provide paved area setbacks as follows:
§ 445-55 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-55
441:1193
If a paved area abuts:
Minimum paved area setback
(measured from the curbline
or the existing legal right-ofway
line after development if
no curbline will exist)
(feet)
Expressway or expressway
ramp or arterial street(other
than abutting an arterial street
in the C-D or C-N District):
For lot with 2 acres or less of
impervious coverage
5
For lot with more than 2 acres
of impervious coverage
10
Collector or local street in any
district
3
Arterial street in the C-D or CN
District
3
(6) Buffer areas between uses. See § 445-74.
(7) Planting strip along parking lots. See § 445-75.
H. Paved area landscaping (parking lot trees).
(1) Intent. This section is primarily intended to reduce the thermal
pollution of surface waters from parking lot runoff.
(2) Any lot approved after the adoption of this chapter, outside of the
C-D District, that would include more than 25 parking spaces shall
be required to provide shade trees within the paved area.
(3) One deciduous tree shall be required for every 3,000 square feet of
paved area. Such trees may be placed within or around the edges of
paved areas.
(4) Trees required by this section shall meet the following standards:
(a) Type of trees permitted. Required trees shall be chosen from
the following list of approved street trees, unless the applicant
provides standard reference material or a signed letter from a
registered landscape architect that proves to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Officer that another specific type of tree would
shade paved areas, be resistant to disease, road salt and air
pollution and be attractive.
§ 445-55 SCRANTON CODE § 445-55
441:1194
Types of Deciduous Trees Permitted
Acer rubrum - American red maple
Acer saccharum - Sugar maple
Celtis occidentalis - Common hackberry
Fagus sylvatica - European beech
Fraxinus americana - White ash
Fraxinus pennsylvania - Green ash
Ginko biloba fastigiata - Maiden hair tree (male only; female
has noxious odor)
Gleditsia triacanthos - Thornless locust
Liriodendron tulipifera - Tulip poplar
Quercus alba - White oak
Quercus acutissima - Sawtooth oak
Quercus borealis - Red oak
Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak
Quercus macrocarpa - Bur oak
Quercus imbricaria - Shingle oak
Quereus montana - Chestnut oak
Quercus velutina - Black oak
Quercus phellos - Willow oak
Sophora japonica - Chinese scholar tree
Tilia americana - American linden
Tilia cordata - Little leaf european linden
Tilia euchlora - Crimean linden
Tilia petiolaris - Silver linden
Zelkova serrata - Zelkova
NOTE:
This chapter only regulates the species of trees that are used
to meet requirements of the City. The species of trees that
are not required by City ordinances are not regulated.
(b) Quality of trees. Required trees shall be of symmetrical growth
and free of insect pests and disease.
(c) Minimum size. The trunk diameter [measured at a height of
one foot above the finished grade level] shall be a minimum of
two inches or greater.
(d) Planting and maintenance. Required trees shall be:
§ 445-55 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-55
441:1195
[1] Planted in conformance with good landscaping practices,
with adequate unpaved surface around each for water and
air;
[2] Properly protected by raised curbs, distance or other
devices from damage from vehicles;
[3] Surrounded by a minimum of nine square feet of pervious
ground area, which shall be protected from vehicles; and
[4] Properly maintained.
(e) Removal and replacement of trees. A required tree shall not be
removed without being replaced within 12 months by another
tree that meets the requirements of this section. Trees which
have died or have become diseased or pest-ridden shall be
replaced within 12 months.
(5) Curbing and landscaped islands shall be located as needed to direct
the flow of traffic through the parking lot in a smooth, orderly and
safe manner to prevent cross-taxiing.
(6) Existing trees. For every existing tree on the lot that is healthy and
is protected and preserved and maintained after the completion of
all construction and that would generally meet the requirements of
this section:
(a) One fewer deciduous tree shall be required to be planted for
every such preserved tree with a minimum trunk diameter of
between four and 16 inches (measured one foot above the
natural ground level); and
(b) Two fewer deciduous trees shall be required to be planted for
every such preserved tree with a minimum trunk diameter of
16 inches or greater (measured one foot above the natural
ground level).
I. Buffer yard. See § 445-74.
J. Handicapped parking.
(1) Number of spaces. Any lot including four or more off-street parking
spaces shall include a minimum of one handicapped space. The
following number of handicapped spaces shall be provided, unless
a revised regulation is officially established under the federal
Americans With Disabilities Act:
Total No. of Required
Parking Spaces on the Lot
Required Minimum
No./Percent of Handicapped
Parking Spaces
4 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
§ 445-55 SCRANTON CODE § 445-55
441:1196
§ 445-56. Parking of unregistered, commercial and junk vehicles.
Total No. of Required
Parking Spaces on the Lot
Required Minimum
No./Percent of Handicapped
Parking Spaces
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of required number of spaces
1,001 or more 20, plus 1% of required number
of spaces over 1,000
(2) Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they
would result in the shortest reasonable accessible distance to a
handicapped accessible building entrance. Curb cuts with an
appropriate slope shall be provided as needed to provide access
from the handicapped spaces.
(3) Minimum size. Each required handicapped parking space shall be a
minimum of eight by eighteen (8 x 18) feet. In addition, each space
shall be adjacent to a five-foot-wide access aisle. Such access aisle
may be shared by two handicapped spaces by being placed
between them. However, one out of every eight required
handicapped parking spaces shall have an adjacent access aisle of
eight feet width instead of five feet.
(4) Slope. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in areas of
fewer than six-percent slope in any direction.
(5) Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked by
clearly visible signs and/or pavement markings.
A. Purpose. The purpose shall be to prevent the character of residential
areas from being harmed by nuisances, hazards and visual blight and to
prevent the establishment of junkyards in residential districts.
B. Storage of unregistered, commercial or junk vehicles.
(1) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle that has a gross
vehicle weight of greater than 6,000 pounds and is primarily used
for business purposes, including but not limited to making service
calls, transporting equipment used in a business or in
§ 445-55 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-56
441:1197
accomplishing physical work as part of a business (such as hauling
material).
TRACTOR OF A TRACTOR-TRAILER — A truck with a minimum of
three axles that is primarily intended to pull a trailer, as defined
below, and not primarily to carry goods itself.
TRAILER OF A TRACTOR-TRAILER — A commercial vehicle with a
length of 20 feet or more that is not self-propelled, that is intended
to haul materials, vehicles, goods, gases or liquids and that is
intended to be pulled by a tractor (as defined above) and that is not
a recreational vehicle.
(2) Residential district. Within a residential district, no motor vehicle
that does not display current registration and current safety
inspection (or safety inspection and registration that expires less
than 90 days prior) and no junk vehicle (as defined by Article II)
shall be parked or stored in any way that is visible from a public
street or an adjacent dwelling.
(3) Nonresidential district. In a nonresidential district, a maximum of
one junk vehicle (as defined by Article II) shall be parked or stored
in such a way that the vehicle is visible from a public street or a
dwelling. This section shall not apply to a permitted auto sales use,
auto service station, junkyard or auto repair garage, provided that
the regulations for that use are met.
(4) Exceptions. This section does not apply to the following, provided
that they are in an operational condition:
(a) Municipally owned vehicles.
(b) Ambulance, fire and rescue vehicles.
(c) Buses used primarily for transporting public or private school
children to and from school or transporting persons to or from
a place of worship.
(d) Recreational vehicles (see definition in Article II and
regulations in § 445-35).
(e) Vehicles operated by the United States Postal Service or a level
of government or a municipal authority.
(f) Vehicles actively engaged in the construction or repair of
buildings, streets, curbs, sidewalks, rehabilitation or utilities in
the immediate area.
(g) Vehicles actively engaged in making routine household
deliveries or rendering routine household services to a
property that is adjacent or on the same lot as the vehicle is
parked.
§ 445-56 SCRANTON CODE § 445-56
441:1198
§ 445-57. Off-street loading.
(h) Equipment and vehicles clearly primarily intended for
agricultural use.
(i) Parking of vehicles that is customarily accessory to a lawful
nonconforming principal business use.
(5) Commercial vehicles in a residential district.
(a) In a residential district, a maximum of two commercial vehicles
(as defined above) may be parked for more than eight hours in
any forty-eight-hour period on private property. Such vehicles
shall be permitted only if used by residents of the property as a
means of transportation between their home and work. No
commercial vehicle in a residential district shall have a gross
vehicle weight of over 15,000 pounds if parked outside of an
enclosed building.
(b) Idling. In a residential district, the engine of a tractor of a
tractor-trailer shall not be idled for more than 10 minutes on
the property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or
be repaired, except for clearly emergency repairs.
(c) No trailer of a tractor-trailer shall be parked, stored,
maintained or kept in a residential district for more than eight
hours in any forty-eight-hour period.
(d) Streets. See requirements of the state motor vehicle code191
that require vehicles parked on a public street to have current
registration.
A. General requirements.
(1) Each use receiving or shipping material or merchandise by trucks
shall provide sufficient off-street loading facilities, which meet the
requirements of this section, to accommodate the maximum
demand generated by the use. For the purposes of this section, the
words "loading" and "unloading" are used interchangeably.
(2) The applicant shall provide evidence to the Zoning Officer that the
use will have sufficient numbers and sizes of loading facilities. If a
site plan or land development review is required, such information
shall also be provided to the Planning Commission, who may advise
the Zoning Officer.
B. Design and layout of loading facilities. Off-street loading facilities shall
meet the following requirements:
(1) Each off-street loading space shall be at least:
191. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 445-56 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-57
441:1199
Largest Type of
Truck Intended
Minimum Width
(feet)
Minimum Length
(feet)
Tractor-trailer 12 (except 11 if
more than 10 such
spaces on a lot)
40 (with 12 feet clear
height)
Trucks other than
tractor-trailers,
pickups or vans
10 25
Pickup truck or van 9 18
(2) Each space shall have sufficient maneuvering room to avoid
conflicts with parking and traffic movements within and outside of
the lot. No facility shall be designed or used in such a manner that
it threatens a safety hazard, public nuisance or a serious
impediment to traffic off the lot.
(3) Each space and the needed maneuvering room shall be located
such that it does not inhibit traffic on public streets and shall be
located outside of required buffer areas and paved area setbacks.
An appropriate means of access to a street shall be provided.
(4) Paving, grading and drainage. See § 445-55E.
C. Fire lanes and emergency access.
(1) Fire lanes shall be provided where required by state or federal
regulations or other local ordinances. The specific locations of
these lanes are subject to review by the City Fire Superintendent or
his/her designated staff.
(2) All buildings shall have adequate access for emergency vehicles.
§ 445-57 SCRANTON CODE § 445-57
441:1200
ARTICLE VII
Signs
§ 445-58. Applicability.
§ 445-59. Existing nonconforming signs.
A. Purposes. This Article is intended to promote and maintain overall
community beautification; establish reasonable time, place and manner
regulations on the exercise of free speech, without regulating content;
promote traffic safety by avoiding distractions and sight distance
obstructions; protect property values and ensure capability with the
character of neighboring existing and planned land uses; and assist in
carrying out the goals of the Pennsylvania Outdoor Advertising Control
Act, as amended.192
B. Permit required. A permit under this chapter shall be required for all
signs except for signs meeting the requirements of § 445-60 and
window signs permitted by this chapter. Only types, sizes and heights of
signs that are specifically permitted by this chapter within the
applicable district shall be allowed.
C. Changes on signs. Any lawfully existing sign (including nonconforming
signs) may be painted or repaired or changed in message without a new
permit under this chapter, provided that the changes do not increase
the sign area or otherwise result in noncompliance or an increased
nonconformity with this chapter.
A. Signs lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this chapter which do
not conform to the requirements of this chapter shall be considered
nonconforming signs. Existing nonconforming signs may be continued
to be used and may be repaired, repainted and changed in message.
B. Replacement. An existing lawful nonconforming sign may be replaced
within one year with a new nonconforming sign, provided that the
replacement sign meets all three of the following standards:
(1) Is not more nonconforming in any measurement than the previous
sign (including but not limited to height and total square feet);
(2) Meets the City building code;193 and
(3) In the case of an on-premises freestanding sign, does not in any
case have a maximum height of greater than 50 feet or a maximum
sign area per side of greater than 100 square feet, unless such size
of a sign is specifically permitted by this chapter.
C. Historic signs. Signs and related canopies and awnings that clearly
have a historic character, that the applicant proves to be of a type that
192. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 2718.101 et seq.
193. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Building Construction;
§ 445-58 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-59
441:1201
§ 445-60. Miscellaneous signs not requiring permits.
The following signs shall be permitted by right within all zoning districts
within the following regulations and shall not be required to have a permit
under this Article.195
§ 445-61. Freestanding, wall and window signs.
previously was attached to the building or on the site and that would
not otherwise be permitted by right under this Article of this chapter,
may be reerected or recreated and placed on a building or site if both
of the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant proves to the written satisfaction of the responsible
City building inspectors that the sign or related canopy or awning
would not be a threat to the public safety; and
(2) The applicant proves to the written satisfaction of the City of
Scranton Architecture, Urban Design and Historic Review
Commission194 (or its successor City board or commission) that the
sign or related canopy or awning would clearly have a historic
character, clearly is of a type that previously was attached to the
building or on the site and would overall improve the appearance of
the building or lot. If such Commission or its successor no longer
exists, then this § 445-54C shall no longer be valid.
A. The following are the signs permitted on a lot within the specified
districts and within the following regulations, in addition to signs not
requiring a permit in § 445-60.196 See definition of the types of signs in
§ 445-68.
(1) A minimum of 10 individual retail establishments.
(2) A conference center or theater(s) (other than an adult theater)
capable of accommodating a minimum of 200 patrons at one time.
(3) The sale of new automobiles manufactured by two or more distinct
corporations.
(4) The lot includes a minimum of 300 square feet of total frontage on a
public street.
B. Maximum height of wall and roof signs. The top part of a wall or wall
sign shall not be placed at a maximum height greater than 10 feet
above the total height of the building to which it is attached, not
including the height of elevator shafts and similar extensions.
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 18, Boards, Commissions and Committees, Art. I, Architecture and
Urban Design Commission.
195. Editor's Note: The table of permitted signs is included at the end of this chapter.
196. Editor's Note: The table of signs is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 445-59 SCRANTON CODE § 445-61
441:1202
§ 445-62. Abandoned or outdated signs.
Conforming and nonconforming signs advertising a use no longer in
existence (other than a sign relating to a building that is clearly temporarily
vacant and being offered to new tenants or for purchase) shall be removed
within 180 days of the cessation of such use.
C. Special sale displays and banners. Banners totaling over 30 square feet
in area (other than banners meeting the requirements for a permitted
sign), balloons of over 50 cubic feet tethered to the ground, aerial
spotlights and outdoor lasers used for commercial purposes are
permitted on a lot that includes a principal commercial use, provided
that such items are not displayed for more than 21 days in any ninetyday
period.
D. Signs on mobile stands (portable signs).
(1) Purpose. These standards recognize that signs on mobile stands
have been inappropriately used as permanent signs, often without
permits, without adequate wiring, with violations of setback
requirements, with violations of sign area requirements and with
obstructions of sight distance. The purpose shall be to recognize
that this chapter permits businesses sufficient sign area to erect a
permanent changeable message sign.
(2) The definition of a "sign on a mobile stand" shall be a freestanding
sign that is not permanently attached to the ground or permanently
attached to a building and that can be carried on the back of a
flatbed truck or towed from one location to another.
(3) Signs on a mobile stand are prohibited in all districts, except that a
new principal commercial use in the C-G or C-N District may use
one sign on a mobile stand with a maximum sign area of 35 square
feet for a maximum of 60 days while a permanent permitted
freestanding sign is on order.
E. Projecting signs. In addition to the signs permitted by this Article, each
lot in the C-D and C-N District may include one projecting sign. Such
sign shall meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Have a maximum sign area of 10 square feet on each of two sides,
except such maximum sign area shall be 50 square feet for a
marque of a nonadult movie theater.
(2) Not extend more than four feet from a building and not more than
four feet into a street right-of-way.
(3) Not be internally illuminated (relief-finish wood with metal
supports are strongly recommended).
(4) Meet the construction requirements of the City building code,
including being securely attached to the building.
§ 445-61 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-63
441:1203
§ 445-63. Location of signs.
The following shall regulate the location of signs:
§ 445-64. Illumination of signs.
A. Public rights-of-way and sign setbacks from streets.
(1) No sign except official signs, nameplate signs, public service signs
and directional signs shall be erected within or project more than
two feet over any existing street right-of-way, except:
(a) If an awning or canopy that is authorized by the City to extend
over a sidewalk, then a portion or all of the permitted sign area
may be located on such awning or canopy (see § 445-74).
(b) As may specifically be permitted by another City ordinance.
(c) As permitted by § 445-61E for projecting signs.
(d) For occasional banners erected across streets when authorized
by the City or PennDOT to advertise a public celebration or
charitable event.
(e) If a setback is required by Subsection A(2) below.
(2) A freestanding sign of greater than five square feet in sign area
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the existing right-ofway
of a public street, except in the C-N and C-D Districts.
(3) Any sign, canopy or awning shall maintain a nine-foot minimum
vertical clearance over a sidewalk. See provisions of the City
building code regarding construction of signs that intrude over a
sidewalk.
B. Sight distance. No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes
with the sight distance requirements of § 445-74 or safe sight distances
for vehicles within a lot.
C. Off-premises. No signs except permitted off-premises, official, political
or public service signs shall be erected on a property to which it does
not relate.
D. Setbacks. An illuminated freestanding sign for a commercial or
industrial business shall not be located within 25 feet of a residential lot
line (see definition in Article II). A sign is not required to meet setback
requirements for principal or accessory structures.
E. Permission of owner. No sign shall be posted on any property or sign
pole or public utility pole, unless permission has been received by the
owner.
F. Utility poles. No sign shall be stapled or nailed to a utility pole, except
by an authorized utility.
§ 445-63 SCRANTON CODE § 445-64
441:1204
§ 445-65. Vehicles functioning as signs.
Any vehicle or structure to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the
carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the primary purpose
of the vehicle or structure but becomes a primary purpose in itself shall be
considered a freestanding sign and as such shall be subject to requirements
for freestanding signs in the district in which such vehicle or structure is
located.
§ 445-66. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
A. See § 445-46, Light and glare control.
B. Times of illumination. It is strongly encouraged that signs within 200
feet of a dwelling not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
C. Permitted signs may include an electrically changing message, except
for those signs prohibited by § 445-66 below.
A. Spinners, pennants or any moving object used to attract attention to a
commercial use; flags and banners of more than 20 square feet per lot
that contain a commercial message and that do not meet the
requirements for a permitted sign.
B. Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated or moving signs of any type,
except for time and temperature signs and signs that have a
nonflashing electrically changing message. This restriction specifically
includes window signs, but does not prohibit Christmas lighting or
displays, within § 445-60.
C. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or odor.
D. Signs which contain information that states or implies that a lot may be
used for any purpose not permitted under the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
E. Signs that are of such character, form, shape or color that they imitate
or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device or that have any
characteristics which are likely to confuse or distract the operator of a
motor vehicle on a public street (such as prominent use of the words
"danger" or "stop").
F. Signs that use reflective materials to give the appearance of flashing,
blinking or twinkling.
G. Signs or displays that include words or images that are obscene,
pornographic or that an average reasonable person would find highly
offensive to public decency.
§ 445-64 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-66
441:1205
§ 445-67. Construction of signs.
See the City building code.197 Every permanent sign permitted in this
chapter shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be kept in good
condition and repair. Any sign which becomes dilapidated or unsafe may be
repaired or removed by the City at the expense of the owner or lessee of the
property on which it is located, after providing written notice to such owner
or lessee.
§ 445-68. Measurement; major types of signs.
H. Balloons of greater than 25 cubic feet that are tethered to the ground or
a structure and are primarily intended for advertising purposes, except
as provided as a special sale sign.
I. Floodlights and lasers, except as is permitted as a special sale display
under § 445-60.
A. Sign definitions. The following definitions shall be used in determining
whether signs meet the measurement and type requirements of this
Article:
BUILDING SIDE OR BUILDING FACE — The vertical area of a
particular side of a building, including the vertical area of any roof,
but not including nonstructural extensions. This area shall be measured
using a straight two-dimensional plane, without considering any
indentations in the building or angling of the roof.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign which is self-supporting upon the
ground or which is primarily supported by poles attached to the ground
and not primarily supported by a building.
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the average
ground level surrounding a sign to the highest point of the sign and
its supporting structure. Religious symbols, when not accompanied by
lettering, shall not be restricted by the sign heights of this Article when
attached to a tower or spire of a place of worship.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, INTERNALLY — A sign with man-made
illumination by light from within the sign and that shines through and
illuminates the sign face, as opposed to a sign illuminated by a source
in front of or shining from the outside of the sign face.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — See Article II.
ROOF SIGN — A sign attached to a building and that extends above the
top of the roof of the building.
SIGN — See Article II.
WALL SIGN — A sign primarily supported by or painted on a wall of a
building and which does not project more than two feet from such wall.
197. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Building Construction.
§ 445-66 SCRANTON CODE § 445-68
441:1206
§ 445-69. Off-premises signs; billboards.
See the requirements of the City building code for signs that project
over sidewalks.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is readily visible and can be at least
partially read from an exterior lot line and which is attached to a
window or transparent door or that can be read through a window or
transparent door and which is not internally illuminated and that is
constructed of paper or similar nonpermanent material or is painted on
the window. Signs within windows that do not meet this definition shall
be regulated as a wall sign.
B. Measurement of sign area.
(1) Sign area shall include all lettering, wording and accompanying
designs and symbols, together with related background areas on
which they are displayed. One freestanding sign may include
several signs that are all attached to one structure, with the total
sign area being the total area of all signs on the structure.
(2) The sign area shall not include any structurally supporting
framework, bracing or clearly defined wooden framing if such area
does not include any display, lettering or sign and if such area is
clearly incidental to the sign area itself. Also, cutout areas that are
open to the sky as part of a freestanding sign shall not be included
in sign area.
(3) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted directly on a building or window, other than an
illuminated background that is a part of the sign, the sign area shall
be the smallest rectangle or two smallest rectangles that include all
of the letters and symbols.
(4) Two-sided signs. In computing the permitted sign area of a sign
with two sides, the permitted total sign area shall be based upon
the sign area of only one side (the larger of any two if they differ). If
the interior angle formed at the inside of a two-sided sign is greater
than 60° (other than a permitted off-premises sign), then the total
area of both sides shall not be greater than the permitted total sign
area. If a sign has more than two sides, then the maximum sign
area per side shall apply to all the sides added together divided by
two.
(5) Unless otherwise specified, all square footages in regards to signs
are maximum sizes.
A. Purposes. Off-premises signs are controlled by this chapter for the
following purposes: to ensure that a physical environment is maintained
that is attractive to desirable types of development, especially light
industrial and office parks; to prevent visual pollution in the City and
protect property values, especially in consideration of the fact that most
§ 445-68 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-69
441:1207
commercial areas of the City are within close proximity to existing
residences; to prevent glare on adjacent property and streets; to
protect the open space and natural character of areas of the City
planned to remain conservation areas; to avoid the creation of
additional visual distractions to motorists, especially along the highspeed
expressways and along busy arterial streets that involve complex
turning movements, congestion and numerous traffic hazards; to
recognize the numerous alternative forms of free speech available in
the City, including existing nonconforming off-premises signs, onpremises
signs and temporary signs and printed and electronic media;
to recognize that this chapter allows every landowner a reasonable use
for their land; to avoid off-premises signs that would have an unfair
advantage over on-premises signs in the competition for attention,
because off-premises signs typically are higher and larger than onpremises
signs; to carry out the purposes listed in § 445-58.
B. Nonconforming off-premises signs. This section is not intended to
require the removal of an existing lawfully placed off-premises sign that
is in structurally sound condition.
C. Commercial and noncommercial. This section applies to both
commercial and noncommercial off-premises signs except as may be
specifically provided for elsewhere in this chapter.
D. PennDOT sign. Signs erected and maintained by PennDOT are
permitted by right in all districts. Such signs that identify business
services available at an interchange are specifically encouraged as an
appropriate and orderly means of providing information without
causing visual pollution or traffic hazards.
E. Political signs. See § 445-60.
F. Permitted off-premises signs. Based directly on the intent statements
within this chapter, off-premises signs are only permitted if they meet
the following requirements, except for exempt signs under § 445-60.
(1) District. An off-premises sign is only permitted in:
(a) The I-G, I-L and C-G Districts; and
(b) The C-N District if both of the following conditions are met:
[1] All portions of such sign are within 150 feet of the existing
right-of-way of Interstate 81, the existing right-of-way of
the North Scranton Expressway north of its intersection
with North Main Avenue or any I-G or I-L District; and
[2] The sign does not abut and does not face East or West
Market Street, North or South Keyser Avenue or the North
Scranton Expressway south of its intersection with North
Main Avenue.
§ 445-69 SCRANTON CODE § 445-69
441:1208
§ 445-70. Sign area bonuses.
(2) Location. An off-premises sign is only permitted within a maximum
of 250 feet of an existing right-of-way of an arterial street or
expressway.
(3) Maximum sign area: 672 square feet on each of two attached sign
faces if the entire sign would be within 250 feet of an expressway in
a permitted district other than the C-N District. In all other
permitted locations, a maximum sign area of 300 square feet on
each of two attached sign faces shall apply. Where a maximum sign
area of 300 square feet is permitted, such sign area may be divided
into four attached sign faces (such as four sign faces of 75 square
feet each).
(4) Spacing. Any off-premises sign shall be separated by a minimum of
400 feet from any other off-premises sign that faces onto the same
side of the same street, including existing signs in other
municipalities. In the case of signs along an expressway, such
separation distance shall only apply for signs along the same side of
the expressway.
(5) Maximum height. The total height of the sign shall be a maximum
of 40 feet above the center line of the primary street that the sign is
directed towards. See definition in § 445-68.
(6) Off-premises signs shall have a maximum of two sign faces attached
to each other, except as stated in Subsection F(3) above.
(7) Lighting and glare. See standards in § 445-46.
(8) Setbacks. In place of the setback requirements of Article III, an offpremises
sign meet the following minimum setback requirements:
(a) Two hundred fifty feet from a residential lot line (as defined by
Article II), except 200 feet if the illumination of the sign would
not be visible from the residential lot line;
(b) Fifty feet from an existing hospital building or nursing home
building; or
(c) Ten feet from the existing right-of-way of a public street or any
other lot line.
A. Intent. The intent shall be to encourage designs of signs that will be
highly compatible with nearby residences and other attractive natural
features and areas.
B. Applicability. These bonuses may apply to on-premises signs in a
commercial, industrial or institutional district.
C. Wood. The wall or freestanding maximum sign area(s) permitted by this
Article may be increased by 20% if:
§ 445-69 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-70
441:1209
§ 445-71. Signs identifying major residential or business
developments.
The following signs are permitted by right in all districts, provided that they
meet the following requirements.
(1) All such wall or freestanding signs are constructed completely of
natural relief-finish wood (other than required fasteners); and
(2) All freestanding signs on the lot have a maximum height of 10 feet.
A. When allowed. Signs and any supporting structure (as described in this
section) are allowed for developments that have been approved to
involve either:
(1) A total of 10 or more residential lots; or
(2) A total of five or more separate office, commercial, industrial and/
or institutional establishments on a minimum total of three acres of
land.
B. Size and number. Signs described in this section may have a maximum
sign area of 40 square feet and a maximum height of 10 feet, except a
maximum height of 15 feet may apply in a commercial district. These
signs and/or structures may be located one each a maximum of three of
the major entrances to the development from exterior streets. This sign
area may be an addition to other sign area limits of this chapter. The
signs may be attached to a brick or wooden structure with a maximum
height of 10 feet and maximum length of 20 feet, which shall be
permitted within a required front yard, provided that required sight
distance is not obstructed.
C. Durability. Such signs shall be designed to be of a durable construction
requiring little maintenance.
D. Message. Such signs may only include the name of the development,
the names of any uses within the development and any logo. A phone
number may only be included during sale or rental of the development.
Such signs shall not include any advertising.
E. Landscaping. Such signs shall be attractively landscaped, with plants
and shrubs requiring minimal maintenance.
F. Location. Such signs and structures shall be located outside of the
existing and future street rights-of-way lines and shall satisfy the sight
distance requirements of § 445-74.
G. Maintenance. If such signs are intended to remain beyond the
completion of a developer's involvement in a project, the developer
shall provide an appropriate method to ensure proper maintenance of
the sign.
H. Illumination. Such signs in a residential district shall not be illuminated.
§ 445-70 SCRANTON CODE § 445-71
441:1210
I. Directional signs within a major business development.
(1) When allowed. A directional business sign is allowed at each
intersection of two or more streets within an office, commercial or
industrial development that involves a total of 20 or more acres.
(2) Size. Each sign may have a total square footage of 120 square feet
on each of two sides. The sign shall be an orderly single structure
and may include on it the names and logos of all the businesses
located in the development, along with directional arrows and a
map.
(3) Purpose. The signs allowed by this subsection are to direct visitors
to businesses. These signs are not intended for routine advertising
purposes.
(4) Illumination. Such signs may be externally but not internally
illuminated.
§ 445-71 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-71
441:1211

ARTICLE VIII
General Regulations
§ 445-72. Frontage onto improved streets; number of uses or
buildings; minimum size of dwellings.
A. Frontage required onto improved street.
(1) A principal building shall only be built upon a lot with frontage on a
public street improved to meet City standards abutting the lot or
for which such improvements have been insured by the posting of a
performance guaranty pursuant to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, except:
(a) A single lot that existed as a lawful recorded lot of record prior
to the adoption of this chapter and that is not proposed to be
subdivided and that is to be used for a single-family detached
dwelling shall be permitted to have access onto a public street
by means of a paved public alley/court with a minimum
cartway width from the subject lot to a public street of 10 feet
if:
[1] Such alley/court provides legally permanent access to the
property; and
[2] The Zoning Officer determines there are no other feasible
methods of providing access to the property.
(b) A townhouse or condominium apartment development may
have access to individual dwellings using a parking court and a
shared accessway/private street within the tract, provided that
such shared access/private street guarantees permanent
access (with a method for funding perpetual maintenance
approved by the Planning Commission under the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance) from such dwellings to
reach a public street.
(2) Any new lot that is granted subdivision approval shall have
frontage onto a public street, except as permitted above for a
townhouse or condominium apartment development.
B. Multiple uses in a building. Occupancy of a principal commercial or
industrial building by more than one permitted use is specifically
allowed, provided that all other requirements of this chapter are
satisfied.
C. Multiple buildings on a lot. An approved commercial, institutional,
industrial, townhouse or garden apartment lot may include more than
one principal building. In such case, the minimum front, side and rear
yard requirements shall only apply at exterior lot lines of the property,
except as otherwise provided by this chapter. Individual buildings or
portions of such buildings may be held in approved condominium
§ 445-72 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-72
441:1213
§ 445-73. Height exceptions; airport approaches.
§ 445-74. Special lot and yard requirements; sight distance and
buffer yards.
ownership, but the lot shall be owned by a single legal entity. In
cases not meeting this § 445-72C, only one principal building shall
be permitted per lot. See § 445-77I concerning the creation of new
nonconforming business lots.
D. Minimum size of dwellings. Each dwelling unit shall include a minimum
of 700 square feet of habitable indoor heated floor area, except:
(1) Such minimum for apartment units shall be 600 square feet.
(2) Such minimum for apartment units within buildings containing six
or more dwelling units that are specifically limited to persons over
55 years old and the spouses and/or the physically handicapped
shall be 450 square feet.
A. Height exceptions. The maximum structure height specified for each
district shall not apply to farm silos and associated agricultural
structures, commercial communications antennas, household antennas
(see § 445-35), water towers, cupolas, clock or bell towers, steeples or
spires of places of worship, electrical transmission lines, industrial raw
material storage silos (other than for fuels), flagpoles, elevator shafts,
ventilators, skylights, windmills, smokestacks, chimneys or other
similar appurtenances usually required to be and customarily placed
above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
B. Height and airport approaches. At a minimum, any structure proposed
to have a height of 75 feet or more above average surrounding ground
level shall present sufficient information to the Zoning Officer to prove
that the structure would comply with all applicable federal, state and
City requirements regarding airport approaches and warning lights.
A. In general.
(1) No lot, structure or use shall be created or developed in such a way
that it would result in another lot, building or use not being able to
meet the requirements of this chapter. This includes, but is not
limited to setback areas, nonimpervious areas and off-street
parking areas.
(2) Emergency access. All uses and structures shall have adequate
provisions for access by emergency vehicles.
(3) Accuracy. The applicant is responsible to make sure that all
measurements submitted to the City are accurate. See revocation
of permits in Article I.
B. Exceptions to minimum lot areas, lot widths and yards.
§ 445-72 SCRANTON CODE § 445-74
441:1214
(1) Nonconforming lots. See § 445-77.
(2) Through lots. Any lot in the R-1 or R-1A District having frontage on
two approximately parallel streets (not including an alley) shall
provide a required front yard setback abutting each of these
streets.
(3) Corner lots.
(a) For R-1, R-1C and R-1A Districts, see setback from public
street in § 445-30B(2).
(b) For a corner lot, the applicant may choose which shall be the
front, unless the Zoning Officer determines that one side
clearly should be the front based upon the predominate pattern
on that block. The front door shall face the front yard.
(4) Triangular lots. If a three-sided lot does not have a rear lot line,
then the required rear yard shall be measured from the corner that
is furthermost away from the front lot line. In such case, the lot
shall have two side lot lines.
(5) Projections into required yards. The following features may project
into required yards as specified:
(a) Emergency fire escapes, new or improved fire exits and
handicapped access facilities added onto a building that
existed prior to the adoption of this chapter, provided that a
fire escape shall not intrude into a required front yard and that
such features intrude a minimum of five feet into a required
yard.
(b) Routinely projecting architectural features such as bay
windows, cornices, eaves, fireplaces, flues, gutters, chimneys,
fire escapes or window sills which do not project more than
three feet into a required yard.
(c) Stairs and landings that are not covered by structural roofs
that are necessary for entry into the main doors of a building.
(d) Patios, porches and decks that:
[1] Are not covered by a structural roof;
[2] Are not enclosed and do not have walls of mostly solid
material, glass or Plexiglas;
[3] Are not closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line,
(except zero feet at a shared lot line of attached
dwellings); and
[4] Are not raised an average of more than four feet above the
surrounding average ground level.
§ 445-74 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-74
441:1215
(e) If a covered or uncovered patio, porch or deck does not meet
the standards of Subsection B(5) above and does not have
enclosed walls of mostly solid material (including glass or
Plexiglas), then such patio, porch or deck may be a minimum of
five feet from a side lot line, 15 feet from a rear lot line and
zero feet from any shared lot line of abutting dwellings.
(f) Awnings and canopies may extend into a required yard if the
following standards are met:
[1] The awnings or canopies are constructed primarily of
fabric (such as canvas) or closely similar material;
[2] The awnings or canopies are maintained in good condition;
[3] The awnings or canopies shall not be enclosed on the front
or sides;
[4] The awnings or canopies do not extend more than three
feet into a street right-of-way, except that canopies
covering a walkway to a main entrance of a principal
apartment, institutional or business building and that has
a maximum canopy width of 10 feet may extend to within
one feet of a curb;
[5] The canopies or awnings shall meet the requirements of
the City building code as applicable; and
[6] The awnings or canopies shall not obstruct pedestrian or
vehicle movement.
(6) Previously approved setbacks. Where a subdivision or land
development was granted final approval prior to the adoption of
this chapter and the lawful setbacks in effect at such time are
shown on the approved plans, at the option of the developer, those
approved setbacks may apply in place of any revised setbacks in
this chapter.
(7) Front yard exceptions. When an unimproved lot is situated between
two or more lots with principal buildings with principal building
front yard setbacks with less depth than required in that district,
the minimum front yard shall be reduced to the depth of such
abutting improved lot that has the largest depth, down to an
absolute minimum of 10 feet.
(8) Parking lot planting strips. See § 445-75.
(9) Depth of irregular lots. On irregularly shaped lots where the rear
lot line is not parallel to the front lot line, the minimum depth may
be based upon average dimensions.
§ 445-74 SCRANTON CODE § 445-74
441:1216
(10) Side yard variation. Where the side wall of a building is irregular
and not parallel with the side lot line, the side yard may be varied
as follows:
(a) The average side yard width shall not be less than the required
width; and
(b) The side yard width shall not be narrower at any point than
75% of the minimum side yard requirement.
C. Sight distance at intersections.
(1) Purpose. The purpose shall be to ensure that traffic passing
through an intersection or turning onto a street can safely see
oncoming traffic.
(2) A triangular area as described in this section shall be graded and
shall be kept free of sight obstructions between a height of two and
one-half (2 1/2) and 10 feet, including structures, nontransparent
fences, vegetation and signs (but not including sign posts or utility
posts of less than one foot in width or the trunks of deciduous
trees).
(3) This sight distance triangle shall be shown on development plans
submitted to the City and be shown on any plan required to be
recorded. Such triangle shall serve as a permanent setback line for
all such visual obstructions and shall be binding upon present and
future owners of the land.
(4) If a driveway, accessway or street would enter onto a state street,
the required sight triangle to be included on the development plan
shall be that necessary to achieve the minimum sight distance
required by PennDOT regulations.
(5) If minimum sight distance requirements would not be established
by PennDOT, then the sight distance triangle shall be as follows:
The triangle shall be measured based upon the intersecting point of
the center lines of the street receiving the traffic and the entering
street, accessway or driveway. The sight distance triangle shall be
established by a distance along the center line of the receiving
street (established below) and a distance (measured along the
center line of the entering street, accessway or driveway) 25 feet
back from the edge of the existing right-of-way of the receiving
street. The following distances shall be used along the center line
of the receiving street in each direction from the intersection to
establish the sight distance triangle:
(a) Three hundred fifty feet along the center line of any arterial
street.
(b) Two hundred seventy-five feet along the center line of any
collector street.
§ 445-74 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-74
441:1217
(c) Two hundred feet along the center line of any local street.
(6) These sight distance requirements shall apply to all intersections
involving a public street and another street, accessway or driveway,
except these requirements shall not apply to an individual driveway
serving only one or two dwelling units that enters onto a local or
collector street.
(7) A sight distance triangle shall apply for each direction of approach
to an intersection when two or more arterial or collector streets are
involved.
D. Buffer yards. Buffer yards and screening complying with the following
standards shall be required under the following situations:
(1) When required. Buffer yards with evergreen screening shall be
required whenever any new or expanded:
(a) Principal commercial use, principal institutional use, principal
industrial use, industrial outdoor storage area, tractor-trailer
truck loading/unloading area or area routinely used for the
parking of two or more tractor-trailer trucks has a side or rear
yard that abuts or is across the street from a residential lot line
(see definition in Article II); or
(b) Off-street parking lot or parking deck containing six or more
parking spaces that abuts and is within 200 feet of a residential
lot line. See also requirements for junkyards in § 445-34.
(2) In case of an expansion of an existing use, only the area abutting
the expansion shall be required to provide the buffer yard, unless
otherwise required as a condition of the Zoning Hearing Board if
such use is within their purview. For a use approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board, the Board may also require fencing where deemed
necessary.
(3) Width and plants. Any required buffer yard shall have a minimum
width of 50 feet if an industrial use or industrial outdoor storage or
§ 445-74 SCRANTON CODE § 445-74
441:1218
a tractor-trailer truck loading dock abuts a residential district and
eight feet in all other situations where a buffer yard is required.
The buffer yard shall include plant screening with an initial height
when planted of four feet. Ninety percent of the plants shall be
evergreen. Plants shall be chosen and placed so as to reasonably be
expected to form a solid year-round visual screen with a minimum
height of six feet within three years of planting.
(4) Location of buffer yards.
(a) The buffer yard width shall be measured from the district
boundary line, existing street right-of-way line or lot line,
whichever is applicable.
(b) Plants needed for the visual screen shall not be placed within
an existing street right-of-way.
(c) The buffer yard may include areas within a required front, side
or rear yard or a paved area setback area, provided that the
larger yard requirement shall apply in case of overlap.
(5) Characteristics of buffer yards.
(a) The buffer yard shall be a landscaped area free of structures,
dumpsters, commercial or industrial storage or display,
manufacturing or processing activity, materials, loading and
unloading areas or vehicle parking or display. No new
driveways or streets shall be permitted in the buffer yards
except at points of approved perpendicular crossings for
ingress or egress, which shall have a maximum width of 35
feet.
(b) Maintenance. In buffer yards, all areas not covered by trees
and shrubs shall be well-maintained in an all-season vegetative
ground cover (such as grass) and shall be kept free of debris
and rubbish and shall not include grass areas higher than eight
inches.
(c) Fence. Any fence in a buffer yard shall be placed on the inside
of any required evergreen screening.
(d) Modifications. In situations where it would be impractical to
develop a screen that would meet all City requirements or
where an undue hardship would be created to an applicant, the
Zoning Hearing Board may as a special exception agree to
modify these requirements to allow an acceptable alternative.
Such alternative may, for example, involve the development of
a solid wooden fence that has been treated to be weather
resistant. Such modification shall only occur after a review by
the Planning Commission.
(6) Buffer yard plans.
§ 445-74 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-74
441:1219
§ 445-75. Landscaping.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter where a
buffer yard would be required and on any required subdivision
or land development plan, the applicant shall submit plans
showing:
[1] The location and arrangement of each buffer yard.
[2] The placement, general selection of species and initial size
of all plant materials.
[3] The placement, size, materials and type of all fences to be
placed in such buffer yard.
(b) The Zoning Officer shall review such plans to determine that
the plans are in conformance with the terms of this chapter.
(7) See also planting strips along parking streets in § 445-75 below.
A. Ground cover. Any part of a commercial, industrial, institutional or
garden apartment lot which is not used for structures, loading areas,
parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas shall
be provided with an all-season, well-maintained vegetative ground
cover and shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs.
B. Parking lot planting strip.
(1) Whenever a parking lot or parking deck including six or more
parking spaces abuts a public street and a buffer yard is not
required under § 445-74, along such lot line a planting strip with a
minimum width of three feet shall be required.
(2) Right-of-way. Such planting strip may extend into or be within the
right-of-way of a public street if authorized, in writing, by the City
Engineer, based upon whether sufficient width for pedestrians
would be maintained (which may involve the use of tree grates) and
obstructions with utilities would be avoided and if authorized by
PennDOT, if a state street is involved.
(3) Plants. Such planting strip shall include:
(a) Grass or other attractive vegetative ground cover.
(b) Shrubs intended to have a maximum height of three feet,
which shall be designed to eventually form a continuous hedge
if within the C-D or C-N District.
(c) Deciduous shade trees with a minimum trunk width when
planted of two inches measured one foot above the average
surrounding ground level, with an average of one such tree for
every 50 feet of length of parking area along such street.
§ 445-74 SCRANTON CODE § 445-75
441:1220
§ 445-76. Ultimate/future street right-of-way widths.
See Chapter 423, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 445-77. Nonconformities.
The following provisions shall apply to nonconformities (see definitions in
Article II).
(4) Maintenance. Such planting strip shall be maintained by the
abutting property owner, regardless of whether the plantings are
located within the public right-of-way or not.
A. Purposes. These provisions are intended to gradually encourage
greater separation of less compatible uses. As nonconforming uses may
desire to grow significantly in intensity, those uses are intended to be
encouraged to relocate in areas that are more suitable. Generally,
existing nonconformities are intended to be permitted to be continued
and to be resold and modified within certain limits.
B. Registration and continuation of nonconformities.
(1) Evidence of nonconformity; failure to register; statement.
[Amended 7-12-2007 by Ord. No. 12-2007]
(a) It shall be the responsibility of a party asserting a
nonconformity to provide evidence that the nonconformity was
lawfully created and was and continues to be in compliance
with all City laws, regulations and codes in effect at the time it
was created and thereafter. With respect to nonconforming
dwelling units, in addition to the above requirements, evidence
must be provided to show the use is in compliance with the
Rental Registration Ordinance (File of Council No. 88, 2001) or
any successor ordinance and the dwelling units are in
compliance with all building codes.198
(b) Failure to properly register the property in accordance with
the said Rental Registration Ordinance or any successor
ordinance, the failure to maintain said registration, or the
failure to maintain the premises in compliance with all building
codes shall be considered both an intent to abandon the
nonconforming use and an actual abandonment of such
nonconforming use and shall make any subsequent
nonconforming use illegal.
(c) A property owner may request a written statement of
nonconformity from the Zoning Officer after providing
sufficient evidence as stated above. The Zoning Officer may,
198. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 373, Rental Property, Art. I, Registration of Residential Rental
Property.
§ 445-75 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-77
441:1221
but is not required to, prepare a partial or complete list of
existing nonconformities.
(2) A lawful nonconforming use, structure or lot as defined by this
chapter may be continued and may be sold and continued by new
owners. Any expansion of, construction upon or change in use of a
nonconformity shall only occur in conformance with this section.
C. Expansion of, construction upon or change in use of nonconformities.
(1) Nonconforming structure.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall permit a nonconforming structure to
be reconstructed or expanded provided:
[1] That such action will not increase the severity or amount
of the nonconformity (such as the area of the building
extending into the required setback) or create any new
nonconformity;
[2] That any expanded area will comply with the applicable
setbacks in that district and other requirements of this
chapter; and
[3] That if the structure uses an on-lot septic system, the City
sewage enforcement officer determines that such system
is adequate for the proposed use.
(b) In the case of a nonconforming structure which is used by a
nonconforming use, any expansion shall also meet the
requirements of this section regarding nonconforming uses.
(c) If a residential building has a lawfully nonconforming side or
rear building setback, additions may occur to increase the
height above such setback or to extend other portions of the
building up to such nonconforming setback line, provided that
the structure is not extended beyond the existing setback line
and provided that no additional nonconformity is created and if
all other requirements of this chapter are met.
(d) If a nonresidential building has a lawfully nonconforming side
or rear building setback, additions may occur to increase the
height above such setback or to extend other portions of the
building up to such nonconforming setback line, provided that
the structure is not extended beyond the existing setback line
and provided that no additional nonconformity is created and if
all other requirements of this chapter are met. However, such
additions shall not be permitted if the nonresidential building
abuts an existing primarily residential use.
(2) Nonconforming lot.
§ 445-77 SCRANTON CODE § 445-77
441:1222
(a) New permitted structures for a single permitted by right
principal use and its customary accessory uses may be
constructed, reconstructed or expanded on a nonconforming
lot of record as a permitted by right use if all of the following
requirements are met:
[1] The lot area is at least 40% of the minimum lot area.
[2] The lot width is at least 40% of the minimum lot width.
[3] The lot is a lot of record that lawfully existed prior to the
adoption of this chapter or an applicable subsequent
amendment.
[4] Minimum setbacks and other requirements of this chapter
are complied with for any new construction or expanded
area.
[5] If a new principal building will be served by an on-lot
septic system, the lot shall comply with all state septic
regulations and shall provide an approved alternative
drainfield location.
[6] For a dwelling on a nonconforming lot, the front door shall
face a public street, and the dwelling shall have a side
facing onto a public street that has an appearance typical
of a front of a dwelling.
(b) Setbacks. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a special
exception to reduce the required setbacks for construction on
a nonconforming lot if the Board determines that such
reduction would result in a building that would be more
compatible with neighboring residences than would be built if
the setback requirement was not reduced.
(c) Integration. Contiguous nonconforming lots under common
ownership shall be integrated to form lots that would be
conforming or less nonconforming.
(d) If a proposed development on a nonconforming lot does not
meet the requirements of the above § 445-77C(2)(a) and (b),
then development of the lot shall not occur unless a variance is
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition to the
standards stated for a variance in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
also review whether any alternative permitted uses could
reasonably be made of the property that would less
significantly adverse impacts upon the established character of
an existing residential neighborhood than the proposed use.
(3) Expansion of a nonconforming nonresidential use. A
nonconforming use or a building used by a nonconforming use shall
§ 445-77 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-77
441:1223
not be expanded, except in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) An expansion of more than 5% in total building floor area shall
require special exception approval from the Zoning Hearing
Board under § 445-19.
(b) Such reconstruction or expansion shall be only upon the same
lot that the nonconforming use was located upon at the time
the use became nonconforming.
(c) The total building floor area used by a nonconforming use or
the total land area used by a nonconforming use, whichever is
more restrictive, shall not be increased by greater than 25%
beyond each such measurement that existed in such use at the
time such use became nonconforming. These maximum
increases shall be measured in aggregate over the entire life of
the nonconformity.
(d) Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall meet the required
setbacks and other requirements of this chapter, unless the
Zoning Hearing Board grants a variance.
(e) The Zoning Hearing Board may require a nonconforming use
that is expanding to provide a buffer yard with a planting
screen meeting the requirements of § 445-74 and/or an
attractive solid wood fence of six feet minimum height.
(4) Expansion of a nonconforming residential use. An existing
nonconforming residential use may be expanded in floor area as a
permitted by right use, provided that:
(a) The number of dwelling units or boardinghouse units or other
types of living units is not increased;
(b) The expansion meets all applicable setbacks;
(c) No new types of nonconformities are created; and
(d) A nonconformity is not made more severe (including the
building area within the required setback area).
D. Damaged or destroyed nonconformities.
(1) Except as provided for in Subsection D(4) below, a nonconforming
structure that has been destroyed or damaged equal up to a
maximum of 75% of its appraised fair market value by fire,
windstorm, lightning or a similar cause deemed not to be the fault
of the owner may be rebuilt in a nonconforming fashion only if:
(a) The application for a building permit is submitted within 12
months after the date of damage or destruction;
(b) Work begins in earnest within six months afterwards;
§ 445-77 SCRANTON CODE § 445-77
441:1224
(c) A new nonconformity shall not be created or increased by a
reconstruction; and
(d) The applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer
that the damage or destruction was not greater than 75% of
the appraised fair market value.
(2) A nonconforming structure that has been destroyed or damaged
equal by more than 75% of its appraised fair market value by any
cause shall not be rebuilt in a nonconforming fashion, except as
provided in Subsection D(5) below.
(3) Rebuilding of a damaged or destroyed nonconformity shall not
begin until plans for rebuilding have been presented and approved
by the Zoning Officer. Any change of one nonconforming use to
another nonconforming use shall comply with the provisions of this
section.
(4) Nonconforming use of open land. All nonconforming off-premises
signs, junkyards, outside storage areas and similar nonconforming
uses of open land, when damaged to an extent of 50% or more of
replacement cost, shall not be continued, repaired or
reconstructed. The burden of proof concerning the extent of the
damage shall be upon the applicant.
(5) Dwellings. A destroyed or damaged nonconforming building
including only one or two dwelling units may be reconstructed
regardless of the percentage destruction, provided that:
(a) No new nonconformity is created or increased by the
reconstruction; and
(b) That work begins in earnest within 18 months of the date of
damage or destruction unless the Zoning Hearing Board grants
a time extension for good cause.
(6) Fair market value. An applicant shall have the burden of proof to
prove the percent of the fair market value that was damaged or
destroyed. Such proof shall involve an appraisal by a licensed real
estate broker with substantial real estate appraisal experience.
"Fair market value" shall generally be defined as the price a
property would bring under normal conditions on the open market,
before and after the damage. Such value shall assume that the
owner is under no compulsion to sell within a shorter than average
time period and that the property would remain on the market for
an average length of time for such properties.
E. Abandonment of a nonconformity.
(1) Discontinuance of nonconformity; rental residential properties.
[Amended 7-12-2007 by Ord. No. 92-2007]
§ 445-77 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-77
441:1225
(a) If a nonconforming use of a building or land is discontinued for
a period of six months or more or is discontinued for a period of
12 or more months in any two-year period, the use is
considered abandoned, except:
[1] As provided for in the Damaged or destroyed
nonconformities section (§ 445-77D); or
[2] If a nonconforming off-premises junkyard, outside storage
area or similar nonconforming use of open land is
discontinued for 30 days or more, the nonconforming use
shall not be continued, repaired or reconstructed.
(b) Regarding residential properties, failure to properly register
the property in accordance with the Rental Registration
Ordinance (File of Council No. 88, 2001, as amended) or any
successor ordinance,199 maintain said registration and
maintain the premises in conformance with City building codes
shall be considered intent to abandon the nonconforming use.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible to provide evidence that the
nonconformity was not abandoned.
(3) Any future use of such building or land shall be in full conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended 7-12-2007 by Ord.
No. 92-2007]
F. Floodplain. See the flood-prone area regulations in § 445-51.
G. Changes from one nonconforming use to another.
(1) Once changed to a conforming use, a structure or land or portion
thereof shall not revert to a nonconforming use.
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to a different type of
nonconforming use only if permitted as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board. The Board shall determine whether the
applicant has provided sufficient proof to show that the proposed
new use will be equally or less objectionable in external effects
compared to the preexisting nonconforming use. The Board should
review the following types of effects:
(a) Traffic generation (especially truck traffic).
(b) Noise, dust, fumes, gases, odor, glare, vibration, fire and
explosive hazards.
(c) Amount and character of outdoor storage.
(d) Hours of operation if the use would be close to dwellings.
199. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 373, Rental Property, Art. I. Registration of Residential Rental
Property.
§ 445-77 SCRANTON CODE § 445-77
441:1226
(e) Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area.
(f) Potential of the expansion to alleviate existing congestion and
parking shortages by improved site design, addition of parking
and improved loading areas.
(3) Approval of the Zoning Hearing Board shall not be required for a
change from one nonconforming retail sales use to another
nonconforming retail sales use or from one personal service use to
another personal service use, provided that:
(a) The hours of operation are not increased between 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.;
(b) The new use is not a sexually oriented business (see definition
in Article II);
(c) The new use meets any applicable conditions placed by the
Board on the prior use; and
(d) The total floor area of the use is not increased by more than
5%.
H. District changes. Any uses, structures or lots that become
nonconforming because of a zoning district change shall be regulated
under this section on nonconformities.
I. Division of lots with existing buildings. Notwithstanding limitations
imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a lot which had one or more
principal commercial or industrial buildings existing prior to the
adoption of this chapter may be divided after receiving special
exception approval into more than one nonconforming lot, provided
that such division is for purposes of conveyance into separate
ownership and provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) Each lot shall have a guaranteed permanent method of vehicle
access onto a public street, through a permanent legal access
easement or other method approved by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Each lot shall be served by both public water and public sewage
service.
(3) The boundaries of all lots shall be designed in such a manner to
maximize lot area, lot width, lot depth and yard areas and to result
in a functional configuration that minimizes nonconformities.
(4) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing
Board that each lot will include adequate off-street parking areas
and loading areas or a permanent legally binding method to ensure
joint use of such facilities.
(5) See Planning Commission review provisions in Article I for a
special exception.
§ 445-77 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-77
441:1227
§ 445-78. Temporary structure or use.
(6) The applicant shall prove that there will be an adequate mechanism
for joint ownership and/or maintenance of any shared facilities or
features.
J. Approval granted prior to passage of chapter. A proposed structure or
use that is granted a zoning permit, building permit or subdivision or
land development approval prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be
deemed a legal nonconforming use, provided that:
(1) The construction of the structure or use was actually started prior
to the adoption of this chapter;
(2) The ground story framework, including the second tier of beams, is
completed within six months of adoption of this chapter; and
(3) The entire structure or use is completed or installed and ready for
operation or occupancy within one year of the adoption of this
chapter.
A. Construction vehicle parking and temporary offices. See essential
services, a permitted by right accessory use, in § 445-46.
B. Tents. The following are permitted by right accessory uses: tents
erected for a use during a maximum of five days in any calendar year
for routine and customary accessory noncommercial uses (such as
weddings in a rear yard) and for a routine and customary accessory use
to an existing commercial use.
C. Temporary uses by special exception. For temporary structures or uses
that are not specifically permitted by right by this chapter, and other
than customary accessory uses and other than those uses that were
lawfully occurring on a periodic basis prior to the adoption of this
chapter, a temporary permit may be issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception for structures or uses that would not
otherwise be permitted, subject to the following additional provisions:
(1) Duration. The Zoning Hearing Board shall establish a limit on the
duration of the use. In the case of a special event, except under
special circumstances, this should be a maximum of seven days in
any sixty-day period. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a single
approval once for numerous occurrences of an event.
(2) Statement from owner. The applicant shall present a statement
from the owner of record of the land accepting responsibility to
ensure that the use or structure is removed once the permit
expires.
(3) Removal. Such structure or use shall be removed completely upon
expiration of the permit without cost to the City. If the structure or
use is not removed in a timely fashion after proper notification, the
§ 445-77 SCRANTON CODE § 445-78
441:1228
§ 445-79. Motor vehicle access.
The following regulations apply to access from a lot to a public street:
City may remove the use or structure at the cost of the person who
owns the land upon which the structure or use is located.
(4) Conditions. The temporary use or structure shall be compatible
with adjacent uses and clearly be of a temporary nature.
(5) Fee. Either the Zoning Hearing Board or the City Council may
waive and/or return the required application fee if the applicant is
an Internal Revenue Service recognized and well-established
nonprofit organization, and the applicant clearly shows that the
proposed use is temporary and will be used to clearly primarily
serve a charitable or public service purpose.
(6) Nonprofit. Only a well-established and Internal Revenue Service
recognized nonprofit organization proposing a temporary use to
clearly primarily serve a charitable or public service purpose shall
be eligible to receive approval for a temporary commercial use in a
district where that use is not permitted.
(7) Special events. For a special event that will attract significant
numbers of the public, the Zoning Hearing Board may deny the use
if it determines that the following will not be generally appropriate:
sanitary and water service, traffic control, off-street parking and
protection of the public health and safety.
A. Each lot with less than 250 feet of frontage on an arterial street shall
have not more than one access point involving left-hand turns onto each
such street, and no lot with 250 feet or more feet of total frontage on an
arterial street shall have more than two access points involving lefthand
turns onto any such arterial street.
(1) This provision shall not apply to the following: construction of new
streets onto an existing arterial street or access points that are
clearly limited to use by only emergency vehicles.
(2) A separate ingress point and a separate egress point shall be
considered one access point, if well-marked.
B. Shared driveways. Where practicable, access to two or more
nonresidential lots should be combined and/or shared and/or
coordinated to minimize the number of access points onto an arterial
street. Shared parking lots and driveways connecting adjacent
nonresidential lots are strongly encouraged. See possible reduction of
parking requirements in § 445-58B.
C. Driveway separation and setback. The edges of driveways entering onto
an arterial or collector street shall be a minimum of 12 feet apart. The
center line of a driveway entering onto a street shall be a minimum of
§ 445-78 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 445-79
441:1229
§ 445-80. Demolition of an attached building.
The following shall apply unless a more restrictive provision is established
under a future City building code:
50 feet from the intersection of rights-of-way of two public streets.
Driveways shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any side lot
line of a dwelling, unless the driveways are approved by the City as
shared driveways or unless dwellings are attached along such lot line.
D. Width. A driveway shall have a maximum width of 35 feet measured at
the existing right-of-way line, except as may be increased by the City
Engineer or PennDOT to provide sufficient turning radii for trucks or
buses.
E. Ramps. Access shall not be provided to an arterial street within 300 feet
of the intersection of such street with an off-ramp ramp from an
interchange of an expressway.
A. If a building is to be demolished that is attached to another building
that is not to be demolished on another lot and the party wall is to be
exposed, then the owner of the building being demolished shall, at his/
her expense, preserve the exposed party wall by permanently
waterproofing the party wall on the exposed side. Such waterproofing
shall involve stucco, brickote, gunite or other approved noncombustible
materials.
B. This provision shall not apply to buildings demolished by the City of
Scranton or the Scranton Redevelopment Authority or if an active
development plan has been approved by the City for the development of
a new building attached to such wall.
§ 445-79 SCRANTON CODE § 445-80
441:1230
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-1997 3-5-1997 Appropriation NCM
17-1997 3-5-1997 Appropriation NCM
18-1997 3-5-1997 Appropriation NCM
19-1997 3-5-1997 Acceptance of deed in
lieu of condemnation
NCM
20-1997 3-12-1997 Transfer of funds NCM
21-1997 3-19-1997 Appropriation NCM
22-1997 3-19-1997 Appropriation NCM
23-1997 3-19-1997 Appropriation NCM
24-1997 3-12-1997 Application for grant
funds
NCM
25-1997 4-2-1997 Economic and
Community
Development
Ch. 51
26-1997 4-9-1997 Appropriation NCM
27-1997 4-2-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
28-1997 4-9-1997 Transfer of funds NCM
29-1997 4-9-1997 Transfer of funds NCM
30-1997 4-9-1997 Transfer of funds NCM
31-1997 4-16-1997 Repealer of sale of
property
NCM
32-1997 4-16-1997 Sale of property NCM
33-1997 4-16-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
34-1997 Not passed
35-1997 Not passed
36-1997 Not passed
37-1997 5-7-1997 Appropriation NCM
38-1997 5-7-1997 Appropriation NCM
§ 445-80 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1231
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
39-1997 5-7-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
40-1997 5-7-1997 Sale of property NCM
41-1997 5-14-1997 Authorization to
implement action plan
NCM
42-1997 5-7-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
43-1997 5-7-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
44-1997 5-7-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
45-1997 5-14-1997 Authorization to file
declaration of
relinquishment
NCM
46-1997 5-14-1997 Authorization to file
declaration of
relinquishment
NCM
47-1997 5-14-1997 Approval to issue note NCM
48-1997 5-28-1997 Appropriation NCM
49-1997 7-9-1997 Extra-duty work
performed by police
officers
Ch. 105, Art. II
50-1997 5-28-1997 Appropriation NCM
51-1997 6-11-1997 Appropriation NCM
52-1997 6-11-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
53-1997 6-11-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
54-1997 6-11-1997 Appropriation NCM
55-1997 6-11-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
56-1997 6-11-1997 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
57-1997 6-25-1997 Sale of property NCM
58-1997 7-16-1997 Appropriation NCM
59-1997 7-16-1997 Appropriation NCM
60-1997 7-16-1997 Appropriation NCM
61-1997 7-16-1997 Appropriation NCM
62-1997 7-16-1997 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1232
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
63-1997 7-16-1997 Repeal of donation of
search dog to
Lackawanna Sheriff's
Office
NCM
64-1997 7-16-1997 Donation of search dog
to Springbrook Kennel
NCM
65-1997 7-16-1997 Appropriation NCM
66-1997 7-16-1997 Authorization to
execute investment
contract
NCM
67-1997 7-23-1997 Pensioner increase NCM
68-1997 7-23-1997 Appropriation NCM
69-1997 7-23-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
70-1997 7-23-1997 Sewer rates Ch. 383, Art. III
71-1997 7-23-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
72-1997 7-23-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
73-1997 7-23-1997 Clerk typist positions
created
NCM
74-1997 7-23-1997 Appropriation NCM
76-1997 7-23-1997 Authorization to enter
loan agreement
NCM
77-1997 7-30-1997 Bond NCM
78-1997 7-30-1997 Authorization to apply
for grant
NCM
79-1997 9-3-1997 Authorization to sell
property
NCM
80-1997 9-17-1997 Appropriation NCM
81-1997 9-17-1997 Authorization to accept
gift
NCM
82-1997 9-10-1997 Authorization to enter
recycling program
NCM
83-1997 9-17-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
84-1997 9-17-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1233
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
85-1997 9-17-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
86-1997 9-10-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
87-1997 9-17-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
88-1997 10-1-1997 Street vacation NCM
89-1997 10-1-1997 Street vacation NCM
90-1997 9-10-1997 Appropriation NCM
91-1997 9-10-1997 Appropriation NCM
92-1997 9-17-1997 Approval of disposition
of land
NCM
93-1997 9-17-1997 Authorization to enter
loan agreement
NCM
94-1997 9-17-1997 Authorization to
purchase street signs
NCM
96-1997 9-24-1997 Sale of property NCM
97-1997 10-8-1997 Erection of museum
and appropriation
therefor
NCM
98-1997 9-24-1997 Microenterprise
Revolving Loan
Program
Ch. 226, Art. VIII
99-1997 9-24-1997 Appropriation NCM
100-1997 9-24-1997 Appropriation NCM
101-1997 9-24-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
102-1997 9-24-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
103-1997 9-24-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
104-1997 9-24-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
105-1997 9-24-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
106-1997 9-24-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
107-1997 9-17-1997 Lease agreement NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1234
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
108-1997 10-1-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
109-1997 12-15-1997 Approval of revised
recovery plan
NCM
110-1997 10-1-1997 Sale of property NCM
111-1997 12-15-1997 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
113-1997 10-1-1997 Bond NCM
114-1997 10-1-1997 Authorization to apply
for grant
NCM
115-1997 10-1-1997 Authorization to
disburse funds
NCM
116-1997 10-22-1997 Street vacation NCM
117-1997 10-8-1997 Appropriation NCM
118-1997 10-8-1997 Appropriation NCM
119-1997 10-8-1997 Appropriation NCM
120-1997 10-15-1997 Sale of property NCM
121-1997 10-15-1997 Appropriation NCM
122-1997 10-29-1997 Sale of property NCM
123-1997 10-29-1997 Sale of property NCM
124-1997 10-29-1997 Sale of property NCM
125-1997 10-29-1997 Authorization to enter
agreement of sale
NCM
126-1997 11-5-1997 Code and supplement
sales
Ch. 35
127-1997 10-29-1997 Authorization to sell
personal property from
purchase of property
NCM
128-1997 11-12-1997 Establishment of
special account
NCM
129-1997 11-12-1997 Appropriation NCM
130-1997 11-12-1997 Appropriation NCM
131-1997 11-12-1997 Appropriation NCM
132-1997 11-12-1997 Appropriation NCM
133-1997 11-12-1997 Authorization to apply
for grant
NCM
134-1997 11-12-1997 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1235
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
135-1997 11-12-1997 Sale of property NCM
136-1997 11-12-1997 Authorization to
execute agreement
with railroad
NCM
137-1997 11-12-1997 Authorization to enter
agreement with
Department of General
Services
NCM
138-1997 11-12-1997 Authorization to enter
project cooperation
agreement
NCM
139-1997 11-19-1997 Appropriation NCM
140-1997 12-8-1997 Authorization to deliver
deed
NCM
141-1997 12-8-1997 Authorization to deliver
license
NCM
142-1997 12-8-1997 Authorization to deliver
deed
NCM
143-1997 12-15-1997 Appropriation NCM
144-1997 12-1-1997 Bond NCM
145-1997 12-15-1997 Street acceptance NCM
146-1997 12-15-1997 Firemen's and
policemen's widows'
pension fund
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. VII
148-1997 12-15-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
149-1997 12-15-1997 Intergovernmental
agreement (rail trail)
NCM
150-1997 12-15-1997 Acquisition of property NCM
151-1997 12-29-1997 Authorization to enter
redevelopment
agreement
Repealed by
Ord. No.
78-1998
152-1997 Issuance and sale of
anticipation note
NCM
1-1998 1-14-1998 General and special
taxes levy for 1998
NCM
2-1998 1-14-1998 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1236
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-1998 1-14-1998 Occupational privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
4-1998 1-14-1998 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
5-1998 1-14-1998 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
6-1998 1-14-1998 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
7-1998 1-14-1998 Landfill tipping fee NCM
8-1998 1-21-1998 Appropriation NCM
9-1998 1-21-1998 Appropriation NCM
10-1998 1-21-1998 Appropriation NCM
11-1998 1-21-1998 Appropriation NCM
12-1998 1-21-1998 Appropriation NCM
13-1998 2-4-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
14-1998 2-11-1998 Appropriation NCM
15-1998 2-4-1998 Authorization to
execute and deliver a
deed of easement
NCM
23-1998 2-18-1998 Appropriation NCM
24-1998 2-18-1998 Appropriation NCM
27-1998 2-25-1998 Ratification of
agreement with
railroad
NCM
28-1998 3-25-1998 Authorization to
petition for sale of
property
NCM
29-1998 3-25-1998 Contract authorization NCM
30-1998 3-18-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
31-1998 3-18-1998 Appropriation NCM
32-1998 3-18-1998 Appropriation NCM
33-1998 4-1-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
34-1998 4-1-1998 Appropriation NCM
35-1998 4-1-1998 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1237
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
36-1998 4-8-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
37-1998 4-29-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
38-1998 4-8-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
39-1998 4-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
40-1998 4-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
41-1998 4-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
42-1998 4-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
43-1998 4-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
44-1998 4-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
45-1998 4-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
46-1998 5-20-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 445
47-1998 5-13-1998 Authorization to
implement fourth year
action plan of
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
48-1998 5-6-1998 Authorization to apply
for community
development block
grant funds
NCM
49-1998 4-29-1998 Authorization to
disburse grant funds
amendment
NCM
50-1998 5-6-1998 Authorization to enter
into lease agreements
with various youth
sport leagues
NCM
51-1998 5-13-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
52-1998 6-3-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
53-1998 5-13-1998 Authorization to
disburse grant funds
NCM
54-1998 5-27-1998 Authorization to enter
into an intermunicipal
lease agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1238
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
55-1998 5-27-1998 Appropriation NCM
56-1998 6-3-1998 Authorization to accept
a deed
NCM
57-1998 6-3-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NCM
58-1998 6-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NCM
59-1998 6-3-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
60-1998 6-3-1998 Authorization to ratify
grant application and
acceptance of grant
funds
NCM
61-1998 6-3-1998 Authorization to enter
grant agreement
NCM
63-1998 6-10-1998 Authorization to waive
bidding requirements
NCM
64-1998 7-29-1998 Street vacation NCM
65-1998 6-24-1998 Appropriation NCM
66-1998 6-24-1998 Appropriation NCM
67-1998 7-1-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
68-1998 6-24-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
69-1998 7-1-1998 Appropriation NCM
70-1998 7-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
71-1998 7-15-1998 Authorization to enter
into agreement with
Department of Health
NCM
72-1998 7-8-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
73-1998 7-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
74-1998 7-8-1998 Appropriation NCM
75-1998 7-15-1998 Appropriation NCM
76-1998 7-15-1998 Appropriation NCM
77-1998 9-9-1998 Street vacations NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1239
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
78-1998 7-22-1998 Repealing
redevelopment
agreement (Ord. No.
151)
NCM
79-1998 7-29-1998 Appropriation NCM
80-1998 7-29-1998 Appropriation NCM
81-1998 7-29-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
82-1998 7-29-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
83-1998 8-26-1998 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
84-1998 9-23-1998 Electrical standards Ch. 215
85-1998 9-23-1998 Plumbing standards Ch. 345
86-1998 9-23-1998 Building construction:
construction standards
Ch. 187, Art. I
87-1998 9-23-1998 Mechanical standards Ch. 313
88-1998 9-16-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
89-1998 9-16-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
90-1998 9-16-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
91-1998 9-16-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
92-1998 9-16-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
93-1998 9-16-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
94-1998 9-30-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
95-1998 9-30-1998 Appropriation NCM
96-1998 10-7-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
97-1998 10-7-1998 Appropriation NCM
98-1998 10-7-1998 Appropriation NCM
99-1998 Appropriation Defeated
100-1998 10-7-1998 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1240
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
101-1998 10-7-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
102-1998 10-7-1998 Authorization to
implement fourth year
action plan of
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
103-1998 10-7-1998 Authorization to
implement fourth year
action plan of
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
104-1998 10-7-1998 Authorization to
implement fourth year
action plan of
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
105-1998 10-7-1998 Authorization to enter
into redevelopment
agreement
NCM
106-1998 10-14-1998 Appropriation NCM
107-1998 10-14-1998 Appropriation NCM
108-1998 11-4-1998 Exemption for certain
deteriorated industrial,
commercial property
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
37-2012
109-1998 11-4-1998 Authorization to apply
for community
development block
grant funds
NCM
110-1998 11-4-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
111-1998 11-18-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
112-1998 11-18-1998 Establishment of
special account
NCM
113-1998 11-30-1998 Transfer of funds NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1241
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
114-1998 11-30-1998 Authorization to
implement fourth year
action plan of
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
115-1998 1-4-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 445
116-1998 11-30-1998 Appropriation NCM
117-1998 12-14-1998 Appropriation NCM
118-1998 12-7-1998 Authorization to amend
redevelopment
agreement
NCM
119-1998 12-9-1998 Bonds NCM
120-1998 12-21-1998 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
121-1998 12-30-1998 Authorization to enter
into a lease agreement
NCM
122-1998 12-21-1998 Authorization to enter
into a professional
services agreement
NCM
123-1998 12-21-1998 Authorization to issue
and sell tax and
revenue anticipation
note
NCM
1-1999 2-1-1999 General and special tax
levy for 1999
NCM
2-1999 2-1-1999 Real property transfer
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art.VI
3-1999 2-1-1999 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
4-1999 2-1-1999 Occupational privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
5-1999 2-1-1999 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
6-1999 2-1-1999 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
7-1999 2-8-1999 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
8-1999 2-8-1999 Emergency services
fees
Ch. 226, Art. IX
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1242
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-1999 2-8-1999 Waste disposal and
collection fee
Ch. 400, Art. II
10-1999 2-12-1999 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
11-1999 3-1-1999 Secondhand dealers
amendment
Ch. 379
12-1999 2-12-1999 Contract for collection
of delinquent refuse
fees
NCM
13-1999 2-12-1999 Appointments to
authorities, boards and
commissions
Ch. 6, Art. IV
14-1999 2-4-1999 Professional services
agreement
NCM
15-1999 2-4-1999 Professional services
agreement
NCM
16-1999 2-4-1999 Fund appropriation NCM
17-1999 2-22-1999 Business privilege and
mercantile tax
regulations
Ch. 428, Art. X
18-1999 2-22-1999 Establishing a special
city account
NCM
19-1999 2-22-1999 Salaries NCM
20-1999 2-22-1999 Deed acceptance NCM
21-1999 2-12-1999 Salaries NCM
22-1999 3-1-1999 Fund appropriation NCM
23-1999 3-1-1999 Fund appropriation NCM
24-1999 3-1-1999 Establishing a special
city account
NCM
25-1999 2-22-1999 Establishing a special
city account
NCM
26-1999 Personnel parking Defeated
27-1999 3-8-1999 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
28-1999 3-8-1999 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
29-1999 3-8-1999 Lease agreement NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1243
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
30-1999 3-8-1999 Fees for copies of
police reports
Repealed by
Ord. No.
28-2010
31-1999 3-8-1999 Application for block
grant funds
NCM
32-1999 3-1-1999 Fund appropriation NCM
33-1999 3-15-1999 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
34-1999 3-15-1999 Fund appropriation NCM
35-1999 3-12-1999 Personal boarding care
home facilities
Ch. 343
36-1999 3-12-1999 Parking meters Ch. 439
37-1999 3-12-1999 Alarm devices Repealed by
Ord. No.
79-2012
38-1999 3-12-1999 Child day-care centers Ch. 212, Art. I
39-1999 3-12-1999 Adult day-care centers Ch. 212, Art. II
40-1999 3-12-1999 Reinspection fee Ch. 226, Art. XI
41-1999 4-19-1999 Street vacation NCM
42-1999 4-5-1999 Nonuniformed
employees pension
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. I
43-1999 4-5-1999 Revised benefit plan for
nonuniformed
employees amendment
Ch. 99, Art. II
44-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
45-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
46-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
47-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
48-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
49-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
50-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
51-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
52-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
53-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
54-1999 4-12-1999 Contractors
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
155-1999
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1244
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
55-1999 4-12-1999 Prepurchase
compliance inspections
Ch. 187, Art. IV
56-1999 Student housing
regulations
Defeated
57-1999 5-7-1999 Authorization to
implement fifth-year
action plan for
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
58-1999 4-12-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
59-1999 4-26-1999 Construction standards
amendment
Ch. 187, Art. I
60-1999 4-26-1999 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 215
61-1999 4-26-1999 Fire prevention
standards
Ch. 243
62-1999 Bond Defeated
63-1999 4-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
64-1999 6-21-1999 Appropriation NCM
65-1999 4-12-1999 New construction tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IX
66-1999 4-19-1999 Authorization to apply
for special projects
grant
NCM
67-1999 5-3-1999 Salaries NCM
68-1999 5-3-1999 Sale of property NCM
69-1999 5-7-1999 Appropriation NCM
70-1999 5-7-1999 Appropriation NCM
71-1999 5-7-1999 Appropriation NCM
72-1999 5-7-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
73-1999 5-7-1999 Revised benefit plan for
nonuniformed
employees amendment
Ch. 99, Art. II
74-1999 5-24-1999 Appropriation NCM
75-1999 5-24-1999 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1245
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
76-1999 5-24-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
77-1999 6-1-1999 Appropriation NCM
78-1999 6-14-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
79-1999 6-14-1999 Revised benefit plan for
nonuniformed
employees amendment
Ch. 99, Art. II
80-1999 6-14-1999 Appropriation NCM
81-1999 6-21-1999 Appropriation NCM
82-1999 6-14-1999 Appropriation NCM
83-1999 6-21-1999 Sale of property NCM
84-1999 6-21-1999 Sale of property NCM
85-1999 6-28-1999 Termination of
redevelopment
agreement
NCM
86-1999 7-12-1999 Authorization of
agreement and
selection of developer
NCM
87-1999 6-28-1999 Appropriation NCM
88-1999 7-19-1999 Sale of property NCM
89-1999 7-19-1999 Sale of property NCM
90-1999 7-19-1999 Sale of property NCM
91-1999 Sale of property Defeated
92-1999 Sale of property Defeated
93-1999 7-19-1999 Sale of property NCM
94-1999 7-19-1999 Appropriation NCM
95-1999 7-19-1999 Appropriation NCM
96-1999 7-19-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
97-1999 7-19-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
98-1999 7-19-1999 Repayment of grant NCM
99-1999 Authorization to
execute grant
Defeated
100-1999 7-26-1999 Appropriation NCM
101-1999 7-26-1999 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1246
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
102-1999 Parking meters Defeated
103-1999 7-26-1999 Sale of property NCM
104-1999 7-26-1999 Authorization to apply
for grant
NCM
105-1999 7-26-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
106-1999 7-26-1999 Appropriation NCM
107-1999 11-8-1999 Street vacation NCM
108-1999 7-26-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
109-1999 Zoning Map
amendment
Defeated
110-1999 7-19-1999 Authorization to submit
Charter question on
ballot
NCM
111-1999 9-13-1999 Appropriation NCM
112-1999 9-13-1999 Appropriation NCM
113-1999 9-13-1999 Appropriation NCM
114-1999 9-13-1999 Appropriation NCM
115-1999 9-20-1999 Appropriation NCM
116-1999 9-20-1999 Repayment of grant NCM
117-1999 9-27-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
118-1999 11-8-1999 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
119-1999 9-27-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
120-1999 9-27-1999 Appropriation NCM
121-1999 11-8-1999 Street vacation NCM
122-1999 9-27-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
123-1999 9-27-1999 Appropriation NCM
124-1999 9-27-1999 Appropriation NCM
125-1999 9-27-1999 Appropriation NCM
126-1999 9-27-1999 Appropriation NCM
127-1999 10-4-1999 Appropriation NCM
128-1999 10-18-1999 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1247
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
129-1999 11-22-1999 Street vacation NCM
130-1999 11-22-1999 Street vacation NCM
131-1999 11-1-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
132-1999 11-1-1999 Appropriation NCM
133-1999 11-1-1999 Appropriation NCM
134-1999 11-1-1999 Earned income and net
profits tax regulations
amendment
NCM
135-1999 11-1-1999 Business privilege and
mercantile tax
regulations amendment
NCM
136-1999
137-1999 10-25-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
138-1999 11-1-1999 Bond NCM
139-1999 11-1-1999 Sale of property NCM
140-1999 Appropriation Defeated
141-1999 11-8-1999 Appropriation NCM
142-1999 12-6-1999 Street vacation NCM
143-1999 11-8-1999 Sale of property NCM
144-1999 11-15-1999 Appropriation NCM
145-1999 11-15-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
146-1999 11-15-1999 Appropriation NCM
147-1999 11-15-1999 Appropriation NCM
148-1999 11-29-1999 Establishment of
special account
NCM
149-1999 11-29-1999 Appropriation NCM
150-1999 11-29-1999 Appropriation NCM
151-1999 Residency requirement Defeated
152-1999 12-13-1999 Appropriation NCM
153-1999 12-13-1999 Appropriation NCM
154-1999 12-13-1999 Tax abatement on
certain property
NCM
155-1999 12-13-1999 Contractors Ch. 203
1-2000 1-3-2000 Anticipation note NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1248
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2000 1-31-2000 Property maintenance Repealed by
Ord. No.
37-2014
3-2000 2-7-2000 General and special
taxes levy for 2000
NCM
4-2000 2-7-2000 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
5-2000 2-7-2000 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
6-2000 2-7-2000 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
7-2000 2-7-2000 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
8-2000 2-7-2000 Occupational privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
9-2000 2-7-2000 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
10-2000
11-2000 2-7-2000 Establishing special
city account
NCM
12-2000 2-7-2000 Appropriation NCM
13-2000 3-20-2000 Addendum to
redevelopment
agreement
NCM
14-2000 2-7-2000 Temporary right of
entry/storage easement
NCM
15-2000
16-2000 3-13-2000 Appropriation NCM
17-2000 3-13-2000 Appropriation NCM
18-2000 3-13-2000 Establishing special
city account
NCM
19-2000 3-13-2000 Approving disposition
of land
NCM
20-2000 3-20-2000 Establishing special
city account
NCM
21-2000 4-3-2000 Purchase of tax
delinquent property
NCM
22-2000 3-20-2000 Authority to execute
deed of easement
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1249
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
23-2000
24-2000 4-3-2000 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
25-2000 4-3-2000 Appropriation NCM
26-2000 5-1-2000 Authority to contract
with Merrill Lynch
NCM
27-2000 5-1-2000 Authority to enter
actuarial contract
NCM
28-2000 4-10-2000 Establishing special
city account
NCM
29-2000 4-10-2000 Establishing special
city account
NCM
30-2000 4-10-2000 Establishing special
city account
NCM
31-2000 4-10-2000 Establishing special
city account
NCM
32-2000 4-10-2000 Appropriation NCM
33-2000 5-8-2000 Authority to implement
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
34-2000 5-1-2000 Authority to enter
temporary easement
NCM
35-2000 5-8-2000 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
36-2000 5-8-2000 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
37-2000 5-8-2000 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
38-2000 5-8-2000 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
39-2000 5-8-2000 Authority to enter lease
agreements
NCM
40-2000 5-8-2000 Authority to implement
fifth-year action plan
NCM
41-2000 6-5-2000 Salaries NCM
42-2000 6-5-2000 Authority to enter lease
agreements
NCM
43-2000 6-5-2000 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1250
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
44-2000 6-12-2000 Appropriation NCM
45-2000 7-24-2000 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
46-2000 7-17-2000 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
47-2000 7-17-2000 Emergency services
fees amendment
Ch. 226, Art. IX
48-2000 7-17-2000 Authority to enter into
agreement
NCM
49-2000 Failed to pass
50-2000 7-31-2000 Appropriation NCM
51-2000 7-31-2000 Appropriation NCM
52-2000 7-31-2000 Appropriation NCM
53-2000 9-18-2000 Right of entry for floodcontrol
project
NCM
54-2000 Failed to pass
55-2000 9-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
56-2000 Failed to pass
57-2000 9-25-2000 Salaries:
reimbursement of gas
mileage
NCM
58-2000 Failed to pass
59-2000 Failed to pass
60-2000 10-2-2000 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
61-2000 10-23-2000 Street vacation NCM
62-2000 10-2-2000 Right of entry for floodcontrol
project
NCM
63-2000 10-9-2000 Approving disposition
of land for residential
development
NCM
64-2000 10-9-2000 Appropriation NCM
65-2000 10-9-2000 Appropriation NCM
66-2000 Failed to pass
67-2000 10-23-2000 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1251
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
68-2000 10-23-2000 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
69-2000 10-23-2000 Authorization to pay
Fire Department
expenses
NCM
70-2000 10-23-2000 Appropriation NCM
71-2000 11-6-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
72-2000 Failed to pass
73-2000 11-6-2000 Appropriation NCM
74-2000 11-20-2000 Street vacation NCM
75-2000 11-13-2000 Appropriation NCM
76-2000 11-20-2000 Authorization to pay for
Neighborhood Police
Patrol
NCM
77-2000 12-15-2000 Appropriation NCM
78-2000 12-11-2000 Community
Development Block
Grant funds
amendment
NCM
79-2000 12-11-2000 Appropriation NCM
80-2000 12-11-2000 Right of entry for floodcontrol
project
NCM
81-2000 12-4-2000 Funding of unfunded
debt
NCM
82-2000 Failed to pass
83-2000 12-11-2000 Establishing general
fund expenditure
account
NCM
84-2000 12-11-2000 Establishing special
city account
NCM
85-2000 12-11-2000 Appropriation NCM
86-2000 12-11-2000 Establishing general
fund revenue account
NCM
87-2000 12-11-2000 Appropriation NCM
88-2000 12-11-2000 Fund transfer NCM
89-2000 12-11-2000 Appropriation NCM
90-2000 Failed to pass
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1252
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
91-2000 1-8-2001 Establishing special
city account
Repealed by
Ord. No.
18-2001
92-2000 1-8-2001 Authorization to
disburse funds for Cops
in School program
NCM
93-2000 1-8-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
94-2000 1-8-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
95-2000 12-18-2000 Appropriation NCM
96-2000 1-22-2001 Right of entry for floodcontrol
project
NCM
97-2000 12-22-2000 Budget NCM
98-2000 12-22-2000 Issuance of revenue
anticipation note
NCM
99-2000 12-22-2000 Issuance of revenue
anticipation note
NCM
1-2001 1-29-2001 General and special
taxes levy for 2001
NCM
2-2001 1-29-2001 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
3-2001 1-29-2001 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
4-2001 1-29-2001 Occupational privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
5-2001 1-29-2001 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
6-2001 1-29-2001 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
7-2001 1-29-2001 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
8-2001 2-5-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
9-2001 2-5-2001 Appropriation NCM
10-2001 2-5-2001 Appropriation NCM
11-2001 2-26-2001 Insurance reserve
program and refunding
program
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1253
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-2001 2-12-2001 Appropriation NCM
13-2001 2-12-2001 Numbering of buildings Ch. 193
14-2001 3-12-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
15-2001 3-19-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
16-2001 3-26-2001 Authorization to
disburse funds
NCM
17-2001 4-2-2001 Implementation of
consolidated
submission for
community planning
and development
program
NCM
18-2001 3-26-2001 Repealing special city
account (Ord. No.
91-2000)
NCM
19-2001 3-26-2001 Establishing special
city account
NCM
20-2001 3-26-2001 Establishing special
city account
NCM
21-2001 3-26-2001 Authorization to
disburse funds for Bike
Mini Grant program
NCM
22-2001 3-26-2001 Establishing special
city account
NCM
23-2001 3-26-2001 Authorization to
disburse funds for Gang
Resistance and
Training Program
NCM
24-2001 3-26-2001 Appropriation NCM
25-2001 3-26-2001 Appropriation NCM
26-2001 3-26-2001 Appropriation NCM
27-2001 Failed to pass
28-2001 4-2-2001 Abolishing special city
account
NCM
29-2001 4-2-2001 Establishing Municipal
Golf Course fund
NCM
30-2001 4-2-2001 Establishing special
city account
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1254
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
31-2001 4-9-2001 Appropriation NCM
32-2001 4-9-2001 Appropriation NCM
33-2001 4-9-2001 Appropriation NCM
34-2001 4-16-2001 Authorization to
disburse funds
NCM
35-2001 4-23-2001 Right of entry for flood
control project
NCM
36-2001 Failed to pass
37-2001 5-7-2001 Refund to employees
for heal care
copayments
NCM
38-2001 5-14-2001 Salaries NCM
39-2001 5-7-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
40-2001 5-7-2001 Insurance reserve
program and refunding
program amendment
NCM
41-2001 5-13-2001 Authorization to
disburse funds
NCM
42-2001 5-21-2001 Authority to enter lease
agreements
NCM
43-2001 5-21-2001 Authority to enter lease
agreements
NCM
44-2001 5-21-2001 Authority to enter
escrow agreement
NCM
45-2001 Not yet adopted
46-2001 7-23-2001 Appropriation NCM
47-2001 Failed to pass
48-2001 7-2-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
49-2001 7-2-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
50-2001 7-2-2001 Appropriation NCM
51-2001 7-9-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
52-2001 7-16-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1255
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
53-2001 7-16-2001 Approving disposition
of land
NCM
54-2001 7-9-2001 Appropriation NCM
55-2001 7-23-2001 Authorization to
disburse funds
NCM
56-2001 7-23-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
57-2001 7-23-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
58-2001 7-23-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
59-2001 9-10-2001 Authority to enter
contract
NCM
60-2001 9-24-2001 Budget amendment NCM
61-2001 9-24-2001 Budget amendment NCM
62-2001 Failed to pass
63-2001 10-1-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
64-2001 10-1-2001 Right of entry for flood
control project
NCM
65-2001 10-1-2001 Appropriation NCM
66-2001 10-17-2001 Implementation of
consolidated
submission for
community planning
and development
program amendment
NCM
67-2001 9-24-2001 Appropriation NCM
68-2001 10-22-2001 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 441, Part 2
69-2001 10-22-2001 Elimination of special
duty assignments for
police
NCM
70-2001 10-29-2001 Budget amendment NCM
71-2001 10-29-2001 Budget amendment NCM
72-2001 10-29-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
73-2001 Failed to pass
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1256
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
74-2001 10-29-2001 Authorization to amend
redevelopment
agreement
NCM
75-2001 11-19-2001 Budget amendment NCM
76-2001 10-29-2001 Budget amendment NCM
77-2001 11-26-2001 Reimbursement of
related expenditures
prior to receiving
reimbursement from
AFT concerning Gang
Resistance and
Training Program
NCM
78-2001 11-26-2001 Budget amendment NCM
79-2001 11-26-2001 Budget amendment NCM
80-2001 12-3-2001 Budget amendment NCM
81-2001 12-3-2001 Budget amendment NCM
82-2001 12-3-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
83-2001 12-3-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
84-2001 12-14-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 445
85-2001 12-3-2001 Budget amendment NCM
86-2001 12-3-2001 Creation of special
account to receive and
disburse grant funds
NCM
87-2001 12-14-2001 2002 budget NCM
88-2001 12-3-2001 Registration of
residential rental
properties
Superseded by
Ord. No.
105-2007
89-2001 12-3-2001 Approving issuance of
sewer revenue note
NCM
90-2001 12-14-2001 Addendum to
disposition of land
agreement
NCM
91-2001 12-28-2001 Amendment to flood
protection project
NCM
92-2001 12-14-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1257
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
93-2001 12-28-2001 Approving disposition
of land
NCM
94-2001 12-28-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
95-2001 12-28-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
96-2001 12-28-2001 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
97-2001 12-14-2001 Authorization of tax and
revenue anticipation
note
NCM
98-2001 12-14-2001 Authorization of tax and
revenue anticipation
note
NCM
1-2002 1-14-2002 Extension of contract
with Northeast Credit
NCM
2-2002 1-14-2002 Bid acceptance NCM
3-2002 2-4-2002 General and special tax
levy for 2002
NCM
4-2002 2-4-2002 Taxation: real estate
transfer tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
5-2002 2-4-2002 Taxation: earned
income tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
6-2002 2-4-2002 Taxation: occupational
privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Article
IV
7-2002 2-4-2002 Taxation: mercantile
license tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
8-2002 2-4-2002 Taxation: business
privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
9-2002 2-4-2002 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
10-2002 1-28-2002 Purchase of recycling
containers
NCM
11-2002 2-11-2002 Establishment of open
space plan account
NCM
12-2002 2-11-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1258
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-2002 2-25-2002 2002 general operating
budget
NCM
14-2002 2-25-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
15-2002 3-18-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
16-2002 7-1-2002 Taxation: new
construction tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IX
17-2002 4-1-2002 Authorization for
consolidation
submission
NCM
18-2002 3-25-2002 Authorization for petty
cash fund
NCM
19-2002 Adoption
pending
20-2002 Adoption
pending
21-2002 Adoption
pending
22-2002 4-15-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
23-2002 4-15-2002 Consolidation
submission amendment
NCM
24-2002 4-15-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
25-2002 4-15-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
26-2002 4-22-2002 Establishment of
account
NCM
27-2002 4-22-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
28-2002 5-6-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
29-2002 5-13-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
30-2002 5-20-2002 Lease agreements NCM
31-2002 5-13-2002 Authorization for
commercial parking lot
NCM
32-2002 5-20-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property amendment
NCM
33-2002 6-10-2002 Revised recovery plan NCM
34-2002 6-10-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1259
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
35-2002 6-24-2002 Authorization to
participate in US
communities
government purchasing
alliance
NCM
36-2002 11-18-2002 Street closing and
vacation
NCM
37-2002 7-1-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
38-2002 7-1-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
39-2002 7-1-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
40-2002 7-1-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
41-2002 7-1-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
42-2002 7-1-2002 Authorization to
petition court
NCM
43-2002 7-8-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
44-2002 7-8-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
45-2002 7-8-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
46-2002 7-8-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
47-2002 7-22-2002 Conditional use
approval
NCM
48-2002 7-15-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
49-2002 7-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
50-2002 7-15-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
51-2002 7-15-2002 Establishment of
account
NCM
52-2002 7-22-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
53-2002 7-22-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
54-2002 Adoption
pending
55-2002 8-14-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
56-2002 8-14-2002 Establishment of
account
NCM
57-2002 8-14-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
58-2002 8-14-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1260
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
59-2002 9-4-2002 Financing of sewer
project
NCM
60-2002 Adoption
pending
61-2002 10-7-2002 Acceptance of 2003
capital budget
NCM
62-2002 9-23-2002 Consolidation
submission amendment
NCM
63-2002 9-30-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
64-2002 9-30-2002 Establishment of
account
NCM
65-2002 9-30-2002 Disbursement of grant
funds
NCM
66-2002 9-30-2002 Consolidation
submission amendment
NCM
67-2002 9-23-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
68-2002 10-7-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
69-2002 10-7-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
70-2002 10-7-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
71-2002 10-7-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
72-2002 10-7-2002 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
73-2002 10-7-2002 Vacation and closing of
street
NCM
74-2002 10-7-2002 Addition of account to
general budget
NCM
75-2002 10-7-2002 Transfer of funds NCM
76-2002 Adoption
pending
77-2002 10-21-2002 Establishment of
account
NCM
78-2002 10-21-2002 Establishment of
account
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1261
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
79-2002 11-4-2002 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
80-2002 11-4-2002 Correction of deed NCM
81-2002 10-28-2002 Incurrence of debt NCM
82-2002 11-18-2002 Addition of account to
general budget
NCM
83-2002 11-18-2002 Pilot parking program NCM
84-2002 11-25-2002 Special city account NCM
85-2002 11-25-2002 Account balance
transfer
NCM
86-2002 12-2-2002 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
87-2002 12-2-2002 Budget amendment NCM
88-2002 12-2-2002 Budget amendment NCM
89-2002 12-2-2002 Eminent domain NCM
90-2002 12-9-2002 2003 budget NCM
91-2002 1-13-2003 Parking meter zones
amendment
Ch. 439
92-2002 12-9-2002 Transfer of property NCM
93-2002 12-16-2002 Budget transfer NCM
94-2002 12-16-2002 Lease agreement NCM
95-2002 1-6-2003 Swimming pool fees
amendment
Ch. 332
96-2002 12-16-2002 Budget transfer NCM
97-2002 12-16-2002 Sale of property NCM
98-2002 12-16-2002 Sale of property NCM
99-2002 12-16-2002 Tax and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
100-2002 12-16-2002 Tax and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
101-2002 1-13-2003 Budget transfer NCM
102-2003 1-27-2003 Budget transfer NCM
103-2003 1-27-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
104-2003 1-27-2003 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1262
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
105-2003 1-27-2003 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
106-2003 1-27-2003 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
107-2003 1-27-2003 Occupational privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
108-2003 1-27-2003 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
109-2003 1-27-2003 2003 tax rate NCM
110-2003 1-27-2003 Waste disposal and
collection fee
amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
111-2003 1-27-2003 Vacate alley NCM
112-2003 2-3-2003 Parking meters
amendment
Ch. 439
113-2003 2-3-2003 Pension trust fund
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. VIII
114-2003 2-3-2003 Firemen's Relief and
Pension Fund
Commission
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. V
115-2003 2-3-2003 Budget transfer NCM
116-2003 2-3-2003 Sale of property NCM
117-2003 2-3-2003 Sale of property NCM
118-2003 2-3-2003 Sale of golf course NCM
119-2003 2-3-2003 Budget transfer NCM
120-2003 2-10-2003 Recycling amendment Ch. 400, Art. V
121-2003 2-10-2003 Budget amendment NCM
122-2003 2-10-2003 Budget transfer NCM
123-2003 2-24-203 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
37-2014
124-2003 2-24-2003 Budget transfer NCM
125-2003 3-3-2003 Budget amendment NCM
126-2003 3-3-2003 Budget transfer NCM
127-2003 3-3-2003 Budget transfer NCM
128-2003 3-3-2003 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1263
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
129-2003 3-3-2004 Budget transfer NCM
130-2003 3-3-2003 Sale of property NCM
131-2003 2-24-2003 Early retirement
benefit
NCM
132-2003 3-10-2003 Sale of police guns NCM
133-2003 3-10-2003 Budget transfer NCM
134-2003 3-10-2003 Budget transfer NCM
135-2003 3-31-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
136-2003 3-16-2003 Budget transfer NCM
137-2003 3-17-2003 Budget transfer NCM
138-2003 3-17-2003 Budget transfer NCM
139-2003 3-24-2003 Budget amendment NCM
140-2003 3-24-2003 Budget transfer NCM
141-2003 3-24-2003 Budget transfer NCM
142-2003 3-31-2003 Disbursement of grant
funds
NCM
143-2003 3-31-2003 Budget amendment NCM
144-2003 4-7-2003 Create special account NCM
145-2003 12-29-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 445
146-2003 4-14-2003 Budget transfer NCM
147-2003
148-2003 4-21-2003 Budget transfer NCM
149-2003 4-21-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
150-2003 4-30-2003 Budget transfer NCM
151-2003 4-30-2003 Special events account
amendment
NCM
152-2003 5-5-2003 Urban Development
Action Grant
disbursement
NCM
153-2003 5-5-2003 Budget transfer NCM
154-2003 5-12-2003 Create special account NCM
155-2003 5-5-2003 Eminent domain NCM
156-2003 5-12-2003 Budget amendment NCM
157-2003 5-12-2003 Budget transfer NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1264
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
158-2003 5-12-2003 Eminent domain NCM
159-2003 6-9-2003 Street vacation NCM
160-2003 5-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
161-2003 5-22-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
162-2003 5-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
163-2003 5-22-2003 Slope easement NCM
164-2003 5-22-2003 Slope easement NCM
165-2003 6-2-2003 Trees Ch. 434, Art. II
166-2003 6-2-2003 Conveyance of
easement
NCM
167-2003 6-9-2003 Budget transfer NCM
168-2003 6-9-2003 Lease agreement NCM
169-2003 6-9-2003 Lease agreement NCM
170-2003 6-2-2003 Grant application NCM
171-2003
172-2003 6-16-2003 Donation of fire engine NCM
173-2003 6-16-2003 Budget transfer NCM
174-2003 6-16-2003 Budget amendment NCM
175-2003 6-16-2003 Create special account NCM
176-2003 7-28-2003 Street vacation NCM
177-2003 6-26-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
178-2003 6-26-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
179-2003 6-26-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
180-2003 6-26-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
181-2003 7-10-2003 Bond NCM
182-2003 6-30-2003 Budget transfer NCM
183-2003 6-30-2003 Budget transfer NCM
184-2003 6-30-2003 Sale of property NCM
185-2003 6-30-2003 Sale of property NCM
186-2003 6-30-2003 Sale of property NCM
187-2003 8-4-2003 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1265
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
188-2003 7-21-2003 Budget amendment NCM
189-2003 7-21-2003 Sale of property NCM
190-2003 7-21-2003 Create special account NCM
191-2003 7-21-2003 Sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 383, Art. III
192-2003 7-21-2003 Budget amendment NCM
193-2003 7-21-2003 Budget transfer NCM
194-2003 7-21-2003 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
195-2003 7-28-2003 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
196-2003 7-28-2003 Budget transfer NCM
197-2003 7-28-2003 Budget transfer NCM
198-2003 7-28-2003 Installation of lighting NCM
199-2003 7-28-2003 Pension contribution NCM
200-2003 9-8-2003 Eminent domain NCM
201-2003 9-8-2003 Sewer revenue note NCM
202-2003 9-22-2003 Residential parking
permits amendment
Ch. 439
203-2003 9-15-2003 Pension contribution
amendment
NCM
204-2003 12-1-2003 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
205-2003 9-29-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
206-2003 9-22-2003 Sale of property NCM
207-2003 9-22-2003 Sale of property NCM
208-2003 9-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
209-2003 9-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
210-2003 9-22-2003 Create special account NCM
211-2003 9-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
212-2003 9-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
213-2003 9-22-2003 Towing amendment Ch. 439
214-2003 9-29-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
215-2003 9-29-2003 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1266
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
216-2003 9-29-2003 Parking of trucks in
residential districts
Ch. 439
217-2003 9-29-2003 Parking amendment Ch. 439
218-2003 10-6-2003 Pension contribution
amendment
NCM
219-2003 10-20-2003 2004 capital budget NCM
220-2003 10-27-2003 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
221-2003 10-6-2003 Liquor license transfer NCM
222-2003 10-20-2003 Abandoned or junk
vehicles
Ch. 438
223-2003 11-10-2003 Budget transfer NCM
224-2003 11-10-2003 Budget transfer NCM
225-2003 10-27-2003 Gas line right-of-way NCM
226-2003 11-24-2003 Budget transfer NCM
227-2003 11-24-2003 Budget transfer NCM
228-2003 11-24-2003 Budget transfer NCM
229-2003
230-2003 11-24-2003 Budget transfer NCM
231-2003 11-15-2003 2004 operating budget NCM
232-2003 12-1-2003 Lease renewal NCM
233-2003 12-1-2003 Easement NCM
234-2003 12-1-2003 Budget transfer NCM
235-2003 12-2-2003 Budget transfer NCM
236-2003 12-2-2003 Budget transfer NCM
237-2003 12-2-2003 Budget transfer NCM
238-2003 12-2-2003 Budget transfer NCM
239-2003 12-1-2003 Bond refunding NCM
240-2003 12-8-2003 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
241-2003 12-8-2003 Budget transfer NCM
242-2003 12-8-2003 Licensing of
contractors amendment
Ch. 203
243-2003 12-8-2003 Human relations and
discrimination
Ch. 296
244-2003 12-15-2003 Special accounts closed NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1267
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
245-2003 12-15-2003 Tax and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
246-2003 12-15-2003 Tax and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
247-2003 12-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
248-2003 12-15-2003 Budget transfer NCM
249-2003 12-22-2003 Inactive CDBG
programs
NCM
250-2003 12-22-2003 Lease of property NCM
251-2003 12-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
252-2003 12-22-2003 Swimming pool fees
amendment
Ch. 332
253-2003 12-22-2003 Grant application NCM
254-2003 12-22-2003 Bond NCM
255-2003 12-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
256-2003 12-22-2003 Budget transfer NCM
257-2003 12-22-2003 Moratorium NCM
258-2003 12-22-2003 CDBG program funds NCM
259-2003 12-22-2003 Grant acceptance NCM
260-2003 12-29-2003 Licensing of sanitation
haulers
Ch. 400, Art. III
1-2004 1-29-2004 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428 Art. VI
2-2004 1-29-2004 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
3-2004 1-29-2004 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
4-2004 1-29-2004 Occupational privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
5-2004 1-29-2004 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
6-2004 1-29-2004 2004 tax rate NCM
7-2004 1-29-2004 Waste disposal and
collection fee
amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
8-2004 2-26-2004 Street vacation
amendment
NCM
9-2004 1-29-2004 Budget transfer NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1268
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-2004
11-2004 2-5-2004 Sale of property NCM
12-2004 2-5-2004 Create special account NCM
13-2004 2-12-2004 Sale of property NCM
14-2004 2-12-2004 Sale of property NCM
15-2004 2-12-2004 Sale of property NCM
16-2004 3-25-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
17-2004 2-26-2004 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
18-2004 3-25-2004 Street vacation NCM
19-2004 3-4-2004 Lease agreement NCM
20-2004 3-11-2004 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
21-2004 3-11-2004 Create special account NCM
23-2004 3-18-2004 Sale of property NCM
24-2004 3-18-2004 Sale of property NCM
25-2004 3-18-2004 Sale of property NCM
26-2004 4-15-2004 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 6
27-2004 3-25-2004 Transfer of funds NCM
28-2004 3-25-2004 Transfer of funds NCM
29-2004 3-25-2004 Transfer of funds NCM
30-2004 5-6-2004 Street vacation NCM
31-2004 4-1-2004 Sale of property NCM
32-2004 4-1-2004 Easement conveyance NCM
33-2004 4-15-2004 Transfer of property NCM
34-2004 4-15-2004 2003 operating budget
amendment
NCM
35-2004 5-6-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
36-2004 4-29-2004 Transfer of funds NCM
37-2004 5-6-2004 Transfer of property NCM
38-2004 5-20-2004 Arcades and
amusement devices
Ch. 172
39-2004 6-3-2004 Transfer of property NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1269
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
40-2004 5-13-2004 Capital improvements NCM
41-2004 6-17-2004 Uniform construction
codes
Repealed by
Ord. No.
15-2010
42-2004 5-20-2004 Liquor license transfer NCM
43-2004 5-20-2004 Acquisition of land NCM
44-2004
45-2004 6-24-2004 Liquor license transfer NCM
46-2004 6-3-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
47-2004 6-3-2004 Grant acceptance NCM
48-2004 6-3-2004 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
49-2004
50-2004
51-2004 7-15-2004 Transfer of property NCM
52-2004 7-22-2004 Street vacation NCM
53-2004 7-1-2004 Transfer of funds NCM
54-2004 7-1-2004 Transfer of funds NCM
55-2004 7-1-2004 Transfer of funds NCM
56-2004 7-1-2004 Transfer of funds NCM
57-2004 7-29-2004 Flood protection
project
NCM
58-2004 7-30-2004 Acquisition of land NCM
59-2004 7-30-2004 Sale of property NCM
60-2004 7-30-2004 Sale of property NCM
61-2004 9-23-2004 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
62-2004 9-23-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
63-2004 10-14-2004 2005 capital budget NCM
64-2004 9-30-2004 Transfer of funds NCM
65-2004 10-7-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
66-2004 10-7-2004 Liquor license transfer NCM
67-2004 10-7-2004 Budget transfer NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1270
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
68-2004 10-28-2004 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
69-2004 10-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
70-2004 10-14-2004 Capital improvement
funds
NCM
71-2004 10-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
72-2004 10-21-2004 Budget transfer NCM
73-2004 10-28-2004 Budget transfer NCM
74-2004 11-4-2004 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
75-2004 11-4-2004 Sale of property NCM
76-2004 11-4-2004 Transfer of property NCM
77-2004 11-9-2004 Budget transfer NCM
78-2004 11-26-2004 Sale of property NCM
79-2004 12-2-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
80-2004 12-9-2004 Sale of property NCM
81-2004 12-9-2004 Budget transfer NCM
82-2004 12-9-2004 Appropriation NCM
83-2004 12-19-2004 CDBG program
amendment
NCM
84-2004 12-15-2004 Tax and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
85-2004 12-15-2004 Tax and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
86-2004 12-15-2004 Liquor license transfer NCM
87-2004
88-2004 12-15-2004 Budget transfer NCM
89-2004 12-15-2004 Budget transfer NCM
90-2004 12-15-2004 Budget transfer NCM
91-2004 12-15-2004 Transfer of property NCM
92-2005 1-20-2005 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
93-2005 1-20-2005 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1271
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
94-2005 1-20-2005 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
95-2005 1-20-2005 Occupational privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Article
IV
96-2005 1-20-2005 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
97-2005 1-20-2005 Disposal and fees
amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
98-2005 1-20-2005 General and special tax
levy for year 2005
NCM
99-2005 1-20-2005 Sale or property NCM
100-2005 1-27-2005 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
101-2005 1-27-2005 Vacant Property Review
Committee amendment
Ch. 18, Art. VI
102-2005 2-10-2005 Sale of property NCM
103-2005 Not adopted
104-2005 2-17-2005 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
105-2005 2-17-2005 Sale of property NCM
106-2005 2-24-2005 Transfer of funds NCM
107-2005 2-24-2005 Transfer of funds NCM
108-2005 2-17-2005 Liquor license transfer NCM
109-2005 3-3-2005 Revolving loan program NCM
110-2005 3-3-2005 Historic Properties List
amendment
NCM
111-2005 3-10-2005 Liquor license transfer NCM
112-2005 3-16-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
113-2005 3-31-2005 Authorization to
execute a corrective
deed
NCM
114-2005 3-31-2005 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
115-2005 3-31-2005 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
116-2005 4-7-2005 Revolving loan program NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1272
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
117-2005 4-7-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
118-2005 4-7-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
119-2005 4-7-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
120-2005 6-2-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
121-2005 6-2-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
122-2005 4-14-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
123-2005 4-14-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
124-2005 4-14-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
125-2005 4-14-2005 Parking restriction NCM
126-2005 4-21-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
127-2005 4-21-2005 Liquor license transfer NCM
128-2005 4-28-2005 Parking restriction NCM
129-2005 4-21-2005 Liquor license transfer NCM
130-2005 5-12-2005 Liquor license transfer NCM
131-2005 5-12-2005 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
132-2005 5-26-2005 Transfer of property NCM
133-2005 6-2-2005 Parking restriction NCM
134-2005 9-29-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 445
135-2005 Not adopted
136-2005 6-30-2005 Liquor license transfer NCM
137-2005 Not adopted
138-2005 7-21-2005 UDAG program
amendment
NCM
139-2005 7-14-2005 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
140-2005 7-14-2005 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
141-2005 8-1-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
142-2005 7-21-2005 Parking restriction NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1273
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
143-2005 9-22-2005 Street vacation NCM
144-2005 9-22-2005 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
145-2005 9-22-2005 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
146-2005 10-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
147-2005 10-13-2005 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
148-2005 10-13-2005 Appropriation NCM
149-2005 10-13-2005 Building construction:
Requirements for
publicly funded
residential construction
to allow accessibility
and occupancy by
disabled persons
Ch. 187, Art. V
150-2005 10-20-2005 Appropriation NCM
151-2005 10-27-2005 Appropriation NCM
152-2005 10-27-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
153-2005 10-27-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
154-2005 10-27-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
155-2005 11-10-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
156-2005 Not adopted
157-2005 11-10-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
158-2005 11-10-2005 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
159-2005 Not adopted
160-2005 12-1-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
161-2005 12-1-2005 Appropriation NCM
162-2005 12-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
163-2005 12-12-2005 Lease of property NCM
164-2005 12-12-2005 Transfer of property NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1274
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
165-2005 12-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
166-2005 12-12-2005 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
167-2005 12-12-2005 Issuance and sale of
anticipation note
NCM
168-2005 12-12-2005 Issuance and sale of
anticipation note
NCM
169-2005 12-12-2005 Authorization to accept
gift
NCM
170-2005 12-12-2005 Street vacation NCM
171-2005 12-12-2005 Authorization to
execute and deliver a
deed of easement
NCM
1-2006 1-26-2006 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
2-2006 1-26-2006 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
3-2006 1-26-2006 General and special tax
levy for year 2006
NCM
4-2006 1-26-2006 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
5-2006 1-26-2006 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
6-2006 1-26-2006 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
7-2006 2-26-2006 Liquor license transfer NCM
8-2006 1-26-2006 Transfer of property NCM
9-2006 2-26-2006 Transfer of property NCM
10-2006 2-26-2006 Emergency and
municipal services tax
amendment; business
privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Arts. IV
and VIII
11-2006 2-2-2006 Transfer of property NCM
12-2006 2-2-2006 Transfer of property NCM
13-2006 Not adopted
14-2006 2-9-2006 Budget transfer NCM
15-2006 2-16-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1275
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-2006 2-16-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
17-2006 4-6-2006 Street vacation NCM
18-2006 4-6-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
19-2006 3-9-2006 Stormwater
management:
prohibited discharges
Ch. 405, Part 2
20-2006 3-9-2006 Transfer of funds NCM
21-2006 3-9-2006 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
22-2006 3-16-2006 Designation of parking
spaces for city
personnel
NCM
23-2006 3-23-2006 Transfer of property NCM
24-2006 4-6-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
25-2006 4-6-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
26-2006 4-20-2006 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
27-2006 4-27-2006 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
28-2006 4-27-2006 Budget transfer NCM
29-2006 4-17-2006 Incurrence of debt NCM
30-2006 4-27-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
31-2006 4-27-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
32-2006 Not adopted
33-2006 5-18-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
34-2006 5-18-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
35-2006 5-18-2006 Designation of
Broadway and Railroad
Avenue as three-way
stop
NCM
36-2006 6-1-2006 Liquor license transfer NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1276
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
37-2006 7-6-2006 Street vacation NCM
38-2006 6-1-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
39-2006 Not adopted
40-2006 7-20-2006 Establishment of
special account
NCM
41-2006 7-27-2006 Lackawanna River
levee
Ch. 303
42-2006 7-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
43-2006 7-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
44-2006 7-27-2006 Disposal of City-owned
personal property
Ch. 108, Art. I
45-2006 9-21-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
46-2006 10-19-2006 Street vacation NCM
47-2006 9-21-2006 Budget amendment NCM
48-2006 Not adopted
49-2006 11-9-2006 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
50-2006 Not adopted
51-2006 10-26-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
52-2006 10-26-2006 Contractors
amendment; plumbing
amendment
Chs. 203; 345
53-2006 11-2-2006 Sex offenders:
residency restrictions
Ch. 386, Art. I
54-2006 11-9-2006 Establishment of
special account
NCM
55-2006 11-9-2006 Establishment of
special account
NCM
56-2006 11-9-2006 Establishment of
special account
NCM
57-2006 11-9-2006 Grant acceptance NCM
58-2006 11-9-2006 Establishment of
special account
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1277
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
59-2006 11-9-2006 Grant acceptance NCM
60-2006 11-16-2006 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
61-2006 11-16-2006 Transfer of easement NCM
62-2006 11-16-2006 Transfer of easement NCM
63-2006 11-30-2006 Lease of property NCM
64-2006 12-7-2006 Clean indoor air Repealed by
Ord. No.
35-3008
65-2006 12-7-2006 Budget amendment NCM
66-2006 12-14-2006 2007 operating budget NCM
67-2006 12-7-2006 Budget amendment NCM
68-2006 12-14-2006 Transfer of property NCM
69-2006 12-14-2006 Issuance and sale of
anticipation note
NCM
70-2006 12-14-2006 Issuance and sale of
anticipation note
NCM
71-2006 1-11-2007 Street vacation NCM
72-2007 1-18-2007 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
73-2007 1-18-2007 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
74-2007 1-18-2007 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
75-2007 1-18-2007 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
76-2007 1-18-2007 General and special tax
levy for year 2007
NCM
77-2007 1-18-2007 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
78-2007 1-18-2007 Emergency and
municipal services tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
79-2007 2-8-2007 Salaries NCM
80-2007 4-12-2007 Establishment of
special account
NCM
81-2007 4-12-2007 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1278
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
82-2007 6-7-2007 Miscellaneous fees:
delinquent real estate
taxes
Repealed by
Ord. No.
49-2010
83-2007 4-26-2007 Maintenance of traffic
signal
NCM
84-2007 4-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
85-2007 5-3-2007 Maintenance of traffic
signal
NCM
86-2007 5-3-2007 Sale of property NCM
87-2007 5-31-2007 Budget amendment NCM
88-2007 4-26-2007 Establishing local limits
for industrial users of
sewer system
NCM
89-2007 5-3-2007 Establishment of
special account
NCM
90-2007 5-17-2007 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
91-2007 5-17-2007 Budget amendment NCM
92-2007 7-12-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 445
93-2007 5-17-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
94-2007 5-17-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
95-2007 5-17-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
96-2007 5-17-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
97-2007 5-31-2007 Parks and recreation:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 332, Art. I
98-2007 6-21-2007 Establishment of
special account
NCM
99-2007 6-21-2007 Establishment of
special account
NCM
100-2007 7-12-2007 Transfer of property NCM
101-2007 7-19-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1279
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
102-2007 7-19-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
103-2007 7-26-2007 Grant application NCM
104-2007 7-26-2007 Acquisition, renovation
and financing of
parking facilities
NCM
105-2007 7-26-2007 Registration of
residential rental
property amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
26-2013
106-2007 7-26-2007 Authorization for sale
of property
NCM
107-2007 7-26-2007 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
108-2007 9-25-2007 2008 capital budget NCM
109-2007 9-25-2007 Transfer of property NCM
110-2007 9-25-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
111-2007 9-25-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
112-2007 9-25-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
113-2007 Not adopted
114-2007 9-18-2007 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
115-2007 9-25-2007 Heating and airconditioning
systems:
outdoor furnaces
Ch. 290, Art. III
116-2007 9-25-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
117-2007 9-25-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
118-2007 9-25-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
119-2007 9-25-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
120-2007 9-25-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
121-2007 10-16-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1280
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
122-2007 9-25-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
123-2007 10-30-2007 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program
implementation
NCM
124-2007 Not adopted
125-2007 10-16-2007 Transfer of property NCM
126-2007 10-16-2007 Abandoned and junk
vehicles amendment
Ch. 438
127-2007 10-16-2007 Special accounts closed NCM
128-2007 10-16-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
129-2007 10-16-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
130-2007 10-16-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
131-2007 10-16-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
132-2007 10-16-2007 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
133-2007 10-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
134-2007 11-13-2007 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
135-2007 11-13-2007 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
136-2007 11-13-2007 Budget amendment NCM
137-2007 11-27-2007 Budget amendment NCM
138-2007 12-11-2007 Street vacation NCM
139-2007 Not adopted
140-2007 12-11-2007 2008 operating budget NCM
141-2007 11-27-2007 Lease agreement NCM
142-2007 12-11-2007 Issuance and sale of
anticipation note
NCM
143-2007 12-11-2007 Issuance and sale of
anticipation note
NCM
144-2007 12-11-2007 Transfer of property NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1281
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
145-2007 12-11-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
1-2008 2-26-2008 Street vacation NCM
2-2008 Not adopted
3-2008 1-29-2008 Sale of property NCM
4-2008 1-29-2008 Building construction
standards amendment
Ch. 187, Art. I
5-2008 1-29-2008 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
6-2008 1-29-2008 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
7-2008 1-29-2008 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
8-2008 1-29-2008 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
9-2008 1-29-2008 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
10-2008 1-29-2008 General and special tax
levy for year 2008
NCM
11-2008 3-4-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
12-2008 2-5-2008 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
13-2008 2-19-2008 Liquor license transfer NCM
14-2008 2-26-2008 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
15-2008 3-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
16-2008 3-25-2008 Establishment of
special account
NCM
17-2008 3-25-2008 Authorization to accept
and disburse grant
from DCED
NCM
18-2008 3-25-2008 Authorization to accept
and disburse grant
from Department of
Homeland Security
NCM
19-2008 3-25-2008 Authorizing lease
agreements
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1282
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
20-2008 3-25-2008 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
21-2008 Not adopted
22-2008 4-29-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
23-2008 7-1-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
24-2008 7-1-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
25-2008 7-1-2008 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
26-2008 7-15-2008 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement
for multimunicipal
comprehensive
planning
NCM
27-2008 7-1-2008 Liquor license transfer NCM
28-2008 7-15-2008 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
29-2008 7-1-2008 Acceptance of land NCM
30-2008 7-15-2008 Conveyance of
easement
NCM
31-2008 7-22-2008 Conveyance of privilege
and easement
NCM
32-2008 7-22-2008 Oversight committee
for management of PEG
channels
NCM
33-2008 7-22-2008 Transfer of funds NCM
34-2008 7-29-2008 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
35-2008 7-29-2008 Clean indoor air
repealer
Ch. 196,
reference only
36-2008 9-23-2008 Establishment of
special account
NCM
37-2008 9-30-2008 2009 budget NCM
38-2008 9-23-2008 Conveyance of land NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1283
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
39-2008 9-30-2008 Authorizing transfer of
title on land;
satisfaction of
demolition lien
NCM
40-2008 9-30-2008 Authorizing lease of
property to
Redevelopment
Authority
NCM
41-2008 10-28-2008 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
42-2008 10-14-2008 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
43-2008 10-14-2008 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
44-2008 10-14-2008 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
45-2008 11-18-2008 Authorization to accept
and disburse grant
from DCED
NCM
46-2008 11-18-2008 Authorization to accept
and disburse grant
from DCED
NCM
47-2008 11-18-2008 Establishment of
special account
NCM
48-2008 11-25-2008 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
49-2008 12-2-2008 Appropriation NCM
50-2008 12-9-2008 Issuance and sale of
anticipation note
NCM
51-2008 12-9-2008 Issuance and sale of
anticipation note
NCM
52-2009 1-20-2009 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
53-2009 1-20-2009 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
54-2009 1-20-2009 General and special tax
levy for year 2009
NCM
55-2009 1-20-2009 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1284
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
56-2009 1-20-2009 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
57-2009 1-20-2009 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
58-2009 1-20-2009 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
59-2009 1-27-2009 Transfer of funds NCM
60-2009 2-10-2009 Sale of property NCM
61-2009 2-24-2009 Application to HUD for
federal loan guarantee
NCM
62-2009 4-28-2009 Establishment of
special account
NCM
63-2009 4-28-2009 Authorization to accept
and disburse grant
NCM
64-2009 5-12-2009 Transfer of funds NCM
65-2009 5-12-2009 Establishment of
special account
NCM
66-2009 5-12-2009 Establishment of
special account
NCM
67-2009 6-2-2009 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
68-2009 6-9-2009 Transfer of funds NCM
69-2009 6-23-2009 Engine brake retarders Ch. 218
70-2009 6-23-2009 Transfer of funds NCM
71-2009 6-23-2009 Establishment of
special account
NCM
72-2009 6-30-2009 Street acceptance NCM
73-2009 7-7-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
74-2009 7-28-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
75-2009 7-28-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
76-2009 7-28-2009 Police alarms
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
79-2012
77-2009 7-28-2009 Disbursement from
grant repayment funds
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1285
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
78-2009 Not adopted
79-2009 9-15-2009 Establishment of new
account
NCM
80-2009 9-15-2009 Establishment of new
account
NCM
81-2009 9-22-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
82-2009 Not adopted
83-2009 10-20-2009 Authorization to
implement
Consolidated
Submission for
Community Planning
and Development
Programs
NCM
84-2009 9-22-2009 Transfer of funds NCM
85-2009 9-15-2009 Establishment of
special account
NCM
86-2009 9-15-2009 Grant acceptance NCM
87-2009 Not adopted
88-2009 10-6-2009 Transfer of funds NCM
89-2009 10-13-2009 Transfer of funds NCM
90-2009 10-13-2009 Transfer of funds NCM
91-2009 10-13-2009 Acceptance of deed NCM
92-2009 11-10-2009 Transfer of funds NCM
93-2009 11-17-2009 Conveyance of land NCM
94-2009 11-24-2009 Street acceptance NCM
95-2009 12-15-2009 Agreement to organize
the Scranton Public
Library Authority
Repealed by
Ord. No. 9-2010
96-2009 12-1-2009 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
97-2009 12-1-2009 Appropriation NCM
98-2009 12-8-2009 Contractors
amendment
Ch. 203
99-2009 12-8-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1286
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
100-2009 12-8-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
101-2009 12-8-2009 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
102-2009 12-8-2009 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
103-2009 12-8-2009 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
104-2009 12-8-2009 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
105-2009 12-8-2009 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
106-2009 12-8-2009 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
107-2009 12-8-2009 Food and food handlers
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
111-2009
108-2009 12-8-2009 Food and food handlers
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
111-2009
109-2009 12-8-2009 Food and food handlers
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
111-2009
110-2009 12-8-2009 Food and food handlers
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
111-2009
111-2009 12-8-2009 Food and food handlers
repealer
Ch. 256, footnote
only
112-2009 12-15-2009 Food and food
handlers: food-handling
establishments
Ch. 256, Art. I
113-2009 12-8-2009 Food and food
handlers: adoption of
standards
Ch. 256, Art. II
114-2009 12-8-2009 Sale of tax and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
115-2009 12-8-2009 Sale of tax and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
116-2009 12-8-2009 Condemned property Ch. 359
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1287
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2010 1-26-2010 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
2-2010 1-26-2010 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
3-2010 1-26-2010 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
4-2010 1-26-2010 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
5-2010 1-26-2010 General and special tax
levy for year 2010
NCM
6-2010 1-26-2010 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
7-2010 1-26-2010 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
8-2010 1-26-2010 Transfer of funds NCM
9-2010 1-26-2010 Scranton Public Library
Authority repealer
NCM
10-2010 2-9-2010 Agreement of
clarification to land use
restrictions
NCM
11-2010 2-23-2010 Easement agreement NCM
12-2010 2-23-2010 Appropriation NCM
13-2010 3-16-2010 Acceptance of funds NCM
14-2010 3-16-2010 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
15-2010 4-13-2010 Uniform construction
codes repealer
Ch. 201
(footnote only)
16-2010 4-13-2010 Uniform construction
codes
Ch. 201
17-2010 Not adopted
18-2010 5-25-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
19-2010 5-25-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
20-2010 5-25-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
21-2010 5-25-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1288
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
22-2010 5-25-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
23-2010 5-25-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
24-2010 5-25-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
25-2010 5-25-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
26-2010 7-13-2010 Declaration of
easement and right-ofway
NCM
27-2010 7-27-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
28-2010 7-27-2010 Fees, miscellaneous:
fire, police, detective
and ambulance reports;
accident reports
repealer
Ch. 226, Arts. III
and VI
29-2010 7-27-2010 Trail maintenance
agreement
NCM
30-2010 7-27-2010 Transfer of funds NCM
31-2010 7-27-2010 Transfer of funds NCM
32-2010 7-27-2010 Utility easement NCM
33-2010 Not adopted
34-2010 9-21-2010 Establishment of
special account
NCM
35-2010 9-21-2010 Establishment of
special account
NCM
36-2010 9-21-2010 Establishment of
special account
NCM
37-2010 9-21-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
38-2010 9-21-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
39-2010 9-21-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1289
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
40-2010 10-26-2010 Authorization to
implement consolidated
submission for
Community Planning
and Development
Programs
NCM
41-2010 10-12-2010 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
42-2010 10-12-2010 Establishment of
special account
NCM
43-2010 10-26-2010 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
44-2010 10-26-2010 CDBG, HOME and ESG
program amendment
NCM
45-2010 10-26-2010 Grant acceptance and
disbursement
NCM
46-2010 11-16-2010 Grant acceptance and
disbursement
NCM
47-2010 11-30-2010 Establishment of
special account
NCM
48-2010 11-30-2010 Cable franchise
agreement
NCM
49-2010 12-7-2010 Fees, miscellaneous:
delinquent real estate
taxes repealer
Ch. 226, Art. XI
(footnote only)
50-2010 12-7-2010 Fees, miscellaneous:
delinquent real estate
taxes and refuse fees
Ch. 226, Art. XI
51-2010 Not adopted
52-2010 12-14-2010 2011 operating budget NCM
53-2010 12-7-2010 Issuance and sale of tax
and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
54-2010 12-7-2010 Issuance and sale of tax
and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
55-2010 12-14-2010 Authorizing Single Tax
Office as collector of
2010 delinquent real
estate taxes
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1290
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
56-2010 12-14-2010 Scranton Parking
Authority 2011
operation budget
NCM
57-2010 12-14-2010 2011 operating budget
amendment
NCM
58-2010 12-14-2010 2011 operating budget
amendment
NCM
1-2011 1-18-2011 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
2-2011 1-18-2011 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
3-2011 1-18-2011 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
4-2011 1-18-2011 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
5-2011 1-18-2011 General and special tax
levy
NCM
6-2011 1-18-2011 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
7-2011 2-1-2011 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
8-2011 2-1-2011 Establishment of
special account
NCM
9-2011 Not adopted
10-2011 Not adopted
11-2011 2-22-2011 2010 operating budget
amendment
NCM
12-2011 3-1-2011 Establishment of new
account
NCM
13-2011 3-8-2011 Establishment of
special account
NCM
14-2011 3-8-2011 Establishment of
special account
NCM
15-2011 3-8-2011 Authorization of
disbursements from
special account
NCM
16-2011 3-15-2011 Sale of tax-delinquent
property
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1291
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-2011 3-15-2011 Grant acceptance and
disbursement
NCM
18-2011 3-15-2011 Acquisition by eminent
domain
NCM
19-2011 3-15-2011 Authorization of
disbursements from
special account
NCM
20-2011 3-15-2011 Establishment of
special account
NCM
21-2011 3-22-2011 Human relations and
discrimination
amendment
Ch. 296
22-2011 4-5-2011 Drugs and drug
paraphernalia: sale or
possession of bath salts
by minors
Ch. 213, Art. I
23-2011 4-5-2011 Drugs and drug
paraphernalia: sale,
possession,
manufacture and
production of bath salts
Ch. 213, Art. II
24-2011 4-5-2011 Drugs and drug
paraphernalia: sale or
possession of synthetic
cannabinoids by minors
Ch. 213, Art. III
25-2011 4-5-2011 Drugs and drug
paraphernalia: sale,
possession,
manufacture and
production of synthetic
cannabinoids
Ch. 213, Art. IV
26-2011 4-19-2011 Removal of parking
meters
NCM
27-2011 5-3-2011 Establishment of new
account
NCM
28-2011 5-3-2011 Establishment of new
account
NCM
29-2011 5-3-2011 Establishment of new
account
NCM
30-2011 5-3-2011 Establishment of new
account
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1292
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
31-2011 5-10-2011 Street acceptance NCM
32-2011 5-10-2011 Acceptance of
stormwater system
NCM
33-2011 1-19-2012 Right-of-way acquisition
of City-owned property
NCM
34-2011 6-7-2011 Lease agreements NCM
35-2011 7-12-2011 Contract for collection
of delinquent real
estate taxes
NCM
36-2011 6-14-2011 Transfer of funds NCM
37-2011 7-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
50-2013
38-2011 6-14-2011 Establishment of
special account
NCM
39-2011 7-26-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
40-2011 6-28-2011 Disbursement from
special account
NCM
41-2011 7-12-2011 Parks and recreation:
West Scranton Skate
Park
Ch. 332
42-2011 Not adopted
43-2011 7-26-2011 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
44-2011 7-26-2011 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
45-2011 7-26-2011 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
46-2011 7-26-2011 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
47-2011 7-26-2011 Vacation of right-of-way NCM
48-2011 7-26-2011 Authorization for grant
application
NCM
49-2011 9-13-2011 Authorization of
submission for
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1293
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
50-2011 9-13-2011 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
51-2011 9-20-2011 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
52-2011 9-20-2011 Vacation of existing
right-of-way and
acceptance of new
right-of-way
NCM
53-2011 10-25-2011 Authorization of
submission for
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
54-2011 9-27-2011 Establishment of
special account
NCM
55-2011 11-1-2011 Authorization to
extinguish permanent
easement
NCM
56-2011 12-13-2011 2012 operating budget NCM
57-2011 12-6-2011 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
58-2011 12-27-2011 Petition to issue
general obligation
bonds
NCM
59-2011 1-12-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 445
1-2012 1-12-2012 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
2-2012 1-12-2012 General and special tax
levy
NCM
3-2012 1-12-2012 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
4-2012 1-12-2012 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
5-2012 1-12-2012 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
6-2012 1-12-2012 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
7-2012 1-19-2012 Collection of 2011
delinquent real estate
taxes
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1294
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2012 1-26-2012 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
9-2012 1-26-2012 Authorization of
easement agreement
NCM
10-2012 1-26-2012 Authorization to
implement consolidated
submission for
community planning
and development
programs amendment
NCM
11-2012 Not adopted
12-2012 3-22-2012 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
13-2012 1-30-2012 Tax and revenue
anticipation note
NCM
14-2012 1-30-2012 Creation of general
fund account
NCM
15-2012 1-30-2012 Approval of loan
stipulations
NCM
16-2012 3-1-2012 Professional services
contract addendum
NCM
17-2012 3-22-2012 Registration of
residential rental
property
Ch. 373, Art. I
18-2012 3-8-2012 Acceptance and
disbursal of grant funds
NCM
19-2012 3-8-2012 Establishment of
special account
NCM
20-2012 3-8-2012 Transfer of funds NCM
21-2012 3-15-2012 Authorization to
implement consolidated
submission for
community planning
and development
programs amendment
NCM
22-2012 3-15-2012 Acceptance and
disbursal of grand
funds
NCM
23-2012 3-15-2012 Establishment of
special account
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1295
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
24-2012 Not adopted
25-2012 3-22-2012 Establishment of new
account
NCM
26-2012 3-22-2012 Registration of
residential rental
property repealer
Ch. 373, Art. I,
footnote only
27-2012 3-29-2012 Establishment of new
account
NCM
28-2012 4-12-2012 Authorization to
implement consolidated
submission for
community planning
and development
programs amendment
NCM
29-2012 4-12-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
30-2012 4-26-2012 Parking lot operators
tax
Repealed by
Ord. No.
40-2016
31-2012 5-17-2012 Bond NCM
32-2012 5-24-2012 Real estate tax millage
increase
NCM
33-2012 5-31-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
34-2012 Not adopted
35-2012 6-7-2012 Amendment of parking
tickets
NCM
36-2012 6-7-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
37-2012 6-7-2012 Tax exemption for
certain deteriorated
industrial, commercial
property amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
22-2016
38-2012 6-7-2012 Authorization of
submission for
community planning
and development
programs amendment
NCM
39-2012 Not adopted
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1296
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
40-2012 6-14-2012 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
41-2012 6-21-2012 Acceptance and
disbursal of grant funds
NCM
42-2012 7-12-2012 Authorization to apply
for and execute grant
application
NCM
43-2012 7-5-2012 Authorization of
submission for
community planning
and development
programs amendment
NCM
44-2012 7-19-2012 Acceptance and
disbursal of grant funds
NCM
45-2012 7-19-2012 Authorization to apply
for and execute grant
application
NCM
46-2012 7-19-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
47-2012 7-19-2012 Confirmation and
dedication of street
NCM
48-2012 8-16-2012 Authorization of
submission for
community planning
and development
programs amendment
NCM
49-2012 8-23-2012 Revised recovery plan
amendment
NCM
50-2012 8-23-2012 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
51-2012 8-23-2012 Appointment of special
counsel
NCM
52-2012 8-23-2012 Authorization of receipt
of interest-free loan
NCM
53-2012 8-23-2012 Tax anticipation note NCM
54-2012 10-18-2012 Approval and
acceptance of 2013
capital budget
NCM
55-2012 9-13-2012 Termination of
cooperation agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1297
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
56-2012 10-25-2012 Authorization to
implement consolidated
submission for
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
57-2012 9-13-2012 Authorization to
petition court for
permission to fund
unfunded debt
NCM
58-2012 9-13-2012 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
59-2012 10-4-2012 Acceptance of streets,
open space and
stormwater facilities
NCM
60-2012 10-4-2012 Establishment of
general fund account
NCM
61-2012 10-4-2012 Authorization to
implement consolidated
submission for
community planning
and development
programs amendment
NCM
62-2012 10-11-2012 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
63-2012 10-25-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
64-2012 11-8-2012 Approval of transfer of
liquor license
NCM
65-2012 11-15-2012 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
66-2012 11-15-2012 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
67-2012 11-15-2012 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
68-2012 11-15-2012 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
69-2012 11-15-2012 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
70-2012 11-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1298
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
71-2012 11-15-2012 Bond NCM
72-2012 11-15-2012 Real estate tax millage
increase
NCM
73-2012 11-15-2012 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
74-2012 12-6-2012 Vacation of unopened
right-of-way
NCM
75-2012 12-6-2012 Amusements tax Ch. 428, Art. XII
76-2012 12-13-2012 Stormwater
management
Ch. 405
77-2012 12-13-2012 Appropriation NCM
78-2012 12-13-2012 Delinquent taxes fee
schedule
NCM
79-2012 12-13-2012 Alarms and alarm
systems
Ch. 152
80-2012 12-13-2012 Tax anticipation note NCM
1-2013 1-10-2013 General and special tax
levy
NCM
2-2013 1-24-2013 Appointment NCM
3-2013 1-31-2013 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
4-2013 2-7-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
5-2013 Not adopted
6-2013 Not adopted
7-2013 2-14-2013 Salary amendment NCM
8-2013 3-7-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
9-2013 3-21-2013 Special encroachment
permit
NCM
10-2013 3-21-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
11-2013 Not adopted
12-2013 3-28-2013 Appointment NCM
13-2013 4-4-2013 Registration of
residential rental
property amendment
Ch. 373, Art. I
14-2013 4-4-2013 Deed execution NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1299
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-2013 4-11-2013 Excavation
authorization
NCM
16-2013 4-11-2013 Removal of specific
parking meters
NCM
17-2013 4-18-2013 Disbursement of grant
repayments
NCM
18-2013 5-2-2013 Funds transfer NCM
19-2013 5-2-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
20-2013 Not adopted
21-2013 5-16-2013 Sub-grantee and
cooperation agreement
NCM
22-2013 5-16-2013 Special account NCM
23-2013 Not adopted
24-2013 Not adopted
25-2013 Not adopted
26-2013 5-16-2013 Redesignation of
parking spaces for
certain City personnel
NCM
27-2013 5-23-2013 Sale of right-of-way NCM
28-2013 5-23-2013 Temporary construction
agreement transfer
NCM
29-2013 7-11-2013 Real estate donation NCM
30-2013 6-27-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
31-2013 6-27-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
32-2013 6-27-2013 Disbursement of grant
repayments
NCM
33-2013 7-18-2013 Peddling and soliciting:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 340, Art. I
34-2013 7-18-2013 Food and food
handlers: restaurants,
food carts and food
trucks; City Health
Inspector
Ch. 256, Art. I
35-2013 7-18-2013 Disbursement of grant
repayments
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1300
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
36-2013 7-18-2013 Initiation of eminent
domain proceedings
NCM
37-2013 7-18-2013 Lease agreement NCM
38-2013 7-18-2013 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
39-2013 7-18-2013 Lease agreement NCM
40-2013 7-18-2013 Lease agreement NCM
41-2013 7-25-2013 Transfer of restaurant
liquor license
NCM
42-2013 7-25-2013 Disbursement of grant
funds
NCM
43-2013 7-25-2013 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
44-2013 7-25-2013 Special account NCM
45-2013 9-19-2013 2014 budget NCM
46-2013 9-19-2013 New account NCM
47-2013 10-24-2013 Consolidated
submission for
Community
Development Program
NCM
48-2013 10-3-2013 Grant application NCM
49-2013 10-17-2013 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
50-2013 10-24-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
51-2013 11-7-2013 Funds transfer NCM
52-2013 11-14-2013 Towing service special
account
NCM
53-2013 10-21-2013 Operating budget
amendment
NCM
54-2013 12-5-2013 Funds transfer NCM
55-2013 12-12-2013 Appropriation NCM
56-2013 12-12-2013 Tax anticipation note NCM
1-2014 1-30-2014 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
2-2014 1-30-2014 Mercantile tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1301
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2014 1-30-2014 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
4-2014 1-30-2014 2014 general and
special tax levy
NCM
5-2014 1-30-2014 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
6-2014 1-30-2014 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
7-2014 1-30-2014 Registration of
residential rental
property amendment
Ch. 373, Art. I
8-2014 2-15-2014 Acceptance and
disbursement of grant
funds
NCM
9-2014 1-30-2014 Extension of discount
period for real estate
taxes
NCM
10-2014 2-15-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
11-2014 5-22-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
12-2014 4-10-2014 Secondhand goods and
dealers amendment
Ch. 379
13-2014 4-16-2014 Closing accounts and
transferring funds
NCM
14-2014 4-24-2014 Transfer of easements NCM
15-2014 5-1-2014 Deed execution NCM
16-2014 5-8-2014 Disposal of City-owned
personal property
amendment
Ch. 108, Art. I
17-2014 5-22-2014 Consolidated
submission for
Community
Development Program
amendment
NCM
18-2014 5-22-2014 Lease agreements NCM
19-2014 5-15-2014 Establishment of
account
NCM
20-2014 5-15-2014 Transfer of funds NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1302
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
21-2014 5-15-2014 Establishment of
account
NCM
22-2014 5-29-2014 Redesignation of
parking spaces for
certain City personnel
NCM
23-2014 6-5-2014 Establishment of
account
NCM
24-2014 6-5-2014 Execution of grant
application
NCM
25-2014 6-5-2014 Lease agreement NCM
26-2014 6-5-2014 Lease agreement NCM
27-2014 6-5-2014 Amusement tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. XII
28-2014 6-26-2014 Accounting adjustments NCM
29-2014 6-26-2014 Consolidated
submission for CDBG
Program
NCM
30-2014 7-2-2014 Parking lot operators
tax amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
40-2016
31-2014 7-2-2014 Alarms and alarm
systems amendment
Ch. 152
32-2014 7-2-2014 Lease agreement NCM
33-2014 7-10-2014 Lease agreements NCM
34-2014 7-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
35-2014 7-17-2014 Establishment of
account
NCM
36-2014 7-31-2014 Act 205 pension
funding tax
Ch. 428, Art. XIII
37-2014 7-31-2014 Property maintenance:
adoption of code
Ch. 360, Art. I
38-2014 7-31-2014 Establishment of
account
NCM
39-2014 7-31-2014 Easement agreement NCM
40-2014 7-31-2014 Easement agreement NCM
41-2014 9-4-2014 Earned income and net
profits tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1303
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
42-2014 9-18-2014 Establishment of
account
NCM
43-2014 9-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
44-2014 10-23-2014 Consolidated
submission for CDBG
Program
NCM
45-2014 9-25-2014 Professional services
for collection of
delinquent refuse fees
NCM
46-2014 9-25-2014 Professional services
agreement amendment
NCM
47-2014 10-2-2014 Updated Capital Budget
and Five-Year Plan
NCM
48-2014 10-9-2014 Acceptance of
easements
NCM
49-2014 10-9-2014 Acceptance of streets NCM
50-2014 10-16-2014 Establishment of
account
NCM
51-2014 10-23-2014 Sale of property NCM
52-2014 10-23-2014 Sale of property NCM
53-2014 10-23-2014 Issuance of Parking
Authority revenue note
NCM
54-2014 10-29-2014 Sale of property NCM
55-2014 11-20-2014 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 332, Art. I
56-2014 Not adopted
57-2014 12-4-2014 2014 Budget
amendment
NCM
58-2014 12-4-2014 Appropriation NCM
59-2014 12-4-2014 Establishment of
account
NCM
60-2014 12-4-2014 Removal and
replacement of signs
NCM
61-2014 12-4-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
62-2014 12-18-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
63-2014 12-11-2014 Easement agreement NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1304
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
64-2014 12-18-2014 Property maintenance:
rules and regulations
Ch. 360, Art. II
65-2014 12-18-2014 Sale of property NCM
66-2014 12-18-2014 Dedication of greenway NCM
67-2014 12-18-2014 Animals amendment Ch. 169
68-2014 12-18-2014 Contractors
amendment
Ch. 203
69-2014 12-18-2014 Contractors
amendment
Ch. 203
70-2014 12-18-2014 Issuance of tax
anticipation note
NCM
71-2015 1-29-2015 Establishment of
account
NCM
72-2015 1-29-2015 Establishment of
account; transfer of
funds
NCM
73-2015 2-5-2015 2015 general and
special tax levy
NCM
74-2015 1-29-2015 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
75-2015 1-29-2015 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
76-2015 1-29-2015 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
77-2015 1-29-2015 Earned income and net
profits tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
78-2015 1-29-2015 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
79-2015 1-29-2015 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
80-2015 2-12-2015 Establishment of
account
NCM
81-2015 2-12-2015 Lease agreement NCM
82-2015 2-19-2015 Replacement of signs NCM
83-2015 Not adopted
84-2015 3-12-2015 Assignment of parking
enforcement personnel
NCM
85-2015 3-19-2015 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1305
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
86-2015 3-12-2015 Revised Recovery Plan NCM
87-2015 3-12-2015 Pensions: revised
benefit plan for
policemen amendment
Ch. 99, Art. IV
88-2015 3-26-2015 Sale of property NCM
89-2015 3-26-2015 Establishment of
account
NCM
90-2015 Not adopted
91-2015 Not adopted
92-2015 4-1-2015 General obligation note NCM
93-2015 4-9-2015 Historic Properties List
amendment
NCM
94-2015 4-16-2015 Exploration of lease
feasibility
NCM
95-2015 5-7-2015 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
96-2015 4-23-2015 Establishment of
account
NCM
97-2015 5-21-2015 CDBG grant submission NCM
98-2015 5-14-2015 Establishment of
account
NCM
99-2015 5-28-2015 Lease agreement NCM
100-2015 5-28-2015 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
101-2015 6-4-2015 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
102-2015 6-4-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 412
103-2015 6-4-2015 Establishment of
account
NCM
104-2015 7-1-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
105-2015 7-9-2015 Grant disbursement NCM
106-2015 7-15-2015 Police Chaplain Ch. 105, Art. III
107-2015 Not adopted
108-2015 9-24-2015 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1306
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
109-2015 9-24-2015 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
110-2015 7-31-2015 2016 Capital Budget NCM
111-2015 9-17-2015 Cable franchise
agreement
NCM
112-2015 7-30-2015 Sale of property NCM
113-2015 7-30-2015 Sale of property NCM
114-2015 7-30-2015 JAG grant application NCM
115-2015 9-17-2015 Sale of property NCM
116-2015 9-10-2015 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
117-2015 9-24-2015 Budget transfer NCM
118-2015 10-22-2015 CDBG grant application NCM
119-2015 9-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
120-2015 10-22-2015 CDBG grant
disbursement
NCM
121-2015 10-8-2015 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement
NCM
122-2015 10-8-2015 Establishment of
account
NCM
123-2015 10-22-2015 Street vacation NCM
124-2015 10-22-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
125-2015 12-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
126-2015 12-3-2015 Appropriation NCM
127-2015 12-10-2015 Professional services
for collection of
delinquent refuse fees
amendment
NCM
128-2015 Not adopted
129-2015 12-10-2015 Establishment of
account
NCM
130-2015 12-10-2015 Tax anticipation note NCM
131-2015 12-10-2015 Earned income and net
profits tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1307
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2016 1-14-2016 General and special tax
levy for 2016
NCM
2-2016 1-14-2016 Real property transfer
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
3-2016 1-14-2016 Mercantile license tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
4-2016 1-14-2016 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
5-2016 1-14-2016 Solid waste: waste
disposal and collection
fee amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
6-2016 4-21-2016 Taxation: new
construction tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IX
7-2016 1-28-2016 Transfer of funds NCM
8-2016 2-4-2016 Submission of HUD
2015-2019 Analysis of
Impediments to Fair
Housing Choice
NCM
9-2016 1-28-2016 Taxation: local services
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
10-2016 Not adopted
11-2016 Not adopted
12-2016 3-10-2016 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 6
13-2016 3-23-2016 Transfer of funds NCM
14-2016 3-23-2016 Establishment of new
account
NCM
15-2016 3-23-2016 Establishment of new
account
NCM
16-2016 3-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
17-2016 3-31-2016 Gazebo dedication NCM
18-2016 3-31-2016 Trees and weeds
amendment
Ch. 434
19-2016 4-7-2016 Property maintenance:
abandoned real
property
Ch. 360, Art. III
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1308
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
20-2016 4-7-2016 Establishment of new
account
NCM
21-2016 4-21-2016 Taxation: exemption for
deteriorated residential
property
Ch. 428, Art. XIV
22-2016 4-21-2016 Taxation: exemption for
certain deteriorated
industrial, commercial
property
Ch. 428, Art. VII
23-2016 5-4-2016 Parks and recreation:
tobacco-free areas
Ch. 332, Art. IV
24-2016 5-4-2016 Authorization to enter
into real property lease
NCM
25-2016 5-12-2016 Authorization to install
stop sign
NCM
26-2016 5-19-2016 Amendment to Articles
of Incorporation of
Scranton-Lackawanna
Health and Welfare
Authority
NCM
27-2016 5-26-2016 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
28-2016 Not adopted
29-2016 6-9-2016 Creating escrow
account for 2016 award
bonds
NCM
30-2016 6-2-2016 Transfer of property NCM
31-2016 6-23-2016 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
32-2016 6-23-2016 Acquisition of
properties by eminent
domain
NCM
33-2016 6-23-2016 Authorization to
approve SHAP
NCM
34-2016 6-23-2016 Taxation: exemption for
deteriorated residential
property amendment
Ch. 428, Art. XIV
35-2016 6-23-2016 Taxation: exemption for
certain deteriorated
industrial, commercial
property amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VII
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1309
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
36-2016 6-23-2016 Taxation: new
construction tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IX
37-2016 6-30-2016 Authorization to enter
into concession
arrangements for
metered parking
NCM
38-2016 6-30-2016 Bond NCM
39-2016 6-30-2016 Parking authority
amendment
Ch. 94
40-2016 6-30-2016 Taxation: parking lot
operators tax repealer
Ch. 428, Art. XI
(reference only)
41-2016 6-30-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
42-2016 6-30-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
43-2016 6-30-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
44-2016 7-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
45-2016 7-28-2016 Solid waste: recycling Ch. 400, Art. V
46-2016 9-15-2015 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
47-2016 9-15-2015 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
48-2016 9-15-2016 Consolidated
submission for
Community
Development Program
amendment
NCM
49-2016 9-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
50-2016 11-3-2016 Consolidated
submission for
community planning
and development
programs
NCM
51-2016 9-29-2016 Acceptance and
disbursement of grant
funds
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1310
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
52-2016 9-29-2016 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
53-2016 9-29-2016 2017 Capital Budget NCM
54-2016 10-6-2016 Acquisition of
properties by eminent
domain amendment
NCM
55-2016 10-13-2016 Creating escrow
account for HARB
applications for
certificate of
appropriateness
NCM
56-2016 10-27-2016 Street vacation NCM
57-2016 10-27-2016 Acceptance and
disbursement of grant
funds
NCM
58-2016 11-10-2016 Rental property:
registration of
residential rental
property
Ch. 373, Art. I
59-2016 11-10-2016 Transfer of easements
and rights-of-way
NCM
60-2016 11-10-2016 Grant of local economic
revitalization tax
assistance
NCM
61-2016 11-10-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
62-2016 11-17-2016 Sale of tax delinquent
property
NCM
63-2016 12-15-2016 Contractors
amendment
Ch. 203
64-2016 12-1-2016 Creating escrow
account
NCM
65-2016 12-8-2016 2017 Operating Budget NCM
66-2016 12-8-2016 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
67-2016 12-8-2016 Authorization to
execute easement and
right-of-way
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1311
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
68-2016 12-15-2016 Termination of
Scranton Sewer
Authority
NCM
69-2016 12-8-2016 Human relations and
discrimination
Ch. 296
70-2016 12-1-2016 Peddling and soliciting:
event licenses
Ch. 340, Art. IV
71-2016 12-8-2016 Authorization of tax and
revenue anticipation
note
NCM
72-2016 12-15-2016 Authorization to
execute easement and
right of way
NCM
73-2016 12-15-2016 Transfer of easements
and rights-of-way
NCM
74-2017 1-5-2017 Taxation: real estate
transfer tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
75-2017 1-5-2017 Taxation: mercantile
license tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
76-2017 1-5-2017 Taxation: business
privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
77-2017 1-5-2017 Taxation: earned
income and net profits
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
78-2017 1-5-2017 General and special tax
levy for 2017
NCM
79-2017 1-5-2017 Solid waste: disposal
and fees amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
80-2017 1-5-2017 Transfer of funds NCM
81-2017 1-26-2017 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
82-2017 2-2-2017 Taxation: real estate
transfer tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
83-2017 1-19-2017 General and special tax
levy for 2017
amendment
NCM
84-2017 1-19-2017 General and special tax
levy for 2017
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1312
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
85-2017 2-9-2017 Acceptance and
disbursement of grant
funds
NCM
86-2017 2-16-2017 Street closure and
vacation
NCM
87-2017 2-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
88-2017 2-23-2017 Transfer of funds NCM
89-2017 2-23-2017 Transfer of funds NCM
90-2017 3-2-2017 Authorization for grant
application
NCM
91-2017 3-9-2017 Authorization to install
two-hour parking only
signs
NCM
92-2017 3-2-2017 Taxation: local services
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. IV
93-2017 3-23-2017 Authorization to
execute easement and
right of way
NCM
94-2017 3-30-2017 Reallocation of funds NCM
95-2017 4-20-2017 Transfer of liquor
license amendment
NCM
96-2017 5-4-2017 Transfer of funds NCM
97-2017 5-4-2017 Street closure and
vacation
NCM
98-2017 5-4-2017 Contractors
amendment
Ch. 203
99-2017 5-11-2017 Disbursement of grant
funds
NCM
100-2017 6-1-2017 Authorization of
acquisition of right-ofway
NCM
101-2017 6-1-2017 Authorization of
acquisition of right-ofway
NCM
102-2017 6-1-2017 Authorization of
acquisition of right-ofway
NCM
103-2017 6-15-2017 Installation of street
signs
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1313
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
104-2017 6-29-2017 Acceptance of title
deed
NCM
105-2017 6-29-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
106-2017 7-13-2017 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
107-2017 7-13-2017 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
108-2017 7-13-2017 Bond NCM
109-2017 7-13-2017 Reallocation of funds NCM
110-2017 7-20-2017 Street closure and
vacation
NCM
111-2017 7-27-2017 Implementation of Act
47 Exit Plan
NCM
112-2017 7-20-2017 Grant of easements and
rights-of-way
NCM
113-2017 9-21-2017 Transfer of funds NCM
114-2017 9-21-2017 Transfer of liquor
license amendment
NCM
115-2017 9-21-2017 Grant of local economic
revitalization tax
assistance amendment
NCM
116-2017 Not adopted
117-2017 9-28-2017 Establishment of
special City account
NCM
118-2017 Not adopted
119-2017 10-5-2017 Authorization for
application and
execution of grant
NCM
120-2017 Not adopted
121-2017 11-16-2017 Lease agreement NCM
122-2017 11-16-2017 Transfer of funds NCM
123-2017 11-16-2017 Transfer of funds NCM
124-2017 11-30-2017 Issuance of tax and
revenue anticipation
notes
NCM
125-2017 11-30-2017 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1314
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
126-2017 11-30-2017 Trail maintenance
agreement
NCM
127-2017 11-30-2017 Deed execution NCM
128-2017 12-7-2017 Taxation: real estate
transfer tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VI
129-2017 12-7-2017 Taxation: mercantile
license tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
130-2017 12-7-2017 Taxation: business
privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
131-2017 12-7-2017 Taxation: earned
income and net profits
tax amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
132-2017 12-7-2017 General and special tax
levy for 2018
NCM
133-2017 12-7-2017 Establishment of
special City account
NCM
134-2017 12-14-2017 Transfer of funds NCM
135-2017 12-14-2017 Transfer of liquor
license
NCM
136-2017 12-14-2017 Allocation of funds NCM
137-2017 12-14-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 439
138-2017 12-14-2017 Pension trust
agreement
NCM
1-2018 2-5-2018 Contract for Recovery
Program
NCM
2-2018 2-12-2018 Rental Property:
Landlord Registration,
Licensing and
Occupancy Amendment
Ch. 373, Art. I
3-2018 3-5-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439
4-2018 3-5-2018 Solid Waste: Disposal
and Fees Amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
5-2018 3-12-2018 Receipt and
Distribution of Grant
Funds
NCM
6-2018 3-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1315
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2018 3-12-2018 Appropriation NCM
8-2018 3-19-2018 Tax Levy NCM
9-2018 4-30-2018 Subdivision and Land
Development
Amendment
Ch. 423
10-2018 4-9-2018 Receipt of Grant Funds NCM
11-2018 4-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439
12-2018 4-23-2018 Property Maintenance:
Adoption of Code
Amendment
Ch. 360, Art. I
13-2018 4-30-2018 Lease NCM
14-2018 4-30-2018 Lease NCM
16-2018 5-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439
17-2018 5-7-2018 Solid Waste: Disposal
and Fees Amendment
Ch. 400, Art. II
18-2018 6-11-2018 Grant Funds NCM
19-2018 6-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439
20-2018 6-18-2018 Emergency Solutions
Grant Program
NCM
21-2018 6-25-2018 Grant Funds NCM
22-2018 6-25-2018 Receipt of Funds NCM
23-2018 6-25-2018 Agreement NCM
24-2018 7-9-2018 Settlement Award NCM
25-2018 7-16-2018 Police Grants NCM
26-2018 7-30-2018 Easement NCM
27-2018 10-22-2018 Grant NCM
28-2018 9-24-2018 Budget Amendment NCM
29-2018 9-24-2018 Fireworks NCM
30-2018 9-24-2018 Easement NCM
31-2018 9-24-2018 Easement NCM
32-2018 10-1-2018 Grant NCM
33-2018 10-15-2018 Transfer of Liquor
License
NCM
34-2018 10-15-2018 Budget NCM
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1316
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
35-2018 11-5-2018 General Obligation
Note
NCM
36-2018 11-19-2018 Tax and Revenue
Anticipation Note
NCM
37-2018 11-26-2018 Transfer of Property NCM
38-2018 12-3-2018 Appropriation NCM
39-2018 12-3-2018 NCM NCM
40-2018 12-3-2018 Taxation: Mercantile
License Tax
Amendment
Ch. 428, Art. V
41-2018 12-3-2018 Taxation: Business
Privilege Tax
Amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VIII
42-2018 12-3-2018 Taxation: Earned
Income and Net Profits
Tax Amendment
Ch. 428, Art. III
43-2018 12-3-2018 Tax Levy NCM
44-2018 12-3-2018 SSA Pension NCM
45-2018 12-3-2018 SSA Funds NCM
46-2018 12-3-2018 Pension Trust
Agreement
NCM
47-2018 12-3-2018 Street Lighting Lease
Reserve Funds
NCM
48-2018 12-3-2018 Highmark Healthcare
Reserve
NCM
49-2018 12-3-2018 Taxation: Exemption for
Deteriorated
Residential Property
Amendment
Ch. 428, Art. XIV
50-2018 12-3-2018 Taxation: Exemption for
Certain Deteriorated
Industrial, Commercial
Property Amendment
Ch. 428, Art. VII
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
51-2019 1-28-2019 Administrative Code
Amendment
Ch. 6 30
52-2019 3-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439 30
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1317
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
53-2019 2-11-2019 Revolving Loan
Program
NCM 30
54-2019 2-11-2019 Grant NCM 30
55-2019 2-25-2019 Subdivision and
Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 423 30
56-2019 3-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439 30
57-2019 3-11-2019 Taxation: Exemption
for Certain
Deteriorated
Industrial,
Commercial
Property
Amendment
Ch. 428, Art.
VII
30
58-2019 3-18-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439 30
59-2019 3-25-2019 Solid Waste:
Disposal and Fees
Amendment
Ch. 400, Art.
II
30
60-2019 4-8-2019 Agreement NCM 30
61-2019 4-15-2019 Taxation: Local
Services Tax
Amendment
Ch. 428, Art.
IV
30
62-2019 4-15-2019 Rental Property:
Landlord
Registration,
Licensing and
Occupancy
Amendment
Ch. 373, Art.
I
30
63-2019 6-3-2019 Transfer of Liquor
License
NCM 30
64-2019 6-3-2019 Acceptance of
Quitclaim Deed
NCM 30
65-2019 6-17-2019 Reinstatement of
Public Library
Authority
NCM 30
66-2019 7-31-2019 Creating Escrow
Account
NCM 30
67-2019 7-3-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439 30
§ DL-1 SCRANTON CODE § DL-1
441:1318
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
68-2019 7-3-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439 30
69-2019 Not Adopted
70-2019 9-23-2019 Grant Application NCM 30
71-2019 9-30-2019 Property
Maintenance:
Adoption of Code
Amendment
Ch. 360, Art.
I
30
72-2019 9-30-2019 Property
Maintenance: Rules
and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 360, Art.
II
30
73-2019 9-30-2019 Easement NCM 30
74-2019 11-18-2019 Consolidated
Submission for
CDBG Program
NCM 30
75-2019 10-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 439 30
76-2019 11-25-2019 Boards and
Commissions:
Architectural and
Urban Design
Review Commission
Amendment
Ch. 18, Art.
VII
30
77-2019 11-25-2019 BYOB Clubs NCM 30
78-2019 12-9-2019 Appropriation NCM 30
79-2019 12-9-2019 Tax and Revenue
Anticipation Note
NCM 30
80-2019 12-16-2019 Tax Rate NCM 30
81-2019 12-16-2019 Tax Rate NCM 30
82-2019 Not Adopted
83-2019 12-16-2019 Tax Rate NCM 30
84-2019 12-16-2019 Taxation: Mercantile
License Tax
Amendment
Ch. 428, Art.
V
30
85-2019 12-16-2019 Transfer of Liquor
License
NCM 30
§ DL-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § DL-1
441:1319